Hillsborough Dark Blue folder


Folder 2   Legal Submissions


Mr. R Maxwell re Sheffield City Council
Reynold Porter Chamberlain Re Eastwood & Partners
Re Supt Greenwood
Vincent Hale re Supt R. Marshall
Mr. Payne R e S.Y. Police Including copies o f various cases as follows (different
order in submission
Photocopy o f various cases:
        R v Portsmouth coroner ex parte Anderson
        R v. Andrews
        R v Caldwell
        R. v Lawrence
        R . Seymour
        Kong v Queen (Privy Council)
       Kevin Goodfellow
        R v Stone
       R vG ray
       British School o f Motoring v Simms
        The City o f Lincoln
       R v Lamb
    >




                                              F W            2   j                5 / ^ 'l 3

S C H E D U L E 17 - SAF E S Y S T E M        /Z\$K H<=>T        &/?{//O U T

 Mackrell - Vol 14, Day 52, No 8, p28g - p.30 e and 38a - 39d

 Mole - Vol 16, Day 60, No 3, P.45/46 '

Lock - Vol 14/15,           Day             pMfMK, day 53, p.74 a-c, p.75 b-d
Jackson - Vol 17,           Day 63, No 2, p.81 c, p.82 a-d

Greenwood - Vol 17, Day 64, No 9, p.57 - p.60

Murray - Vol 18, Day 67, p.17b - p.18d

C533 De-briefing notes of Mr Murray

^oddard - Day 70,           p.97e - 98b, p.101 e-f, p.102 d-g

AJK. Seaman - Vol           14, Day 50, No 3, p.70/71

Eastwood - Vol 15, Day 57, No 3/5, p.9d-14f

Butler - Vol 9, Day 36, No 22, p.34 b-f, p.35 e-g, p.62g, p.63 b-
f and day 37, p.74 a-g

Bownes - Vol 10, Day 38, No 2, p.8, p.27 e / p.28 a-c, p.66 c-e

t i c k e t                hqi,     1 1 .                « * -*./>/<>*».



                                   /j              e z   c        - ( ■ i o



                                   /\r




                                                                              £
                                                        KEEBLE HAWSON
                                                                   SOLICITORS
                                                        Incorporating Branson Bramley & Co.

A. H. G R E G O R Y   N. T. H A W S O N                                                       OLD CATHEDRAL VICARAGE.
C. J. PR YC E         G. C O N N E L L
A. J. C O O M B E     C. M . M . A YR E
J. M . K IL N E R     H. J. M O O R F IE L D                                                           ST.JAMES' ROW.
D . A. D E E N E Y


                                                                                                                  SHEFFIELD.
C o n sultan t:       P r a c t ic e M a n a g e r
A. H. C O N N E L L   D. P A R K IN
                                                                                                                         S1 1XA.
The Office of H.M. Coroner                                                                    TELEPHONE 0742 - 722061
for South Yorkshire (West District)
Town Hall,                                                                                    M D X N O . 10527
SHEFFIELD.                                                                                    FAX NO. 0742 - 700813
S1 .                                                                                          FAX NO. 0742 - 750243



                                                                                              15th March 1991

OUR REF:                                             YOUR REF:                                WHEN YOU TELEPHONE OR C A LL PLEASE ASK FOR:



AAW/MRK                                                                                       Mr. Watt




Dear Sirs,

Re ; Hillsborough Inquests

We enclose final Legal Submissions prepared by Mr. Richard Maxwell Q.C.,
leading Counsel for Sheffield City Council to be placed before H.M.
Coroner for South Yorkshire (West District).




                         THE FIRM IS REGULATED BY THE LAW SOCIETY IN THE CONDUCT OF INVESTMENT BUSINESS
1           9      9       1




INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS
 OF THE VICTIMS OF THE
 HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
STADIUM DISASTER ON THE
    15th APRIL 1989




SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF
SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL




R ef :   AAW/DEH

Messrs. Keeble Hawson,
Old Cathedral Vicarage,
St. James' Row,
Sheffield.
SI 1XA
                INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE VICTIMS OF THE

                    HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM DISASTER

                              ON THE 15th APRIL 1989




               SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL



INTRODUCTION

1.     These submissions relate only to the possibility of the Jury being

directed to consider a verdict of unlawful killing.      The submissions below

are developed both generally in order to make relevant submissions of law

and specifically with a view to showing that Sheffield City Council and the

Council's employees could not possibly be regarded as persons who unlawfully

killed any of the deceased.   Sheffield City Council do not presume to enter

the debate that will no doubt arise as to whether any other person, whether

corporation or natural human being, might, or might not, possibly be regarded

as one who unlawfully killed the deceased, and so far as that issue goes

Sheffield City Council take up a neutral position.




POSSIBLE BASIS FOR VERDICT OF UNLAWFUL KILLING




2.    For the purposes of these Inquests a verdict of unlawful killing would

be justified if the Jury were satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that some

person or persons (whom the Jury must under no account name or identify)

had brought about the death of the deceased, or some or any of them, as a

result of committing the offence of manslaughter.      It would be improper to

direct the Jury to consider the possibility of a verdict of unlawful killing

based upon the offence of murder having been committed, as there is no
evidence at all to show that any person caused the death of the deceased

through some unlawful act or that any person intended to kill or to cause

grievous bodily harm.     Neither the actus reus nor the mens rea of murder

is established on the evidence before this Jury.




3.     If the Jury are to be directed to consider a verdict of unlawful

killing on the basis that any or some or all of the deceased died as a

consequence of manslaughter then the Jury must be warned in terms that they

are being directed to consider whether a criminal offence of manslaughter

had been committed.     They must be given the appropriate direction as to the

standard of proof for manslaughter, and the appropriate direction is the

simple one that they should be satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt or,

as sometimes said, satisfied so that they are sure that all the necessary

elements of the offence are proved; and that the verdict of unlawful killing

must not be returned unless they are satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt

that such elements are proved.    When directions are given as to any other

verdict that may be brought in, e.g., accident/misadventure or open, it

should be stressed that a different standard of proof applies viz, proof

on a balance of probabilities, with an appropriate     explanation of what that

means and how that differs from the criminal standard of proof.




4.    So far as the offence of manslaughter goes there is no question of

any of the deceased having been killed as a result of an unlawful act.        For

these purposes an unlawful act is one which is unlawful for some reason other

than the negligent manner of its performance.     The Jury should n o t ,

therefore, be directed to consider the possibility of any person having
killed the deceased or any of them as a result of an unlawful a c t .

Involuntary manslaughter of that form could not possibly form the basis for

a verdict of unlawful killing.



5.     The question is whether the Jury should be directed to consider a

verdict of unlawful killing based upon reckless manslaughter, that is to

say to consider whether the Jury are satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt

that some person or persons (whom they must under no account name) has

brought about the death of any or some or all of the deceased as a result

of recklessness.     It is not necessary, and it will be unhelpful and

confusing, to direct the Jury to consider "gross negligence manslaughter".




FIRST ELEMENT OF RECKLESS MANSLAUGHTER       - CAUSATIVE CONDUCT




6.     If the Jury are to consider whether some specific individual committed

the offence of reckless manslaughter then the Jury have to consider firstly

whether that person by his conduct, i.e., some act or omission to act (where

there was a duty to act), was a substantial cause of the death of any or

some or all of the deceased.       In order to prove causation the following

matters must be established:




       (i)         that but for the conduct of the person under consideration

                   the    death of the deceased would not have occurred.




       (ii)        that although the conduct of the person under consideration

                   need    not be the sole or the main cause of death it must

                   be a substantial cause.
       (iii)    that where the conduct of the person under consideration

                was performed prior to the 15th April 1989 then a subsequent

                and intervening act which causes death breaks the chain of

                causation if that intervening act is not foreseeable; and

                that this means that such prior conduct is not, in law, to

                be regarded as a substantial cause of such subsequent event.

                This is consistent with the Jury's function of establishing

                how the deceased came by his death since the Jury are there

                concerned to find out what circumstances are directly

                responsible for the death of the deceased.   Such an

                intervening and unforeseeable act prevents any prior

                circumstances, by way of earlier acts or omissions, from

                being directly responsible for subsequent death.




(b)    It is submitted on behalf of Sheffield City Council that no reasonable

Jury properly directed could possibly conclude:




       (i)      That but for the conduct of the Sheffield City Council, or

                any of its employees, the deaths would not have occurred.




       (ii)     That any conduct of the Sheffield City Council or any of

                its employees was a substantial cause of death.




       (iii)    That the events occurring at the ground on the 15th April

                1989 from 2.30 p.m. onwards were foreseeable.     The events

                referred to are the sudden introduction of a large number

                of fans en masse into an area of the terraces which was
                already crowded and full.       On the contrary, no reasonable

                Jury properly directed could find that such events were

                foreseeable by Sheffield City Council or any of its employees

                or that any chain of causation which might otherwise have

                been established by any prior conduct on the part of

                Sheffield City Council was other than broken.




(c)    Accordingly as a matter of law the Jury should not be directed to

consider the conduct of Sheffield City Council or any of its employees in

the context of any verdict of unlawful killing based upon involuntary

reckless manslaughter.




(d)    If the submission at (c) is rejected, then the Jury must be properly

directed to consider the issue of causation in the specific context of the

conduct of Sheffield City Council and be given full instructions to the

relevant criteria to be applied i.e. as per (b) above, but amplified as

necessary.




SECOND ELEMENT OF RECKLESS MANSLAUGHTER     -   MENTAL ELEMENT




7.     The second matter to be considered is the mental element involved

in reckless manslaughter.   So far as this mental element is concerned the

appropriate direction is that known as the Lawrence Direction which is to

be found in the following passage of the speech of Lord Diplock in

Reg -v- Lawrence 1982 A.C. 510 at 526 E to 527 B as follows:
"Recklessness on the part of the doer of an act does presuppose that

there is something in the circumstances that would have drawn the

attention of an ordinary prudent individual to the possibility that

his act was capable of causing the kind of serious harmful consequences

that the section which creates the offence was intended to prevent,

and that the risk of those harmful consequences occurring was not

so slight that an ordinary prudent individual would feel justified

in treating them as negligible.     It is only when this is so that the

doer of the act is acting "recklessly" if before doing the act, he

either fails to give any thought to the possibility of there being

any such risk or, having recognised that there was such risk, he

nevertheless goes on to do it.




In my view, an appropriate instruction to the Jury on what is meant

by driving recklessly would be that they must be satisfied of two

things:




First, that the defendant was in fact driving the vehicle in such

a manner as to create an obvious and serious risk of causing physical

injury to some other person who might happen to be using the road

or of doing substantial damage to property; and




Second, that in driving in that manner the defendant did so without

having given any thought to the possibility of there being any such

risk or, having recognised that there was some risk involved, had

nonetheless gone on to take i t .
       It is for the Jury to decide whether the risk created by the manner

       in which the vehicle was being driven was both obvious and serious

       and, in deciding that, they might apply the standard of the ordinary

       prudent motorist as represented by themselves.




       If satisfied that an obvious and serious risk was created by the manner

       of the defendant's driving, the Jury are entitled to infer that he

      was in one or other of the states of mind required to constitute the

       offence and will probably do so; but regard must be given to any

      explanation he gives as to his state of mind which may displace the

       inference."




A practical application of the Lawrence direction can be seen in action in

Reg -v- Seymour 1983 2 A.C. 493.    The importance of this decision is that

Lord Diplock was a member of the Court and he (and all of their Lordships)

agreed with the speech of Lord Roskill.    In the speech of Lord Roskill at

page 504 C to 504 G appears the following:




      "The learned judge rejected the submission and gave the "Lawrence

      direction" subject only to the omission of any reference to the "

      obvious and serious risk       of doing substantial damage to property"

      see Reg. -v- Lawrence (Stephen) [1982] A.C. 510, 526.    In my view,

      he was entirely right not to refer to damage to property, a reference

      to which was irrelevant in this case and might well have confused

      the Jury.   His admirably clear direction not only properly reflected

      the decision of this House in Lawrence but also Lord Atkin's speech

      in Andrews [1937] A.C. 576.    I quote the relevant passages:
The second question you have to decide; was the driving that

caused those injuries     reckless?    If so, then it is

manslaughter.     If you are not satisfied that it was reckless,

then the verdict is not guilty.       To amount to reckless

driving mere negligence is not enough.       His conduct must

go beyond the question of compensation between citizens and

amount to, in your view, criminal conduct requiring

punishment.     You have to be satisfied upon the question of

recklessness that he drove in such a manner as to create

an obvious and serious risk of causing physical harm to some

other person who might happen to be using the road at the

time....Once you are satsified that the matter of his driving

was such as to create an obvious and serious risk of causing

physical harm to a person using the road at the time, you

also have to be satisfied that driving in that manner he

did so without having given any thought to the possibility

of there being any such risk, or alternatively, having

recognised that there was some risk involved, nonetheless

went on to take it; in other words, he was reckless.          He

reckoned not of the consequences.




"In determining the quality of his driving, you apply the

standards of the ordinary reasonable motorist.       You, of

course, take into account all the evidence including his

explanation         ""
A suggested direction




The passage last quoted can be adapted as agropriate to the context of any

specific person, whether corporation or natural human being, whose conduct

the Jury are directed to consider for the purposes of deciding whether that

person committed reckless manslaughter.   The passage quoted from Lord

Roskill's speech presupposes that the Jury have concluded that the issue

of causation is proved.   The adaptation of this passge of the speech might

be on the following lines:




      "If you are satisfied so as to be sure that the first question is

      proved that is to say that the act of X was a substantial cause of

      the death of any of the deceased then the second question you have

      to decide is was the act that caused those deaths reckless?     If so

      then it is manslaughter.   If you are not satisfied that it was reckless

      then a verdict of unlawful killing is not open to you.     To amount

      to a reckless act mere negligence is not enough.   His conduct must

      go beyond the question of compensation between citizens and amount

      to, in your view, criminal conduct requiring punishment.     You have

      to be satisfied upon the question of recklessness that he acted in

      such a manner as to create an obvious and serious risk of causing

      physical harm to some other person who might happen to be using the

      terraces at the time.   Once you are satisfied that his act was such

      as to create an obvious and serious risk of causing physical harm

      to a person using the terraces at the time you also have to be

      satisfied that acting in that manner he did so without having given

      any thought to the possibility of there being any such risk, or
      alternatively having recognised that there was some risk involved

      nonetheless went on to take it; in other words he was reckless.      He

      reckoned not of the consequences.   In determining the quality of his

      act you apply the standards of the ordinary reasonable person who

      happened to be in the same circumstances as X.   You of course take

      into account all the evidence including his explanation..."




Lord Roskill added at 508C that it is appropriate also to point out that

in order to constitute the offence of manslaughter the risk of death being

caused must be very high, and such a remark should be made to the Jury here.

Lord Roskill said:




       I would therefore answer the certified question as follows:   "Where

      manslaughter is charged and the circumstances are that the victim

      was killed as a result of the reckless driving of the defendant on

      a public highway, the trial judge should give the Jury the direction

       suggested in Reg -v- Lawrence but it is appropriate also to point

      out that in order to constitute the offence of manslaughter the risk

      of death being caused by the manner of the defendant's driving must

      be very high."




In deciding whether or not a risk was obvious the Jury should have regard

to whether the risk would have been obvious to an ordinary prudent individual

in the relevant circumstances.   The Jury should be told that they may take

account of what any witness has told them was obvious or not to that witness

as a risk.   The witnesses' perception of the risk can provide an indication

of whether or not the risk was obvious to an ordinary prudent person, and
especially so if the Jury conclude that the witness in question was such

an ordinary prudent person.   For this purpose 'witness' includes a person

whose conduct has been called into question at the Inquest and Lord Roskill

made it clear that a Jury can take into account an explanation given by such

a person.




It is important to stress to the Jury that a failure to appreciate that there

was such a risk would not by itself be sufficient to amount to recklessness

see Reg -v- West London Coroner ex parte Gray 1988 1 Q.B. page 477 B per

Watkins L.J.:-



       "He deliberately chose to run the risk by doing nothing about it.

       It should be emphasised, however, that a failure to appreciate that

       there was such a risk would not by itself be sufficient to amount

       to recklessness.




FURTHER RELEVANT MATTERS:




(i)   PRIMA FACIE CASE




8.    The Jury should only be directed to consider a verdict of unlawful

killing based upon reckless manslaughter if the Coroner concludes as a matter

of law that there is a prima facie case, that is to say a case fit to be

left to the Jury where the Coroner concludes, as a matter of law, that a

reasonable Jury properly directed might bring in such a verdict.   If the

Coroner concludes as a matter of law that there is no such case fit to be
left to the Jury then the Coroner must direct the Jury not to consider that

verdict, that is he must withdraw the verdict from them.




(ii)   INDIVIDUAL CONSIDERATION   -   THE DECEASED




9.     The death of each deceased must be considered individually.     Before

the Jury may be invited to consider a verdict of unlawful killing in respect

of any of the deceased the Coroner must direct himself as to whether or not

there is a prima facie case so far as that individual deceased is concerned.




A verdict in the case of each deceased is required and if unlawful killing

is to be left to the Jury it must be considered by the Jury in relation to

each of the deceased.   The Jury should be directed that if, having considered

the circumstances of death affecting each of the individual deceased, they

are satsfied beyond reasonable doubt that some or all of them may be

considered as a group of persons}whose death was caused as a result of

reckless manslaughter committed by some specific individual or individuals

(who must under no account be named or identified), then similar verdicts

may be returned in the case of each member of such group.   There will

therefore be 95 verdicts but some or all may be in similar terms.




However, the Jury must be directed that it is improper to consider unlawful

killing in relation to the 95 deceased as a whole or to any group of the

deceased without first considering the individual circumstances of the death

of each particular deceased.   The Jury must be warned that no short cut is

available to them permitting them to proceed on the presumption that they

are entitled to consider the circumstances of death of the 95 deceased as
a whole, or of any group of the deceased as a group, unless some cause is

shown why they should not do so.     That would reverse the order in which

relevant consideration should be dealt with.          They are concerned with the

Inquests^ relating to the deaths of the victims of the Hillsborough Football

Stadium Disaster.     There is no presumption that a verdict in common form

is applicable to the 95 deceased persons.          Only after a careful consideration

of each individual case can the Jury establish what verdict is appropriate.




(iii)     NO AGGREGATION




10.       The Jury must be directed that they can return a verdict of unlawful

killing only if they can attribute the ingredients of the relevant offence,

reckless manslaughter, to some individual person or persons whom they should

on no account name or otherwise identify:

Reg -v- West London Coroner ex parte Gray 1988 1 Q.B. at page 477 B .         In

this context the Jury should consider the position of each single person

who may be a candidate taking each such person in turn and coming to a

conclusion.




In this context the Jury     must be warned that whatever person is being

considered (and be that person a corporation or a natural human being) the

ingredients of manslaughter must be established by proving the necessary

mens rea (mental element) and actus reus (criminal conduct) of manslaughter

against it or him by evidence properly to be relied on against it or him

and a case against any person cannot be fortified by evidence against another

person.     No aggregation of criminal culpability is permitted.




                                      -   13   -
(iv)   ORDER OF PRIORITY IN CONSIDERING VERDICT




11.    If unlawful killing is to be left to the Jury as a possible verdict

then the Coroner should indicate to the Jury that they must deal with that

issue first; and that they should approach, therefore, initially the question

whether or not they are satisfied so that they are sure beyond a reasonable

doubt that the verdict of unlawful killing may be returned in respect of

any or some or all of the deceased.    If they conclude that unlawful killing

is not an appropriate verdict, or are not sure that it is an appropriate

verdict, in the case of any or some or all of the deceased then they should

go on to consider other possible verdicts, i.e., accident/misadventure or

open verdict.   Support for this is to be found in R. -v- Wolverhampton

Coroner ex parte McCurbin 1990 1 WLR 719 at 728 B - D :




       "It is true that, in many cases where it is open to a Coroner's Jury

       to find a verdict of unlawful killing, they may also have to consider

       the question of death by misadventure.    However, in my view, this

       does not and should not give rise to problems.     The Coroner should

       indicate to the Jury that they should approach, initially, the question

       as to whether or not they are satisfied so that they are sure that

       this is unlawful killing.   If they come to the conclusion that it

       is not unlawful killing, they are not satisfied so that they are sure

       that the verdict is appropriate, then they will consider the question

       of misadventure and, in so doing, they do not need to bear in mind

       the heavy standard of proof which is required for unlawful killing.

       They can approach the matter on the basis of the balance of

       probabilities.   The situation is that, just as it is important
       that a jury should not bring in a verdict of suicide unless they are

       sure, likewise they should not bring in a verdict of unlawful killing

       unless they are sure."




SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL




12.    The Jury have heard a variety of criticisms of different persons and

such criticisms have been voiced wholly or mainly in cross examination.

Representation of certain persons whose conduct was likely to be called into

question has been permitted.    One of those persons, legal persons, is the

Sheffield City Council.




In the case of any such person whose conduct has been called into question

then, unless a reasonable Jury properly directed could conclude that such

person committed the offence of manslaughter against any or all or some of

the deceased, the Jury must be directed in terms either (1) to exclude that

person from their consideration of the issue whether or not they are

satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the verdict of unlawful killing is

appropriate or (2) to consider such a verdict only in the case of some other

person or persons (who should be named in the direction but not of course

in the verdict) and not to consider such a verdict in the case of any other

person.




The reasons for discriminating in this way are:-




(a)   For reasons of justice and humanity there should be no question of

      any risk arising that a verdict of unlawful killing, where the Jury
      are forbidden to name any culprit, might be understood in the context

       of the evidence to refer to one or more of those persons whose conduct

      was called into question at the Inquest, but in respect of whom no

       reasonable Jury properly directed could conclude that such person

      had committed the offence of manslaughter.   Such a risk does arise

      where there have been criticisms of and suggestions, express or

      implied, of negligence against a variety of persons; and all the more

      so where the verdict of unlawful killing involves a finding of

      recklessness,
                  ,which the Jury and the public may be at risk of confusing

      with negligence.   There must be no risk of those who are innocent

      of criminal culpability being caught up with any whom the Jury may

      regard as criminally responsible.




(b)   The converse to (a) is also true, namely that, in the case of a person

      whose conduct the Jury are rightly scrutinising to see whether they

      are satisfied so as to be sure that such conduct is criminal, any

      allegations against or criticism of any other person might give rise

      to prejudice.   Such a risk does arise where the Jury may be tempted

      to aggregate fault.




(c)   Without discrimination and exclusion of persons who ought not to be

      regarded as candidates in terms of criminal culpability there is a

      risk that the Jury may be confused by an unnecessarily and erroneously

      wide choice of candidates.




13.   No reasonable Jury properly directed could find that Sheffield City

Council, or any employee or agent of Sheffield City Council whether it be
Mr. Butler or Mr. Bownes or anyone else employed by Sheffield City Council,

has or have committed any offence of manslaughter.   The Jury should be

directed accordingly, with an instruction that as a matter of law there is

no evidence on which the Jury could find that any of those persons committed

any such offence.   The Jury should be told in terms that quite apart from

the difficulties relating to the issue of causation (as Paragraph 6 above):



       (i)     There is no evidence on which any reasonable Jury could     find

                that any of such persons acted in a manner so as to create

                an obvious and serious risk of causing physical injury to

                any football fan or fans.




       (ii)    There is no evidence on which any reasonable Jury could     find

                that any of such persons acted recklessly, having regard

                to the definition of such term as above.




       (iii)   Specifically in the case of Sheffield City Council no verdict

                of corporate manslaughter could possibly be established here;

                and any verdict that Sheffield City Council committed the

                offence of manslaughter would be unreasonable and improper.

                No further direction is needed, but if it was thought

                desirable to amplify such direction then the appropriate

                indication would be that for a corporation to be criminally

                liable for manslaughter then it is required that the mens

                rea (alternatively the mental element of recklessness) and

                the actus reus (alternatively the conduct complained of)

                comprised in the alleged offence of manslaughter should be
                    established not against those who acted for or in the name

                    of the corporation but against those who were to be

                    identified as the embodiment of the cororation itself.

                    Neither Mr. Bownes nor Mr. Butler nor anyone else referred

                    to at the Inquest could properly be regarded as the

                    embodiment of the Council.       No sustainable case in

                    manslaughter arises here against Sheffield City Council.




        See for example R. -v- H.M. Coroner for East Kent ex parte Spooner

        1989 88 Cr. App. R. page 10 at page 16-17.

                                                                         /




NOTE:   (i)         Copies of Cases referred to above are annexed for ease of

        reference, to the copy of these submissions filed with the Coroner's

        Court. The cases are:




        Reg   -v-   Lawrence 1982 AC510




        Reg   -v-   Seymour 1983 2 AC 493




        Reg   -v-   West London Coroner ex p. Gray 1988 1 Q.B. 467




        Reg   -v-   Wolverhampton Coroner ex p. McCurbin 1990 1 WLR 718



                                      -     18   -
Reg     -v-   H.M. Coroner for East Kent ex p. Spooner (1989) 88 Cr. App.

R. 10




(ii)          The evidence of   Mr. Arthur Butler      for SheffieldCityCouncil

was given on Days 36 and        37 (23.1.1991 and 24.1.1991)




(iii)         The evidence of   Mr. David Bownes for SheffieldCityCouncil

was given on Days 37 and        38 (24.1.1991 and 25.1.1991)
                                   !                                    ■

                         5

                                                                 “■


                                         r                                                                                                                                     -


                                         .       Centre                                                                                                                        ■
                                                                                                                                                                           ;
                                                                                                                                                               CSs;
             §                   C1.d ""s 3'"7ET
                                                                                                                                                       lUat..

                                                                                                                                                       j,;i


                                                                                                                                                       IS Mafcia lifi
            CtafM _                                              , :-4          w;v;
                                                                                                                                                                                                .




             Dear Sir



                                       recsli             tha-         >?*      «r*                                           o.-v                             ■■.s?
                      •sers.




            w : 7 y ^ ' ° r r<r »■                   •'*<*                                      e:..;-            ,                              S ; H i:: ,.: ^ k T ^ i T ,
              ‘                                               yQM            ar«     ■:'■■;.»     s k u           ■?.?.       z.'—        ~ t-      :r.&.t»s       a;          b e h a lf
                  .*«                                             I.                                       :;.r 2 :;-#:;                    ;; .;                      v|iS
                                             ^r.“                           '’■ 4: , *                           \:                   ■■-■■'•■>                                    n-d^i
                        ...                               "• -
                                                             '• t-'■ •           "     / '7               '       ■•’             '•.•■'
            ■-■'■■■                                                                             ■-.■             >        -                                            -

            **v                                       '.h ;? .         v"-;t    tr                ?,:■■:■■'■<■    1: ~          c r   ,                                             ,-s.~ — -
            Hesitate               tc                              .                   "'                                 *      ‘                    "'■'

            Jfours
            lillf O W S
                                                 1    '




.
                                                                                                                                                                   .




                                                                                                                                                                                    ■



        '

                                                                                                                                                           '
    -                                                                                                                                                  .

        ■

                                             -
                             .




                                                                                                                                           :
                  INQUEST INTO THE DEATHS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER:                     15.4.1989


                           SUBMISSION ON BEHALF OF SUPERINTENDENT GREENWOOD


  INTENTION:
            Sole concern        of these      submissions    is to establish that Mr Greenwood is not a

            person in respect of whom the jury should be permitted to consider returning a

            verdict of unlawful killing.
            It is not concerned with the position of other persons, human or corporate.



  IMPORTANCE OF EXCLUDING INELIGIBLE PERSONS.


  R. v. West London Coroner, ex p. Gray (1988) 1 QB 464


  R. v. South London Coroner, ex p. Thompson


  The Coroner has a duty to withdraw from the jury's consideration those persons where

  there   is no evidence,            or only tenuous      evidence or\ which,     even if such evidence were

  accepted,      a real   jury,      properly directed,       could conclude     that      they unlawfully killed

  any of the deceased.
            by analogy R. v. Galbraith (I9 8 I) 1 WLR @ 1043 C


  The    Coroner's     duty     to    exclude    ineligible      persons   should     be    discharged     robustly,
  especially when dealing with causation (see below) and the elements of manslaughter.

  R. v. East Kent Coroner, ex p. Spooner (1989) 88 CAR 10 @ 17


  A    person    should   not    be    left   for   the   jury   to   consider   in   respect    of   a   verdict   of

  unlawful killing unless there is sufficient and proper evidence on which a reasonable

^ j u r y , properly directed, could conclude that that person killed unlawfully one or more

  of the deceased.


  FORMS OF UNLAWFUL KILLING


  a)        murder
  b)        unlawful act        manslaughter

  c)        reckless act        manslaughter



  DISTINCTION OF STANDARDS OF PROOF


            for unlawful killing                : beyond reasonable doubt
                for misadventure etc            : upon balance of probabilities
                    R. v. Wolverhampton Coroner ex p. McCurbin 1990 1 WLR 719, 1990 TLR 329
*        s




        UNLAWFUL    KILLING         :     APPROACH


        Were the    deaths of any of the deceased caused by a reckless                                         act by Mr Greenwood or an

        omission    to act on his part when under aduty to act                                         [anomission]?



        Nothing short of recklessness will suffice (see below).



        UNLAWFUL    KILLING         :     CAUSATION


                   It is possible to unravel                      time     and circumstances leading up to the deaths                                 to

                   produce      a   catalogue              of    all   the      features           mentioned in     connection          with         the

                   disaster.
    _        -     It   is    important         to        distinguish           a    cause        or    causes of   the        deaths   from         the

    “            tessellation of events constituting the background to the disaster.


                   Features/events/acts/omissions                          must           be    identified      which      are     substantial,

                   effective and direct causes.
                   Each cause must be                 -     causa c a u s a n s .

                   satisfy the BUT/FOR test.
             -     It   is    important        to recognise              breaks       in chain of causation and                   the effect          of
                   such      breaks:          e.g.         The    fact    of        the    entry       of a large number          of supporters

                   intent      on   seeing           the    match        into       the        most    popular area       of    terracing           very
                   shortly       before         or         at     kick-off           in        circumstances        wholly        unprecedented,

                   unexpected           and     unforseeable              which           takes        place   to   the        ignorance       of     Mr

                   Greenwood.

    i
                   No reasonable jury, properly directed, could conclude that any act or omission

                   by Mr Greenwood was a direct,                         substantial and effective cause of the death of

                   any of the deceased.
ELEMENTS OF MANSLAUGHTER


        Important to bear in mind there are 2 elements:

        1.      Actus reus (the deed)

        2.      Mens rea (the mind)



1.      Actus reus:
        An   act   (or    omission,       where   there    is    a   duty    on    that   person     to    act)   which

        creates a risk, serious and obvious to a reasonable and prudent person (in the
        same position as that person)              that    physical     injury will be caused to another

        by that act (or omission).



        Mens rea:
        When    that     person   does     that   act   (or     omits   to    do    it)   he   has   not    given   any

        thought to the possibility of              there being such a risk or has gone on to take

        the risk, having recognised it.
                                                          MPC v. Caldwell (1982) AC 3^1

                                                          R. v. Lawrence          (1982) AC 510

                                                          R. v. Seymour (1983) AC 493


       A failure to appreciate             such a risk is not by itself sufficient to amount to

        recklessness         :    (Watkins L J in ex p. Gray)


        No epithet applies to negligence can be a synonym for recklessness.

        Kong Cheuk Kwan v. The Queen 82 CAR p. 18

                       see Lord Roskill @ p.26
        R. v. Stanley & Others               (transcript)       (a proper authority)

                       Turner J @ 53G - 5^A



'SERIOUS & OBVIOUS'


(i)     'Serious    and obvious' are not synonymous
               serious goes to likelihood of occurrence - i.e. very likely

               obvious goes to apparentness - i.e. very apparent

        synonymous might be           :    'perfectly evident'
                                           'stares you in the face'



(ii)    'Serious    and Obvious' means much more than reasonably forseeable.

        R. v. Sheppard (1981) AC 39^ @ 404
(iii )     'Serious and Obvious' means more than conduct which is inefficient, defective,

           open to criticism.
                a much stronger case is required for recklessness.



(iv )      'Serious and Obvious' to whom?
           In motor cases, the jury will include motorists and is entitled to draw on its

           collective experience.

           Lord Diplock in Lawrence at 527B.


If the conduct of a person doing a particular activity in a civil case is to be judged

by    comparisons     to    the   conduct      of        a    reasonably     prudent      person    engaged       in    the   same
activity    (e.g. Solicitor,         Doctor,         Accountants).           A   fortiori,       in a criminal case what

      alleged would have appeared as a serious and obvious risk must be compared to the

perception of the risk by a reasonable and prudent person engaged in the same activity

in the same circumstances.


           see Turner J in Stanley € 61G - 62 A


and his concern for the view of                                     Marine Superintendents
                                                                    Chief Superintendents
                                                                    Naval Architects



           In Mr Greenwood’s case,                 the       reasonable,     prudent Superintendent              doing the job

           of   Ground      Commander,        as     it       was   perceived       by   the    South    Yorkshire       Police,
           equipped        with    the    information               Mr   Greenwood        had      and     in     the    precise

           circumstances in which Mr Greenwood found hims e l f .



           In this respect, the standard of proof is critical.


(v)       Serious   and      obvious     to    a     proper         person    (as    identified         above)    in    the   same

           circumstances.
           a)   before     3 pm   - atmosphere,               alternative     calls      or    attention,       communication,

           structure, 1987 and 1 9 8 8 .

           b) after 3 pm - reaction to an emergency.
If   the   jury     are    not   to     have    the     verdict    of    unlawful         killing   withdrawn    from    them

altogether, it is sumbitted that:


1.         It is     not possible on the evidence as a whole, as a matter                            of    law, to identify

           any act by Mr Greenwood which was a direct effective and substantial cause of

           the death of any of the deceased.


2.         It is     not possible on the evidence as a whole, or a matter                            of    law, to identify

           any omission to do or act which Mr Greenwood was under a duty to do, which was

           a direct and substantial cause of death of any of the deceased.



In any event


3.         There      is [no evidence]           that any act       (or omission)           on the part of Mr Greenwood

           created        a risk,     serious     and     obvious       to    a   reasonably     prudent    Superintendent

           with the duty of Ground Commander, of physical injury to any of the deceased.


4.         There      is [no     evidence]       that     any    such act         (or   omission)    on     the part    of   Mr

           Greenwood was done (or omitted to be done) by him without thought to a serious

           and     obvious       risk     (as    defined)        that        it   would     cause   physical    injury       or

           regardless of such a risk which he had in fact recognised.


Submissions        3 & 4 can be made with greater force if for                             ’no evide n c e’ is substituted

'insufficient        evidence         upon      which     a     reasonable         jury,     properly     directed,     could

conclude’.



COROLLARY:
Mr Greenwood        should be excluded            from any pool of persons                 in respect of whom the jury

can even consider returning a verdict of unlawful killing.
  MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS:


  The identification of Mr Greenwood by Mr Hicks:
              The identification of Mr Greenwood as the person whom Mr Hicks saw come                 out of

              the Control Box and whom he addressed requires special consideration.



  Making 3 assumptions:


              (1) Mr Hicks addressed someone on the steps.

              (2) That person heard what was said.

              (3) That person took no action.


^ ^ T h e r e is possible omissions to act to which the jury might attach importance.


  It    issubmitted that the evidence of identification of Mr Greenwood as that person                    is

  so    poor, in all the circumstances that it should not be left to the jury.

              R. v. Turnbull (Archbold para.      14-2 p. 1138 Vol.     1)

              R. v. Breslin (Archbold para.    l4-2c p.   1140 Vol. 1)


  It     is   for   the   Coroner's   judgement     whether     the    quality    of    the   evidence    of

  identification is good or poor.
  It is submitted it is poor for the following reasons:


  (i)         Incorrect description of headress.

  (ii)        Incorrect description of outer clothing.
^^(iii)       No impression made by the face of the Officer           (compared   to the 2nd Officer).

  (iv)        Relative positions of Mr Hicks and the steps.
  (v)         Absence of any evidence to corroborate      the    identification        - noevidence      that

              Mr Greenwood went to the Control Box (Murray, Goddard, Bichard).

  (vi)        Positive evidence that Mr Greenwood was elsewhere.
   (v i i )   Court should be wary of identification evidence of a witness whose evidence of

              identification becomes stronger with the passage of time.
                                   Vincent Hale & Co.
                                           Solicitors

Telephone: (0742)                          N ash H ouse            Vincent Hale Solicitor
Office 325842                           140 Upperthorpe            Consultant:
H om e 345214                               Sheffield              Gerard Vincent H ale   B .A . ( H o n s .)
Fax    325644                               S6 3NF

      Our ref: VH/DB                            18th March, 1991
      Your ref:

     Dear Sir,

      Hillsborough Inquest - legal submissions - on behalf of
      Superintendent Roger Marshall.

     Thank you for the opportunity of making legal submissions in
     writing. I have had the benefit of seeing the submissions in
     writing by my learned friend Mr. Richard Maxwell Q.C. and
     respectfully adopt his submissions so far as they deal with the
     general law.

      So far as Superintendent Marshall is concerned, I would merely
      add:


      1.   that any act of his on the day which may be considered to have

           been a substantial cause of the death of any person would not

           be an unlawful act unless it were a totally voluntary act with

           a reasonable alternative which was recklessly ignored.     If the

           act was carried out under pressure which was not itself caused

           unlawfully by Superintendent Marshall and if the only

           alternative was seen by Superintendent Marshall as being

           likely to lead to other disastrous consequences it could not

           be said that the action actually taken was unlawful merely

           because taking the alternative, in hindsight, might have led

           to less serious consequences.    A decision taken honestly in a

           dilemma or in the 'agony of the moment' even if subsequently

           proved to be wrong, has been held frequently to be

           unimpeachable.   If such decision was therefore a lawful act,

           no further consideration need be given in Superintendent

           Marshall's case to the many other issues such as intervening

           or multiple causes including the voluntary assumption of

           risk by some, I stress some, of the deceased.
2.   As regards any omission in prior planning (insofar as Mr.

     Marshall had any responsibility therefor) alleged to be the

     basis of recklessness, the standard of care is that of the

     reasonable man.    There must not only have been foreseeability

     of the consequences of the omission but also a reasonable

     prospect of success for what is alleged ought to have been

     done.    The mere possibility of an alternative procedure which

     might have been effective is not enough.    It needs a precise

     alternative procedure which could be shown to have been

     available and so likely to be effective in the particular

     circumstances that failure to consider that course was

     reckless.   If there was no such alternative with a high degree

     of probable success, any alleged failure to foresee and

     provide for the circumstances which actually occurred is a

     mere counsel of perfection and cannot be a foundation for a

     finding of unlawful killing by the application of any of the

     tests.


Yours faithfully,
VINCENT HALE       .
Dr. S. L. Popper,
H.M. Coroner,
Coroner's Court,
The Town Hall,
Sheffield

Authority for 'dilemma or agony of the moment' decisions - as this
is not the High Court, I hope I may be excused for giving a text
book 'Glanville Williams - Joint Torts and Contributory
Negligence' - Part 11 - Pp 360 - 364 or Winfield & Jolowicz on
Torts 13th Edition P 162 (or any good book on torts!)
Similarly, on the standard of care - to avoid quoting innumerable
cases, Winfield & Jolowicz summarise the cases on Pp 118 - 119



                                      Page - 2
FINAL SUBMISSION ON BEHALF OF CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE


QUESTION

'How' means what acts and omissions are directly responsible for the deaths.
Rule 36 The C o r o n e r s R u l e s 1984. Jervis 15-19.



VERDICT

Choice of 3
(i) Misadventure/Accident
No practical distinction       :   R v_Portsmouth Coroner_(_1987j__l          ._16 10

(ii) Unlawful Killing
Only possible category is involuntary manslaughter (see below)

(iii) If neither proved - open verdict
J e r v i s 16.19


BIJJHJEN OF PROOF

(i) Misadventure   :   balance of probabilities
R v W. London Coroner ex parte Gray (1988) 1 Q.B. 464_at__gJL 477H

(ii) Unlawful killing   :   beyond reasonable doubt
R v Wolverhampton Coroner ex parte McCurbin (1990J. l_W.L_^Rj— 719

(iii) Open verdict    :    if neither proved e.g. if unlawful          killing proved on
balance but not beyond reasonable doubt   :   Jervi^l^lg



WHAT HAS TO BE PROVED

(i) For misadventure (balance of probabilities)

Some deliberate     lawful human act which has unexpectedly taken a turn that leads
 to death

 or

An unintended act

 Jervis 16.15

 (ii) For unlawful k i lling (beyond reasonable doubt)

 (a)   A particular individual had     the duty of regarding   the   health     and welfare
          of the deceased.

 (b)   That individual failed   to do what in the circumstances        he ought     to   have
        done for the health and welfare of the deceased.

 (c)   That     failure was a substantial cause of the deceased's death.
    *1
                                                     -   2   -
V



               (d)      That in acting or failing to act for the benefit of the deceased's health
                        and welfare that individual acted recklessly.

               where

         (See Lawrence 1981 1AER 974,982g)

               'Recklessly' means an obvious and serious risk to the health and welfare of the
               deceased to which the particular individual, having regard    to his duty,  was
               indifferent or that, recognising that risk to be present, he deliberately chose
               to run the risk by doing nothing about it.

               and further where

               Failure to appreciate that there was              such    a   risk   would    not by    itself      be
               sufficient to amount to recklessness.

               R v W. London Coroner ex parte Gray (1988)         1 Q .B . 467 at pp . 467G to 47 7 B

               (iii)    For open verdict

               either

               Misadventure has not been proved on the balance of probabilities

               or

               Unlawful killing has not been proved beyond reasonable doubt

               Jervis 16.19 and Supplement



         5.    QUESTIONS FOR THE SBRY

         5.1   What were the causes of the disaster?
               See list of things which are capable of being causes                 and decide      on balance     of
                probabilities which, if any, in fact was a cause.

         5.2   Then, in relation to each cause -

               (1)      Beyond reasonable doubt at the time and in the particular circumstances
                        was there a serious risk of injury which risk would be obvious to an
                        ordinary prudent individual in the position of the person concerned.

               IF YES:

               (2)      Beyond reasonabel doubt was that individual indifferent to the risk?

               IF YES:

               (3)      Beyond reasonable doubt was the act             or   omission   of   that     individual    a
                        substantial cause of the disaster?
                                                - 3 -



     IF ALL YES: VERDICT: UNLAWFUL KILLING

     IF ALL YES ON BALANCE OF PROBABILITIES: VERDICT: OPEN

     IF ANY NO: VERDICT: ACCIDENT OR OPEN

     (4)     On the balance of probabilities        was   there   an unexpected      turn of events
              which did lead to the disaster?

             IF YES: VERDICT: ACCIDENT

6.   RELEVANT TIME AND CIRCUMSTANCES?

     Appropriate directions include:

     a)      Hindsight should be excluded.

     b)      The emergency outside the turnstiles should be taken into account in
              deciding whether anyone was at fault as a result of trying to deal with
              it.

     c)      As to whether anyone was 'indifferent', relevant circumstances included
              that there was a potential disaster outside the turnstiles which occupied
              the attention of the Police.

     d)      The time for decisions was short.

     7.      WHAT IS ’OBVIOUS*

A.   Appropriate directions include that:

     a)      Hindsight should be excluded.

     b)      'Obvious' means   obvious   in the   circumstances    at   the   time   to a particular
              individual.

     c)      Evidence of fans, ball-boys and B.B.C. staff is relevant to whether
             crushing was in fact obvious before about 3.00pm (see Schedule 15)-

     d)      There is no evidence that the risk of crushing was obvious to anyone in
              authority before it was too late, and most of the evidence is to the
              contrary (Schedule 13,15) (Schedule 17)•

B.   The evidence that the risk of overcrowding was 'obvious' is tenuous, and is
     inconsistent with most of the evidence, so that the jury could not properly find
     'unlawful killing' and accordingly that verdict should be excluded.

     Archbold 4 - 386 digest of R v Galbraith 1981 73 C .A.R.            124, 1981 1 W . L.R. 1039

 See Illustration of Application            )      in R. v. Stanley 14G - 24B
          of "Obvious" Test                 )   ^ .J^DO©*^                       tftCAA J*A
    !*                                                  -    4   -


V


                                                  CAPABLE OF BEING CAUSES


         1.    Fans arriving      'late'    in unprecedented numbers (Schedule 1)

         2.    Fans drinking exceptional amounts of alcohol (Schedule 2)

         3.    Fans refusing to co-operate with Police or Stewards (Schedule 3)

         4.    Fans pushing and shoving (Schedule 4)

         5.    Fans arriving without tickets (Schedule 5)

         6.    Club providing inadequate information on tickets                   (Schedule 6 )

         7.    Club failing to provide adequate signposting outside and inside (Schedule 7)

         8.    Club failing to provide           adequeate       turnstile    approaches    and adequate      numbers   of
               turnstiles (Schedule 8 )

         9.    Club, O.W.P., City Council or Engineers failing to work out and certify capacity
                of pens (Schedule 9)

         10.   Club, O.W.P. or Engineer          failing to provide           system to count or control numbers
                (Schedule 10)

         11.   Club, Police O.W.P.         and   Engineer    adopting        system   of   'finding your      own   level'
                (Schedule 11)

         12.   Fans causing need for Police to open Gate C (Schedule 1, 3 & 4)

         13.   Police   leaving    tunnel    doors   open    and/or    failing    to block     the   tunnel    (Schedule
               12)

         14.   Police being slow to recognise overcrowding (Schedule 13)

         15.   Club and Engineer failing          to ensure that barrier 124A of adequate strength

         16.   Club, O.W.P.       and Engineer removing barrier 144 (Doctor Nicholson)

         17.   Club, O.W.P.    and Engineer failing to provide safe means of escape (Schedule 14)

         18.   Fear of Stewards to try to impede crowd through Gate C (Schedule 18)
                          h   R eports, July 10, 1981
                                                                                                         1039




^                                                     [COURT o r    appeal ]


                                          *                 R E G I N A v. G A L B R A I T H

                                „                      L o ld Lane C.J., Peter Pain and Stuart-Sm ith JJ.
        |yoi ♦ *y lZt 1
I       C rim e — P r a c tic e — S u b m is s io n    of    n?          j^ ^ e ^ g f h 'i ^ w e a k -



^            W h e t h e r f o r ju r y to d e te r m in e
                   The applicant was charged with having *°“ ghth “ndh™d been
             affray. T h e P ^ ^ c f a t ' ^ f e a s T h ^ e S n were stabbed,
             an affray in a bar in which at least tn                   evidence of two
„            one fatally. T h ere were Passag”                      annlicant had taken
c            witnesses which t e n d e d to show that t h ^ PPstatcment t the
              an active p a r t tn th e affray, aimougr                            affray
              police the applicant had m am tam ed tha                 doWnstains in the
              U s in progress he ha I not bcffl «" the t a ^ j u t                g sub.
              lavatory. A t the close o f              P          . -j^ e applicant, who
              mission o f no case to a^ we^ ^          i.) ating the self-exculpatory
              m ade a statement i r o n i the docV•re*‘e r ^ . n | tne s
    n         statement which he had m ad              a n neal against conviction: —
    D              On an application for ^ ^ . ‘V Z t w h e n a submission of
                   H e l d , refusing the application, uu11            . when there was
               no case was m ade the casen ^ a ‘0edbe^ 7 c o r n m T tte d the crime
               no evidence that th e PeP °              j     tu e evidence was tenuous
               alleged and was also        ,bet,s^ X Drose^ t i o n \ evidence taken
               and the judge c o n e lu d c d th a       P        directed jury could not
               at its highest was such th a t a prop» r y               prosecution’s evi-
    E          properly convict on i t ; b u t t h a t , j h e r e the prO      ed ^ |h c
                dence was such that its str,clJ?1t.^ f _ w;tness or other matters
                view to be taken of the reliability ol »                of a jury
                 which were, generally sr* * k:"3®’                       that there was evidence
                 and one possible view of the: fact                                   Qn charged


    F
                                                                               ,hi :r iris
                  " r c u S n c " e r > h r » S i « n . ?s subn,i«ion of no case ,o a n » e r

                  WM K T i '                          ( N ° ,c ) 0 9 7 5 ) 65 C .A P P .R . 287, C.A.

                  W T s / v . Mansfield 11977] 1 NV.L.K. 1102. C.A. explained

                  The following c a « s are referred to in the ju d s m c n l:

    0                                                                                      ' A» E.R. IM. CA
                   Rep. v. T o b in [1980] Crim.L.R. 731.

                   T h e following additional cases were cited in
                   R e g , v. F a lc o n e r - A tl e e (1973) 58 C r.A pp.R . 348, C.A.
                   Reg. v . Hipson [1969] C rim.L.R. 8_. C.

        H         AFP. 1CAT.ON for leave to appeal g a i n * c o n v i c U o n ( M

             J)    Z     applicant, G e o rg e Charles Galbraith,
             m e n t c h a r g i n g th a t h e f o u g h t an^ ^         arn ]ea v e Vo ap pea l a g a i n s t c o n -
             f o u r Years’ i m p r i s o n m e n t . H e a p p                 , re je cte d a s u b m i s s i o n at
             v ic tio n o n th e g r o u n d s t h a U b e ^          d   ^      r    o    r   hi m ^               be
              th e e n d o f t h e p r o s e c u t . o n ’s c a s e that th e c a s - ag
                                                 T h e Weekly Law R e p o ru , July 10,

1040
                              Reg. v, Galbraith (C.A.)                               11981]
withdrawn from the jury and that the verdict was unsafe and unsatis- *
factory. A n application for leave to appeal against sentence does not call
for report. A t the conclusion of the argument Lord Lane C.J. announced
that the application for leave to appeal against conviction was refused
for reasons to be given at a later date.
    The facts are stated in the judgment.

   R o b in Sim pson Q.C. and H o w a rd G o d fre y for the applicant.               ■
   A lla n G reen and Susan E dw ards for the Crown.

                                                                     Cur. adv. vult.

   May 19. L o r d L a n e C.J. read the following judgment of the court.
On November 13, 1979, at the Central Criminal Court, the applicant C
was convicted by a majority verdict of affray and was sentenced to four
years’ imprisonment. He now applies for leave to appeal against that
conviction, the application having been referred to this court by the
single judge.
     The facts of the case were these. On November 20, 1978, at the
Ranelagh Yacht Club, Putney Bridge, in the early hours of the evening
a fight broke out in the bar. There were a number of people present,
amongst them being Darke, Begbe, Bohm, Dennis and Bindon. Knives
were used At least three men were stabbed, Darke fatally, Bindon
seriously and Dennis less so. There was in these circumstances no doubt
 that there had been an affray. The only question for the jury to decide
was whether it had been established with a sufficient degree of certainty
 that the applicant had been unlawfully taking part in that affray.                             B
      At the close of the prosecution evidence, a submission was made by
 counsel for the applicant that there was no case for him to answer. The
 judge rejected that submission. The principal ground of appeal to this
 court is that he was wrong in so doing. There are other subsidiary
 grounds of appeal which we shall have to examine in due course.
      W e are told that some doubt exists as to Ihe proper approach to be p
 adopted by the judge at the close of the prosecution case upon a sub­
  mission of “ no c a s e ” : see A r c h b o ld , Crim inal Pleading Evidence &
 Practice, 40th ed. (1979), 6th Cumulative Supplement, para. 575 and
  R e g v. T obin r1980) Crim.L.R. 731.
       T h e r e are two sc h o o l s o f t h o u g h t: (1) that th e judg e sh ou ld stop the
  case if, in his view, it would be u n s a f e (a l te r n a ti v e ly u n s a fe or unsatis- Q
  r3 tory) for the jury to convict; (2) that he should do so only if there is
  no" evidence u p o n which a jury properly directed could properly convict.
  Although in many cases the question is one of semantics, a nd though
  in many cases each test would produce the same result, this is not
  necessarily so. A balance has to be struck between on the one hand a
  usurpation by the judge of the jury’s functions and on the other the
    The W eekly L«w R eports, July 10, 1981                                                          1041

                                    R ccr
                                    H   r .. v.
                                             v.   G a lb ra ith (C.A.)

  ;ory) to convict on the p—    , e v in c e an,
4 draw the case from the jury Whetl er t         g                                    .n thc basis o{



     S      f f i S                                                     - .he close of the prosecu-

        tion case.                            . . . rAac__ f nr doubting the wisdom of
|          There    is h o w e v er a m ore solid rea               co n v ic tio n w ould be
*        this test. I f a judge is obliged to con                               jf he ap^ ics




        Si^’S"ZZ£.
P was clearly not p erm issib le.
                                                                        “- — 287-288's"
                                                                                   taken the view that
C     « . . . even if the ju d g e " - o u r e m p h a s . s -              h ^ ; taken t h e ^
             the evidence could not support a con                           ^              to thc jury
             sistencies, he should n«vert^ sstha‘t the judge-s obligation to stop
             It cannot be too clearly s          concerned primarily with those
             the case is an obbgation w.hl.<*    evidence to establish the facts of
             cases where the nccessary ™inim          the :udge’s job to weigh the
    P        the crime has not been calie .            and to stop the case merely
             evidence, decide who is telling t       .                    u      the
              because he thinks the witness is lying. I o do i
              function of the jury . .                         r       a * the
          Allhough .h i. was a case where no submission was in , a c made,



          v. M ansfield [1977J l w . l . k .                        withdrawing a
              “ Unfortunately since this p r a c t i c e _ s on the evidence
              case from the jury on the ground th               tendency for some
               would be unsafe         there has ,. s e e m a ^               [of
               judges to take the view that ilI they^Ihink^ ^ ^ inslf ]ustifies them
        F      prosecution are not telling th                  widgery C.J. in his
                                                                   'J     - a , Ihis was w r o n , . . .

           He then ciled par. of the passage we have already ,uoled.                         l* « .o n


           "            ~
                 evidence was so conflicting a.
                                                      “^ SnSilS.M ^ ^
                                                                    uncafe      In our judgment he was
                 M                                             to the judge and the ,udge was no.

                 entitled
                 en titled to rule
                           to ru ie that
                                    n idi he
                                          uv could not.                                          ^          u nih

                 On one reading of that f f ^ c ^ A n p ^ 2 8 7 and iSth the earlier part of
         R with Reg. v. B arker {N ote) 6         • P_ • • ^ danger inherent in the use
             the judgment itself. It is an i us       _tlire   invites the judge to evaluate
             of the word “ unsafe      by     very " * « ? 1           whi cJh Reg. v. Barker
             the weight and reliability of e               confusion which now apparently
             {Note) forbids and leads to he s° rt              capable of embracing either
             exists. “ U nsafe,” unless fur|^ er        . ’ believe is the cause of much
              of the two schools of tlJ'0U8ht *n       . R e g V- M ansfield has apparently
              of the difficulty which the judgment in Reg. v. m
                                              The Weekly Law Reports, July   iq   |
 1042
                            Reg. v. G albraith (C A .)                        [19I1J
given. It may mean unsafe because there is insufficient evidence on whi h
a jury could properly reach a verdict of guilty; it may on the other hand
mean unsafe because in the judge’s view, for example, the main prosecu
tion witness is not to be believed. If it is used in the latter sense as the
test, it is wrong. We have come to the conclusion that if and in so far
as the decision in Reg. v. M ansfield [1977] 1 W.L.R. 1102 is at variance
with that in Reg. v. B a rker (N o te) 65 Cr.App.R. 287 we must follow the
latter.
    H o w then sh ould the judge approach a subm ission o f . “ n o.'
 (1) If there is no evidence that the crime alleged has been committei_
 the defendant, there is no difficulty. The judge will of course stop the
 case. (2) The difficulty arises where there is some evidence but it is of 4
 tenuous character, for example because of inherent weakness or vague^
 ness or because it is inconsistent with other evidence, (a) Where the judge
 comes to the conclusion that the prosecution evidence, taken at its
 highest, is such that a jury properly directed could not properly convict
 upon it, it is his duty, upon a submission being made, to stop the case,
 (b) Where however the prosecution evidence is such that its strength or
 weakness depends on the view to be taken of a witness’s reliability, or
 other matters which are generally speaking within the province of the
 jury and where on one possible view of the facts there is evidence upon
 which a jury could properly come to the conclusion that the defendant js
 guilty, then the judge should allow the matter to be tried by the jury. It
 follows that we think the second of the two schools of thought is to be
 preferred.
     There will of course, as always in this branch of the law, be borderline
 cases. They can safely be left to the discretion of the judge.
     We turn now to the evidence in this case. It was admitted that the
applicant had gone to the club with Darke and Begbe and, using a false
name, had signed them in. They had later been joined by Bohm. It was
further not disputed that at the conclusion of the fighting the applicant
was in the bar and. much to his credit, was helping a dying Darke. He
did not go into the witness box, but the account of events which he gave
in a self-exculpatory statement to the police, reiterated in a statement
from the dock, was that he had at the material time when the affray was
in progress not been in thc bar at all but had been downstairs in the
lavatory.
     There were two principal pieces of evidence called by the prosecution
which tended to disprove that assertion and to show that he was in the
bar taking an active part in the affray. The first was a witness called John
Gilette. He said that Darke had attacked Bindon and that at that time
there were three men with Darke. They all had knives. He then described
the three men. One description plainly referred to Begbe, another to Bohm
and the third was an accurate description of the applicant. These men
were described by Gilette as standing by the fight watching with knives
out in a threatening way. He had attended an identification parade on
February 19, 1979. On that parade the applicant was standing. Gilette
however said he was not able to point out anyone on that parade whom
he recognised as having been in the club that night.
    The second piece of evidence was from a witness called Cook, He was
the doorman of the club and was a very reluctant witness. Leave was
eventually given to treat him as hostile. Cook described how the applicant,
or a man who, from the description given by Cook, was plainly an<J
i         Weekly L a w R eports, July 10, 1981
                                                                                                     1043

      w L R                                Reg. v- G alb raith (C.A.)
   1rlmittedly the applicant, had signed Darke and Begbe into the club at
   “taut 4 15 p m . At 6.15 p.m. he heard glass breaking and people shout-
   * ^ n the bar so he went upstairs. When he got there Dennis had told
   H , that he had been stabbed and pointed to a^group of peop e
   f »he iuke box This croup was described by Cook as beine                 John
   n a r k e s party the man with the beard, the fair-haired chap and the
   K e with the twisted nose," The reference to the fa.r-ha.red chap was
     Linlv intended to be a reference to the same person as had signed the
  Iwher two in at the door two hours previously, namely, the applicant.
P ? ^ o s r . « r m m a ion h H a i d that h e could have been mistaken in think-
    !" S       r    f X . k d man with Darke b , the juke b o , was tbe same

     bl0^ S o t ? o S‘,h eese !womp!ences of evidence there was a further witness
       „ dI t l n r ? «         evidence that when Darke was attack.ng B.ndon
 C   as   Bindon                                                                                      ^


     S                S              s                 5        =
      531 U             in       .’S a t e that there had been some form of agreement




         Pr°OM he°rJmainin)r subsidiary grounds which the applicant advances in


         s^fcSKiE'EHSS:
  ■                                                                                  3    b     S     S
         applicant. W e are                                c e riain1y part o f the background o f the




  0 ot                                                                  ■* “p p - ^           - kes u Mces-
          sary to comment upon them                                         Qf ^      argument before us,
          ,be“               ^ f “ "                    a p p e a l   against conviction is refused. We
          have alr ea d y de alt w it h the q u e s t i o n o f s e n t e n c e .

     U                                                                              A pplication refused.

                                            a, Cn  D irector o f Public Prosecutions.
               Solicitors: H e n ry M ilner & Co., u i r t u u , ,
                                                                                                L. N. W.
  12_______________________________________                          (1989)88Cr.A pp.R.
   drawn from the fact that the first limb is satisfied, or to displace any explanation
   advanced by the driver, they can do so by any evidence which is admissible:
   and, (3) evidence of alcoholic consumption sufficient to impair control is
   admissible for this purpose.
     There being for the foregoing reasons no basis for interfering with the
  conviction the appeal is dismissed.
     There remains for consideration the question certified by the judge. As it
  stands, the answer must be in the negative for it omits the whole of the first
  limb of the R. v. Lawrence test. If, however, it were amended so as to read: is
  the offence of causing death by reckless driving proved where, having taken
 alcoholic drink in sufficient quantity such that he knew or must have known that
 his ability to drive was substantially impaired and that there was therefore a risk
 of his causing injury to other road users, the defendant chose to drive a motor
 vehicle and the manner of his driving was such that: (a) it created an obvious
 and serious risk of causing physical injury to some other person who happened
 or might happen to be using the road, or of doing substantial damage to
 property, and (b) it did cause the death of another road user, we would answer
 the question, “prima facie, yes, in the absence of some other explanation.”

                                                                 Appeal dismissed.
   Solicitors: Leslie Maddrell &Co, Cheltenham, for the Crown.




R. v. H.M. CORONER FOR EAST KENT, Ex parte
            SPOONER AND OTHERS

R. v. H.M. CORONER FOR EAST KENT, Ex parte De
             ROHAN AND ANOTHER
                                    (Lord Justice Bingham, Mr.
Q ueen ’s B ench (D ivisional C ourt)
    Justice Mann and Mr. Justice Kennedy): October 5, 6, 1987
Manslaughter—Capacity—Corporate Body—Whether Corporation Capable of
Committing Manslaughter—Whether Aggregation of Acts by Individuals in
Corporation CanAmount to Manslaughter              •
   A corporate body can be guilty of manslaughter on the appropriate facts where
the mens rea and aaus reus of manslaughter can be established against thosf
identified as the embodiment of the company itself. Evidence must be adduced to
show guilt on the part of the corporation as'such. Evidence against one individual
cannot be added to that against another so as to provide the necessary ingredients
of aggregation.
  The vehicle feny ship Herald of Free Enterprise capsized outside Zeebrugge
haibour with the resultant heavy loss of life. A public inquiry took place shortly
after the capsize and a report was published. In the course of an inquest into the
Q.B.D.                                R. v. H.M.    C oroner   for   E a st K e n t   11
death of persons on the ferry as a result of the capsize, the coroner decided as a
matter of law that (i) a corporate body could not be guilty of manslaughter; (ii)
where the acts or omissions of employees or managers of a corporate body were
not sufficient to render them guilty of manslaughter, those acts or omissions could
not be aggregated so as to render the corporate body guilty; (iii) the acts or
omissions of the company which owned the vessel were not the direct cause of the
deaths; and (iv) the evidence to be adduced at the inquest would be narrowed
down. The applicants, relatives of named victims, sought judicial review of the
coroner’s decision and relied on three points made against the company in the
Sheen report, i.e. the company had failed to consider seriously a proposal to fit a
warning light system on the ferry; five or six previous incidents of ferry doors being
left open had not been properly reported and collated by the company and it
lacked any proper system to ensure that the highest standards of safety were
observed.

Held, refusing the applications, the Court was prepared tentatively to accept that a
corporate body was capable of being found guilty of manslaughter; however, no
sustainable case had been made against the named directors of the company, the
owners of the ferry. In exceptional cases the Court would intervene while
proceedings were in progress; but in the instant case the Court was very reluctant
to intervene, especially because it was an inquest. A coroner acted as an inquisitor
and as such was the master of his own procedure. Great weight had to be given to
the coroner’s judgment, whose duty it was to guide the jury to a correct verdict by
way of a fact finding mission, and not to apportion blame and liability.
  Applications for judicial review.
  The applicants, Peter Alan Spooner, Pamela Muriel Spooner, Alan Frederick
Reynolds, Joan Patricia Reynolds, Maurice De Rohan and Margaret De Rohan,
applied for judicial review of decisions of the Coroner for East Kent (Mr. Richard
Harry Brooke Sturt) made on September 19,1987, in the course of an inquest into
the death of 188 people arising out of the capsize on March 6, 1987 of the Herald
of Free Enterprise stating that as a matter of law a corporate body could not be
guilty of manslaughter. An application for an order postponing the publication of
any report of the proceedings until after the jury had returned their verdict in the
inquest was allowed under section 4 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981.
  The grounds of the application and the ruling of the coroner are set out in the
judgment of Bingham LJ.
  The applications were argued on October 5, 1987, when the Court stated that
they would be refused.
  AlastairJohn Forrest for the applicants Spooner and Reynolds.
  EdwardLawson for the applicants De Rohan.
  David Guy for the coroner.
                                                                     Cur. adv. vult.
  October 6. BINGHAM L.J. delivered the following judgment: There are before
the Court two renewed applications for judicial review. The first application is made
on behalf of Mr. and Mrs. Spooner and Mr. and Mrs. Reynolds. The application
was made on September 22, 1987, and refused by McCowan J. on September 24.
The second application is made on behalf of Mr. and Mn. de Rohan and was first
made on September 23, being refused by McCowan J. also on September 24.
  Both applications relate to an inquest currently being conducted in Dover by Her
Majesty’s Coroner for East Kent. Both' applications are made by parents and
 12                                              «              (1989) 88 Cr.A pp.R.
   relatives of the deceased. Both seek to quash decisions of the coroner made on
   September 18 and 19.
     The grounds of the application are, put broadly, that the coroner made an
  incorrect ruling on issues of law arising during the hearing before him and, as a
  result, improperly limited the scope of the inquest. The parties ask this Court to
  make a declaration as to the law and to direct the coroner to call additional
  evidence, or to reconsider what evidence should be called in the light of the Court’s
  declaration.
     The inquest arises from the capsize of the vehicle ferry “Herald of Free
  Enterprise" off Zeebrugge on March 6, 1987 and the huge loss of life, both of
  passengers and crew, to which that tragic disaster gave rise. Nearly 200 lives were
  lost, causing widespread grief, and the facts of the disaster are etched not only on
  the recollections of all who were involved, directly or indirectly, but on the
 consciousness of the nation as a whole.
     Veiy shortly after the disaster the Secretary of State for Trade ordered a formal
 investigation under section 55 of the Merchant Shipping Act 1970. Sheen J. sitting
 with Assessors, was appointed to conduct it. There was a long, comprehensive and
 well publicised investigation culminating in a full report and recommendation^'
•published in July of this year.
    The investigation found that the immediate cause of the vessel’s loss was that she
 sailed with her bow doors open trimmed by the head, i.e. with her nose down. The
 manoeuvre in which she engaged led to the entry of water into the vehicle deck,
 the heavy listing of the vessel and her speedy capsize.
    Sheen J. criticised a number of individuals who had failed to perform their duty,
 in particular those responsible for failing to close the bow doors, failing to see that
 the doors were closed and sailing without knowing that the doors were closed. He
 expressed his criticisms in strong terms. The vessel was owned and operated by
Townsend Car Ferries Ltd., and that company also was the subject of severe
 criticism.
    It is right that I should refer to the terms in which Sheen J. expressed those
criticisms. In paragraph 14.1 of his report he said this:
      “At first sight the faults which led to this disaster were the aforesaid errors of
      omission on the part of the Master, the Chief Officer and the assistant bosun,
      and also the failure by Captain Kirby to issue and enforce clear orders. But a
      full investigation into the circumstances of the disaster leads inexorably to the
      conclusion that the underlying or cardinal faults lay higher up in the Company.
      The Board of Directors did not appreciate their responsibility for the safe
      management of their ships. They did not apply their minds to the question:
      What orders should be given for the safety of our ships? The Directors did not
      have any proper comprehension of what their duties were. There appears to
      have been a lack of thought about the way in which the HERALD ought to
      have been organised for the Dover/Zeebrugge run. All concerned in
      management, from the members of the Board of Directors down to the junior
      superintendents, were guilty of fault in that all must be regarded as sharing
      responsibility for the failure of management. From top to bottom the body
      corporate was infected with the disease of sloppiness. This became particularly
      apparent from the evidence of Mr. A. P. Young, who was the Operations
      Director and Mr. W. J. Ayers, who was Technical Director. As will become
      apparent from later passages. in this Report, the Court was singularly
      unimpressed by both these gentlemen. The failure on the part of the shore
Q.B.D.                                R. v. H.M.      C oroner            for   EA st K ent   13
     management to pw proper and cie* directions « « . contributory a g e rf
     the disaster. This is a serious finding which must be explained in some detail.
   The report then goes into very considerable detail and in the course of tte
present hearing three points are relied on as being parteula^y relevant First, it «
pointed out that the company and its representatives failed to
consideration to a proposal that lights should be fitted on the ^
which would inform the Master whether the bow doors and, for thatmatter, the
stem doors were closed or not. Such a warning system, if duly heeded by roe
Master, would have prevented this disaster. This was a suggestion which was made
but seems unhappily to have been the subject of facetious comment.              ........
   Secondly, attention is drawn to the failure of the company and repr^enta&vea
to report and collate information relating to previous incidents when vesseb; haa
sailed with their doors open. It appears that there were five or six sudi ^ « i t s
between October 1983 and February 1987. Had knowledge of these repea ed
incidents been appreciated it should have alerted the officers of the comP*n^ o tJ*
risk of disaster, but it appears that there was no person within the company who
ever knew of all the incidents.                                               ~ mri,„v
   Thirdly, attention is drawn to the lack of any proper system wthmthecomp y
to ensure that the vessels were operated in accordance with the
 safety. It is rightly urged upon us that where the result of an unsafe system is liab e
 to be so grave, the onus on a company to ensure safe operation is correspondingly

WAt the very end of his report. Sheen J. answered the                            jj*
investigation by the Secretary of State. Question 3 was in Ithese terms. 1Was 1foe
capsize of the ‘Herald of Free Enterprise’ caused or                        Jkren to
any person or persons and, if so, whom and in what respect? The             Pi
that question was: “Yes, by the faults of the following. and three ^ £ u a f c are
 listed Then: “4. Townsend Car Ferries limited at all levels from the B o a r d of
 Directors through the managers of the M a r i n e Department dow ntotfie^m »
 Superintendents. As to the respects in which each of the above-named was guilty
 causative fault, see Report."                                      .             nn
     One might suppose that one Inquiry of ^                     ^
 this scale, would be enough but the law required HerMajesty s J ^ w r for East
  Kent to conduct an inquest with a jury pursuant to section :J of               * d
  1887. It was the coroner’s duty to ascertain in each case who the deceased was
  how, when and where the deceased came by his or her death.
     This inquest was very different from most inquests, ^ th b e a u ^ f tte hujp
  number of deceased persons with whom it was concerned “ d ^
  mass of material relating to the incident, particularly foUo^ngthemqu^of S^e
  J. But, as with any other inquest, its conduct was in the hands of the coroner
  whose duty was to conduct an inquisition and not an adve^n^ tnal He ha
  consider a huge mass of material in order to  d e t e r r m a c c o r d h* duty
                                                                n e . m


  under section 4 of the 1887 Act, whom he thought it expedient to examine. He
  had to bear in mind that at the conclusion of the hearing the jury               .
  give a verdict and certify who the deceased was and how, when and where th
  deceased came by his or her death.                                                ..
     The evidence which we have seen suggests to me that this corone^set about fos
   task with great conscientiousness and jssiduity. After a forma opening ofthe
   inquest at an earlier date the substantive opening of the inquest into 188deaths
   began on September 7, 1987. The coroner then delivered a very full and^efaUy
   constructed opening address to the jury, telling them of the,coroners funcu ,
  14                                                             (1989) 88 Cr.A pp.R.
  their functions and the whole background to the harrowing task which they had
  jointly to carry out. It could not be suggested that a speech on this scale would be
  suitable in other than exceptional cases, but on this particular occasion it was no
  doubt helpful for the jury to be given such a compendious introduction to their
  task.
    It is not, I think, necessary to go in great detail into the opening address of the
  coroner but I should draw attention to what he said on p. 76of the transcript of his
  address. He said this:
         “Another potential verdict you will have to consider in due course, and
         perhaps most controversially, is the verdict of unlawful killing. The notes,
         again they are not part of the law, suggest that in the case of murder,’
        manslaughter or infanticide, the following form be adopted, ‘so and so was
        nUed unlawfully.’ Members of the jury, again I think we can eliminate the
        infanticide and almost certainly murder from thisconsideration but the
        manslaughter will require more detailed consideration. I shall be directingyou
        on the subject of manslaughter leading to a Coroner’s verdict of ‘killed
        unlawfully’ in due course but perhaps I need to introduce the subject now by
        saying three things and they are very important: (i) You will remember that if
        you were to decide upon such a verdict, no individual should be named as
        having been responsible, (ii) Secondly, to arrive at a verdict of unlawful killing
       you need to be satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt that the act or omission
       of an individual caused substantially one or more of the deaths and that that
       individual was guilty of gross negligence. By this I mean that he did or omitted
       to do something which created an obvious and serious risk of physical injury;
       and that this was done without having given any thought to the possibility of
       the nsk or that whoever did or omitted to do the thing recognised the risk and
       nevertheless decided to take it. (iii) The third thing that I wish to say at this
       stage is that although it is possible for several persons to be guilty individually
       of manslaughter, it is not permissible to aggregate several acts of neglect by
       different persons, so as to have gross negligence by a process of aggregation.
       That is a very important point of law. Members of the Jury, which I will
       emphasise again in due course."
    No criticism is I think made of what the coroner said about manslaughter as
           ^)€rsona* defendant, but criticism has been made before us as'to what he
 said about aggregation. The point has been made thata company can be euiltv of
 manslaughter as well as an individual.                                      ^ 7
   After the coroner’s opening address the Inquest proceeded. A very large number
 of witnesses were called and a very large number of proofs of written evidence
were read to the jury. So matters continued until September 17 when Sir David
         °n         °f Mr*      Mrs. de Rohan, made submissions to the coroner.
   The burden of his submission was that the coroner should call five witnesses (who
were named and identified) belonging to the management of the owning and
operating company. Sir David submitted to the coroner that a corporation can be
pulty of manslaughter, and he referred to a body of authority—albeit somewhat
inconclusive—to that effect. He further urged that the coroner should investigate in
evidence the responsibility of senior management of the company in order to leave
                 question whether the company itself was guilty of manslaughter, or
unlawful killing. He drew the attention of the coroner to, and relied on, evidence in
  hcen s report. He further urged that different acts all contributing to a death
            ,und an •"dictment for manslaughter against the company. Mr. Forrest
on oehalf of other parties adopted and elaborated those submissions.
    Q.B.D.
                                          R. v. H.M.    C oro ner   for   E a st Ke n t    15

    i T        r r       "       1,16 mattcr Md gave a ruling on September 18 He
               .?     erwl!nesses’ *wo of whom had not given evidence to Sheen J and
    tf«e other three of whom had given evidence amounting to S w                  of
                    coroner reached four conclusions. Fust, he expressed his^oinion
    W d £y»Ch
            nc“ eexpressed
                   ^ r S bthe    T °f mrthat
                           t h eopinion   ! aUghtCr ag8inSt
                                             a company      the fivc
                                                         cannot      named
                                                                 in law     individuals.
                                                                        be indidM   fnr
   rouna a cnarge of manslaughter against the company even if such a rrW m..w K*
   £ ■ £ £ £ ? \ m p u >- ?ourthl‘ - he ra,' d ih"
   ^                          0f 'ndWdual acts which d0 "ot individually constitute
   m T w S E O n w i £ T 5 " I agr" 10 0,11             evidence from one of the
   he haH h! ? ’ j September 21 the coroner gave further reasons for the ruling that
                                        00“ i0" Md deah more                     -S E
  .tt?ntioSn » " nA m ? ,'1 .'T ' . 1 ? ^ Naple» Wro" » >h' coroner, drawing his
  cnmmiff»H k further authority on the question whether manslaughter could be
  ftlamn           * co.rPoratlon- The authority referred to was a case tried at the




  » * 7 a 5 2 K S 2 ? ~ li" 4 - *- p “^ d " ^
   is to1LC^ A .a^?Kb(1 n dl?Wn.t0 the coroner’s attention-and no possible criticism
   uI to be made of the fact that it was not drawn to his attention before because the
                           <«» ■™«' *• * * n o d c ^ h e S ™ , ' T e ^ ^ T f e ^
  t“L
    h,eT™
        lK 0otf%0^ L i/np
               Northern        J*™ Construction'V°U
                        S S A/uwi*                      , f0r (unreported
                                                   Co. Ltd.    drawin8 mX mention
                                                                           1956) It to
                                                                                     is
   in mt               tCqS!S°i7 ° f ^ ^ t e liability was argued. However, as I said
   tn !H        ? S?P*?niber 18 at PP- 5 and 6, the acts of the company would have
   h in w lf^ i£ ** md,v,dual (“ “*1 should have said an individual director) who was
   K w °£.*he V               “ " tdirectors
                    three relevant    * made hadC,ear ther'
                                                   done   any" act
                                                               * "°orPbeen
                                                                       * ~ *guilty
                                                                              * « of
                                                                                   & anv
                                                                                      £
             which could be said to be a direct or substantial cause of thfeareize and
     A t^ rlw ^ A e question of corporate manslaughter did not in any event wise-
     At the time when that letter was written, on September 23 340 witnew< haH
  re-arLuelfhUf6 ° ? 8,1(1 400 statements had been read to the jury. The matter was
 it is fair t^C« re     Jf0r^nCr ° n ° ctober !*the argument before him being, I think
 before He “ y,, n° *ou.bt '"‘’I? elaborate but to substantially the same effect as
 * 2 ? J ? V n a              ' Ulhng fa thtSC tCnns: UAs 1 have saic^Mr ForTesrt
 br^T of thJ J        0CtUS^ and the mens na may ^ found in the hands and
               tTSES-'                     » ad ** facts been, as in the < 7 w J E
 alleged ^       h            a             d            C° Ud ’ <whcrc ** i«tmrton
          m Ac            1 ,5 Z Y            wag,ng PlT.M0T’was to demolish a bridge
 2                                 ^T, pMy brams had ®vcn instmctions to go out So
 be a ^ h o U                   y n SpCKd, When                 by thc hcad’ * « would
has not ^ n                  L            submission might then have been relevant. It
i J l T ® ? suggested by anyone that that is what happened here I have
S n M v L « 7 V'd'"“ < r n ^ ?* Direa°" » the S h S T „ q„?^, J , S S
incidentally, is 467 pages of transcript and not 367 as I mstakinl/said on a
   16                                                           (1989) 88 Cr.App.R.
    previous occasion, when -I gave these rulings, and I have now also considered the
    evidence given by one former -director to this inquest, and I can see nothing in any
    of that evidence to support such a suggestion. It accordingly seems to me to be
    irrelevant to the issues before the jury. Quite apart from anything else, a failure to
    act would only ground manslaughter if it was that person’s duty to act. The jury
    would need evidence of the extent of the duties of each of the directors concerned.
    It would also need evidence of the powers which each director had to take action.
    And, for example, would he have had to persuade the whole Board, or some other
   director, to agree with the proposal. It is obvious, as a matter of ordinary common
   sense, that the whole subject goes far beyond the proper scope of an Inquest,
   wtuch is essentially a fact finding and not a fault finding enquiry. For these reasons
   I intend to tell the jury that they are not concerned with corporate manslaughter,
   whether it exists or not, and that in this inquest, when considering the possible
   verdict of unlawful killing, they are only concerned with the acts or omissions of
   those individuals who could be said to have caused the deaths.”
      Tlie arguments which were deployed and elaborated before the coroner have, in
  substance, been repeated with great cogency and skill before us. The first question
  B , ^ Cther.a corPora^on 0311 be indicted for manslaughter. The coroner originally
  ruled that it could not. In the course of argument in this Court we indicated at an
  early stage that we were prepared to assume for the purposes of this hearing that it
  could. As a result the question has not been fully argued and I have not found it
  necessary to reach a final conclusion. I am, however, tentatively of opinion that on
  appropriate facts the mens rea required for manslaughter can be established against
  a corporation. I see no reason in principle why such a charge should not be
  established. I am therefore tentatively of opinion that the coroner’s original ruling
  was wrong, and indeed I would need considerable persuasion to reach the
 conclusion that it was correct.
     But that is not the end of the matter because the coroner clearly adhered to his
 substantial ruling even on the assumption that a company could in principle be
 guilty of manslaughter. The coroner made it clear that he was of opinion that the
 evidence which he had considered was not capable of supporting the conclusion that
 those who represented the directing mind and will of the company and controlled
 what it did had been guilty of conduct amounting to manslaughter.
     I am not persuaded that that is a conclusion which is or may be wrong. Nothing
 was, in my judgment, said by Sheen J. or by way of concession before him which
 undermines that conclusion. It is important to bear in mind an important distinction.
 A company may be vicariously liable for the negligent acts and omissions of its
 servants and agents, but for a company to be criminally liable for manslaughter—on
the assumption I am making that such a crime exists—it is required that the mens
reaand the actus reus of manslaughter should be established not against those who
Kted' for or in the name of the company but against those who were to be
identified as the embodiment of the company itself. The coroner formed the view
that there was no such case fit to be left to the jury against this company. I see no
reason to disagree. I would add that I see no sustainable case in manslaughter
against the directors who are named either.
    I do not think the aggregation argument assists the applicants. Whether the
defendant is a corporation or a personal defendant, the ingredients of manslaughter
must be established by proving the necessary mens rea and actus reus of
manslaughter against it of him by evidence properly to be relied on against it or
        A 6854 against a F^rsonal defendant cannot be fortified by evidence against
another defendant. The case against a corporation can only be made by evidence
 C.A.                                 R.   v.   H.M.   C oroner   for   E ast K en t   17

  property addressed to showing guilt on the part of the corporation as such. On the
  main substance of his ruling I am not persuaded that the coroner erred.
     Indeed, on the materials I have seen I would reach that conclusion even if the
  inquest had been concluded. But I reach the conclusion with some relief given that
  the Inquest is in progress and that the coroner is in the course of summing-up.
     I accept that in exceptional cases the Court will intervene by way of judicial
  review while a proceeding is in progress. If intervention were necessary to prevent
 this inquest having to be conducted all over again because of legal or procedural
 error, it might very well be such an exceptional case. But just as the Court of
 Appeal is veiy slow to interfere in the conduct of a trial proceeding before a judge,
 so this court should, in my judgment, be very reluctant to intervene in the conduct
 of an inquest in train before a coroner. The fact that it is an inquest perhaps makes
 the argument even stronger because the coroner is by law an inquisitor; the
 witnesses called are those whom he, under the statute, thinks it expedient to
examine, and he is very much the master of his own procedure.
    These considerations are fortified here because the coroner has immersed himself
 in a huge mass of material which the court has not seen. We have scarcely glimpsed
the tip of the iceberg of evidence with which he is familiar. Very great weight
therefore should be given to his judgment, although on questions of Taw he is of
course exercising a judgment, not a discretion.
    It is his duty to guide the jury to a correct verdict but his responsibility is to
conduct a fact-finding exercise, not to apportion blame and not to decide civil
liability. In a case such as this the chain of causation may be of almost infinite
length. The coroner had to break it somewhere to keep his enquiry within tolerable
bounds. He broke it at what I judge to be a reasonable and sustainable point,
particularly bearing in mind the exhaustive public inquiry which had already been
conducted by Sheen J.
   Those are my reasons for the conclusion announced at the end of yesterday’s
hearing that leave to move for judicial review should not be given.
  MANN J.: I agree with the reasons given by Bingham LJ. Like Bingham LJ., I
am of the view that a body corporate can in appropriate circumstances be guilty of
a crime of manslaughter, but would not wish to decide the matter on an application
for leave to move.
  KENNEDY J.: I agree.
                                                              Applications refused.
  Solicitors: Pannone Napier, for the applicants Spooner and Reynolds. Kingsley
Napley for the applicants de Rohan. Sharpe Pritchard & Co. agents for W. G.
Hopkin, Maidstone for the Coroner.
462                                     k i n g ’s b e n c h   d iv is io n .   6      £ l9 4 9 ]
                                                                                                      1   K. B.           ^ n g t b e n c h d iv is io n .
                                                                                                                                                                                                    463
      C. A.             T his association received a contribution from th e federation
      1948          am ounting to som e 6,000/. T his is clearly n o t a v olu n ta ry                Scientific S ocieties A ct, 1843. N o dem and for rates had been                    c.   a.
                   contribution, because the federation receives its funds from                      received b y the association for tw e n ty years before 1946.
  M etro­
                                                                                                     T h e Central M iddlesex A ssessm ent C om m ittee refused th e                       1948
  p o l it a n     th e m em bers o f th e a ssociation and th e p ay m en t is in effect a
 B orough
                   p ay m en t b y th e m em bers in order to g et th e benefit of th e work         claim b u t altered th e description o f the site fr o m : " s ite                 B r it is h
      of                                                                                                                                                                                 Laun-
B attersea         o f the association. There is also a governm ent grant o f som e                     laundry and prem ises, R esearch L aundry " to : " R esearch                    d erers'
      v.                                                                                                laboratories, E xperim ental L aundry, site and p r e m ise s”                 R esea rch
    T he
                   29,700/., w hich w as also n o t a v olu n ta ry contribution. B u t                                                                                                A s s o c ia ­
  B r it is h      there w as one p a ym en t o f 2,0001, as to w hich a ll th a t is said           a n d inserted a gross valu e o f 436/. T h e association appealed                    t io n
    Iron                                                                                             to quarter sessions, th e rating a u th ority o n ly appearing as                       v.
and Steel
                   in th e case sta te d is th a t “ an associate m em ber v o lu n ta rily                                                                                          B orough o f
R esearch          " contributed 2,000/. in support o f th e general fun d s.” A ssum ing            respondents. Q uarter sessions held th a t the association cam e                  H endon
 A s s o c ia ­
                   th a t th is 2,000/. w as a v o lu n ta ry contribution, is it correct to         w ith in th e term s o f th e section and th e rating au th o rity                 R a t in g
   t io n .                                                                                                                                                                          A u t h o r it y .
                                                                                                     appealed to the D iv ision al Court.
                   sa y th at th e a ssociation is " supported in w hole or in part b y
Bucknill L.J.                                                                                            I h e association w as a co m p a n y lim ited b y guarantee regis­
                      v olu n ta ry contributions ? ” T he to ta l incom e from June,
                   1944, to th e end o f D ecem ber, 1945, w as 99,474/. 12s. 5d.                    tered on J u ly 2 3 ,1 9 2 0 , estab lish ed for th e prom otion o f research
                  but       th e   balance     o f incom e      over expen diture       w as         a n d other scientific w ork in connexion w ith th e laundry and
                   I 3 >°3 0^         2d.    I t is difficult to suppose th a t the                  cleaning trades or industries as set o u t in the m em orandum of
                  association w as “ su p p o r te d ” b y th is 2,000/. A so c ie ty is             asso cia tio n and also as there sta te d , inter alia : to encourage
                  o n ly “ su p ported in w hole or in part b y v o lu n tary con­                   a n d im prove the ed u cation of persons w ho are engaged, or
                      trib u tion s if it h as to rely on th em for the continuance of               lik ely to be engaged in the said indu stries 3 ( a ) ; to publish
                  its w ork. T he sum of 2,000/. is too sm all a proportion o f th e                 a n d circulate literary m atter treatin g o f and bearing upon th e
                  w hole incom e to enable th at inference to be drawn.                             lau n d ry and cleaning trades or industries 2 (b) ; to estab lish
                      I agree the appeal should be allow ed.                                        a n d m aintain libraries and collection s o f literature and other
                                                                                                    inform ation relating to th e said trades 2 ( b ) ; to dissem inate
                                                                                                    inform ation b y m eans o f th e reading of papers, d eliv ery o f
                                                                         A p p e a l aUowed.
                                                                                                    lectures, g iv in g o f advice and b y th e ap pointm ent o f advisory
                      Solicitors for th e ratin g au th o rity : Sharpe P ritch a rd & Co.,         officers 3 (b) ; further to encourage and m ake know n th e nature
                  fo r the T ow n Clerk o f B attersea.                                             a n d m erits of in ven tion s, im provem ents, processes, m aterials
                      Solicitors for th e so c ie ty : A llen & O very.                             a n d designs w hich m a y seem capable o f being used b y m em bers
                                                                                                    o f the association and others for a n y o f th e purposes o f the
                                                                                                    said trades or industries 3 (b).
                                                                                    C. G. M.
                                                                                                         T he hereditam ent com prised a laboratory block contain ing
                                                                                                     a n alytica l, chem ical, te x tile , bacteriological and tw o p hysical
                  B R IT IS H L A U N D E R E R S ’ R E SE A R C H A SSO C IA TIO N                  chem ical laboratories, an instrum ent laboratory also used for
                     v. B O R O U G H O F H E N D O N R A T IN G A U T H O R IT Y .                 co n stru ctin g th e a ssociation ’s ow n scientific instrum ents a
                                                                                                    m icro-photograph and u ltra-violet light laboratory. A lso’ in
                     A p p e a l from a decision o f th e D iv ision a l Court on a case            th e block were an engineer’s draw ing office, m achine shop,
                  stated by the M iddlesex quarter sessions.                                        b oth for building special appliances and m aintenance o f
                     On N ovem b er 9, 1946, th e association m ade a proposal for                  e x istin g appliances, a library of scientific and tech n ical books,
                  th e am endm ent o f th e valuation list for the borough o f H endon              an office dealing chiefly w ith tech n ical reports, directors’ and
                  in respect o f a hereditam ent ow ned and occupied b y th em :                    secretaries’ room s and cloakroom s. A separate building
                  " site, laundry and prem ises, research laundry ” assessed at no                  contain ed an experim en tal laundry for carrying out applied
                  gross, but a t 360/. rateable value. T he association claim ed                    research on norm al w ork and special w ork. There were also
                  th a t th e y were exem p t from rates b y reason o f s. 1 o f th e               a boiler house, w ater softeners and coal and w ater storage
                                                                                                    p laces. A djoining the laboratory w as a tem porary building
     466                                     k i n g ’s BENCH DIVISIO N.                ^        TL949]          I S . B.               k i n g 's b e n c h    division.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   467
           c.   A.        R esearch A ssociation , th e federation is an independent body
                                                                                                                 w as no oth er contribution w hich w as voluntary. In th e case                        c.
           1948           distinct from the m em bers o f th e association and o f th e                                                                                                                       A.
                                                                                                                o f H ornsey School o f A r t v . Edm onton U n ion ( 1 ) it is clear th a t
        B ritish federation. T he federation b y its contribution is a ctin g w ith                                                                                                                     1948
                                                                                                                th e court decided th a t a governm ent grant w as a volu n tary
         Laun-            th e d isin terested m o tiv e o f en deavouring to see th a t scientific
                                                                                                                co n trib u tion because th e y felt bound b y th e decision in The                  B r it is h
       R esearch           researc^ *n               “"on an<^ stee l trades is properly co n stitu ted .                                                                                             Laun-
                                                                                                                R o y a l College o f M u sic v . S t. M argaret’s V estry {2 ). B u t
        A s s o c ia -     T he argum ent o f counsel in th e B ritish Iro n and Steel case                                                                                                          derers’
                                                                                                                th a t had n ever been decided in th e R o yal College o f M u sic                  R esea rch
           t io n         Was th a t th e governm ent grant in th a t case w as n o t a v o lu n tary                                                                                               A ss o c ia ­
                                                                                                                case ( 2 ). There w as evid en ce in th a t case o f volu n tary con­
     B o r o u g h o f contribution because it w as m ade su bject to certain conditions.                                                                                                              t io n
                                                                                                                trib u tion s m ade to th e so c ie ty of 1 ,1 3 2 1, and a governm ent                  v.
        Rating                    g ° vernrnent> it w as said, g o t a quid pro quo. B u t th e                                                                                                   B orough o p
                                                                                                                grant of 5 0 0 1, w as paid to th e so ciety . T he court b y their                 H endon
     A u t h o r i t y . w hole ob ject o f th e contribution b y th e governm ent both in
                                                                                                                judgm ent said th a t th e volu n tary contributions were 1 ,6 3 3 1.                R a t in g
                           th a t case and in th is, is granted for th e com m on good o f science.                                                                                               A u t h o r it y .
                                                                                                                T his m ay w ell have been a slip b ut th a t casu al sta tem en t
                           T he con ditions are im posed for th e benefit o f th e cou n try as a
                                                                                                                  as been treated su b seq u en tly b y th e D ivision al Court as a
                           w hole. “ V olu n ta ry ” as used in th is section does n o t m ean
                                                                                                               d ecision th a t a governm ent grant is a volu n tary contribution
                          n o t com pulsory ; it m eans gratu itou s, w ith ou t a n y m o n ey or
                                                                                                                K en n ed y L .J . in M a y o r o f L iverpool v. W est D erby U nion (3 )
                          oth er m erely m aterial Consideration : See Overseers o f the S avoy
                          v . A r t U itim o f London ( 1 ).                                                   h ad decided th a t th e con trib u tion in th a t case from th e
                                                                                                               ed u ca tio n a u th ority w as n o t volu n tary. The case of N o n -
                              [ D e n n i n g L. J .    A re h osp itals to -d a y supported b y volu n tary
                          con trib u tion s ?]                                                                 F errous M etals Research A ssociation v . Borough o f St. P ancras (4 )
                                                                                                               c o n tin u ed th e chain o f error. Lord H ew art C.J. based h is
                              If I offer -to p a y 5 I. to a ch arity is th a t n ot a volu n ta ry
                                                                                                               ju d gm en t in th a t case on H ornsey School o f A r t v . Edm onton
                          contribution ? I f a bed is endow ed in a h osp ital for th e
                                                                                                               U n ton (1) w hich itself w as w rongly based oh th e R o ya l College
                          m em ber o f a certain class, th a t is a volu n tary contribution
                                                                                                               o f M u sic case (2 ). (Com m issioners o f In la n d Revenue v .
                          n otw ith stan d in g th e condition as to th e class o f p atien t.
                                                                                                               F o rrest ( 5 ) w as again referred to.)
                          T he m ere fact th a t conditions are im posed on th e use to w hich
                                                                                                                   M ichael Rowe K .C . replied.
                          a contribution is p u t, does n o t render it n ot voluntary. From
                          th e d ate o f th e S a vo y case ( 1 ) governm ent grants h ave been
                          h eld t o be volu n tary contributions. T he decision of th e                                                                                    C ur. adv. vult.
                          D iv isio n a l Court w as w rong and should be reversed.
                                                                                                                  D e c . 3 , 1 9 4 8 . B u c k n i l l L .J.   I w ill ask D e n n i n g L. T.
                             F itzgerald K .C . and J . R am say W illis for th e rating au th ority.
                                                                                                               to g iv e th e first judgm ent.
                         T o secure exem p tion a so c ie ty m u st b e in stitu te d for purposes
                         o f science exclu sively. The p osition itt law is correctly sta te d
                                                                                                                    D e n n i n g L .J.  T he first question is, w hat is th e true
                         in R y d e on R a tin g (8 th ed.) a t p. 1 5 2 , para. 1 4 3 : “ In order
                                                                                                                in terpretation of th e w ords “ for th e purposes o f science,
                         ■“ to com e w ith in th e A ct, th e docum ent defining th e purposes
                                                                                                                   literature or th e fine arts ex clu siv ely ” in s. 1 o f th e
                          “ for w hich th e so c ie ty is in stitu te d m u st exclu d e purposes
                                                                                                               S cien tific S ocieties A ct, 1 8 4 3 . There is one th in g w hich is clear
                          “ w hich w ou ld n o t com e w ith in th e A ct, in such a w a y th a t an
                                                                                                               b oth on th e w ording o f th e sta tu te and on th e cases. T he word
                          “ ap p lication o f th e funds or efforts o f th e so c ie ty to such
                                                                                                               “ ex clu siv ely ” m u st be given its full effect. It is n o t sufficient
                         “ purposes w ould b e ultra vires. I t is further su b m itted
                                                                                                               th a t th e so c iety should be in stitu ted " m ain ly " or “ prim ailry ”
                          “ th a t if th e so ciety be in stitu ted for tw o purposes, one o f w hich
                                                                                                               or “ chiefly ” for th e purposes of science, literatu re or th e fine
                        ■“ is w ith in th e A ct, w hile th e oth er is n ot, th e so ciety cannot
                                                                                                               arts. It m u st be in stitu te d “ ex clu siv ely ” for th o se purposes.
                        “ claim exem p tion , ev en th ou gh th e so c ie ty be in fact carried
                                                                                                               T he o n ly qualification— w hich, indeed, is n o t rea lly a q u a li­
                         “ on so lely to prom ote th a t purpose w hich is w ith in th e A c t.”
                                                                                                               fication a t all— is th a t other purposes w hich are m erely
                         See also th e rest o f para. 1 4 3 . In th is case, if th e governm ent
                        grant w as n o t a volu n tary contribution, it is clear th a t there                    j1} l°ll'       ’J L ' G> R I ?8‘ (3 ) 69 J. P . 277 ; 3 L. G. R. 647.
                                                  (1) [1896] A. C. 296.                                          (2) [1898] 1 Q. B. 304 ; (C. A.)  (4) 16 R. a n d I . T. Cases 136.
JO                                                                                                                                                 (5 ) 15 App. Cas. 334.
468                                          KING’S BENCH D IV ISIO N.                                 [1949]         1 K. B.                     K IN G ’S B E N C H D IV IS IO N .                                                            469


     C. A .           in cid en tal to th e purposes o f scien ce and literatu re or th e                             of Preventive Medicine v . St. George’s Union (1) and the School                                                  c. a.
      1948
                      fine arts, th a t is, m erely a m eans to th e fulfilm ent o f those                            of Oriental and African Studies v. Westminster City Rating                                                              8
                      purposes, do n o t deprive a so cie ty o f th e ex em p tio n . OnCe                            Authority (2 ).                                                                                                 „~
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      I j R IT IS H
   B r it is h
    L aun-
                      how ever, th e oth er purposes cease to be m erely in cid en tal                                   There are tw o cases, how ever, to w hich I m u st specifically                                               laun      -
   D ERERs ’          b u t becom e c o lla te r a l; th a t is, cease to be a m eans to an                           refer. The first is Reg. v. Institution of Civil Engineers (3 ).                                               d e re rs’
  R esearch                                                                                                                                                                                                                         R esearch
   A SS O C IA ­
                      end, b u t becom e an end in th em selv es ; th a t is, becom e                                 In th a t case th e In stitu tio n of C ivil E ngineers w as held not to                                       A ssocsa-
      TIO N           ad d ition al purposes o f th e so ciety ; th en , w hether th e y be                           be ex em p ted b y th e A ct 1 8 4 3 , from being rated. T he decision                                            w on
        v.
 B orough o f
                      m ain or subsidiary, w hether th e y e x ist jo in tly w ith or sep arately                     w as clearly right, b ut th e court to o k th e wrong test. T he                                             borough of

   H endon            from th e purposes o f scien ce, literature or th e fin e arts, th e                            court there asked itse lf : W hat w as th e m ain and su b stan tia l
• R a t in g
 A u t h o r it y .
                      so c ie ty cannot claim th e ex em p tio n . T h at is, I th in k , m ade                       object o f th e association ? W as it th e purposes o f science ?                                            a u t h o r it y   .
                      q u ite clear b y th e opinions o f Lord W a tson and Lord Mac-                                 or, W as it th e purposes o f its m em bers ? T hat w ou ld h ave been                                             ~~L
  Denning L.J.
                      nagh ten in Com m issioners o f In la n d Revenue v . F orrest ( 1 ).                           a proper te s t under s. 11 o f th e Custom s and Inland R evenue
                         M ore difficulty arises, how ever, in sa yin g w h a t are “ the                             A ct, 1 8 8 5 , b ut w as a w rong te st under th e Scientific Societies
                      “ purposes o f scien ce.’- Science includes, o f course, n o t on ly                            A ct, 1 8 4 3 , because it ga v e no effect to th e w ord “e x c lu siv e ly .”
                      pure or ab stract scien ce, such a s pure m ath em atics, b u t also                            A p p lyin g th a t w rong te st, th e court th ou gh t th a t th e m ain and
                      th e ap plied scien ces, su ch a s electricity or engineering             axid                  su b stan tial object o f th e in stitu tio n w as for th e purposes of
                      th e purposes o f science include n ot o n ly th e ad vancem ent of                             its m em bers. T hat finding w as in effect overruled b y th e
                      know ledge b y research w ork, but also th e d issem in ation o f it                            decision of th e H ouse of Lords in Commissioners of Inland
                      b y lectures or teach in g or w ritin g. T ake th e departm ent pf                              Revenue v. Forrest (4 ). The H ouse o f Lords found th a t th e
                      engineering a t Cam bridge. It is u n d ou b ted ly in stitu ted for                            m ain object o f th e in stitu tio n w as th e prom otion o f science,
                      th e purposes o f science ex clu siv ely ; and although it undertakes                           and it w as on th a t account ex em p t from inland revenue d u ty.
                      th e t r a i n i n g o f stu d en ts, th a t is m erely in cid en ta l to th e                  B u t th e H ouse of Lords e v id en tly th ou gh t th a t th e in stitu tion
                      purposes o f science (see th e case o f th e R o ya l College o f M u sic                       had, as a subsidiary ob ject, th e purposes o f its m em bers :
                      v . V estry o f S t. M argaret’s (2 ).                                                          and th a t therefore th e a ctu a l conclusion of th e court in th e
                          T he purposes o f science, how ever, do n o t include th e purposes                         ratin g case w as right, because th e association w as not in stitu ted
                      o f th e firms or persons w ho m ake use o f science. M any o f our                             for th e purposes of science ex clu siv ely , but also for th e purposes
                      great industrial concerns, such as I.C .I., m ake use o f science                               o f its m em bers. T his is, I th in k , w h at both Lord W atson and
                       and, indeed, in stitu te research laboratories for th e purposes of                            Lord M acnaghten had in m in d in Commissioners of
                      science, b ut o n ly as in cid en tal to th eir industrial purposes.                            Inland Revenue v . Forrest (5 ). In a y e t later revenue
                       So also our tech n ical schools m ake use o f science and in stitu te                          case in th e Court o f A p p eal about th e Institution of Civil
                       laboratories for th e purposes o f science, b ut on ly as in cid en tal                        Engineers ( 6 ), th e judges th ou g h t th a t th e a ctu a l conclusion in
                       to th e training of craftsm en. In such cases th e laboratories                                th e rating case w as virtu a lly overruled b y th e H ouse of Lords
                       are in stitu te d for th e purposes o f ind ivid u als, n o t for th e                         in th e revenue case : and th a t th e rating case can o n ly be
                       purposes o f science ex cep t as in cid en tal to th e purposes of                             supported on th e ground th a t th e in stitu tio n w as not supported
                       individuals.                                                                                   b y volu n tary contributions. There is n othing in th e report
                          Trade research associations stan d m id-w ay. T h ey are                                    of th e rating case, how ever, to su ggest th a t th e in stitu tio n w as
                       in stitu te d for th e purposes of science and also for th e purposes                          not supported b y volu n tary con trib u tion s, i t w as assum ed b y
                       of th e m em bers w ho m ake use of science. N either purpose
                       is m erely in cid en tal to th e other. E ach is collateral to th e                               (1 ) 6 9 L .   J.   (Q . B .) 8 1 4 ;   R yde          (5 ) I b i d . a t p . 3 4 8 l i n e s 1 4 t o 8
                                                                                                                      and    K o n s t a m ’s   R a tin g   A p p e a ls ,   fr o m    th e   b o tto m     of   th e   page;
                       other. T he associations are in stitu ted for th e tw o purposes
                                                                                                                      1 8 9 4 -1 9 0 4 , a t p . 242.                        3 5 3 , lin e s 14 t o 1 0 fr o m t h e b o t t o m
                       jo in tly , and are therefore n o t in stitu te d for th e purposes of                            (2)' LI 94 ° ] 2 A ll E . R . 5 3 7 .               and      354,    lin e s   9   to   4   fr o m th e
                       science exclu sively— see th e cases o f th e Jenne* Institute                                    (3 ) 5   Q . B . D. 4 8 .                           b o tto m .
                         (1)   15 A p p . C as. 334, 348, 354.   (2) [1 8 9 8 ] 1 Q . B . 3 0 4 ; (C. A .). 8 0 9 .      (4 }   15 A p p . C a s. 3 3 4 .                        (6 ) [1 9 3 2 ] 1 K . B . 1 4 9 .
                                                                                                                       • •
470                                           KING’S BENCH DIVISION.                       [1949]   1 K. B.             . k i n g ’s b e n c h d i v i s i o n .                                471

      C. A .         everyb od y th a t it w a s : and it is ob viou s th a t, even if th e         th e so c ie ty h as in fact pursued : for, if it in fact pursues alien            C. A.

      1948
                     m em bers’ subscriptions w ere n ot volu n tary contributions,                 purposes, it cannot claim th e exem ption, P u r v is v. T ra ill ( 1 ),           1948
                     there m ay have been other contributions w hich were v o lu n tary             per P arke B . A so cie ty can n ot get exem p tion from rates
   B r it is h                                                                                                                                                                      B r it is h
    L aun-           con trib u tion s. W hen Lord M acnaghten said th a t he en tirely             b y sayin g th a t w hat th e y are doing is ultra vires. T he court             Laun­
  derers’            agreed in th e conclusion o f th a t case, he m eant th a t he agreed          w ill assum e th a t th e purposes w hich it pursues are purposes               d erers’
 R esea rch                                                                                                                                                                        R esearch
  A s s o c ia ­     w ith th e a ctu a l conclusion th a t th e In stitu tio n o f Civil           for w hich it w as in stitu ted .                                               A s s o c ia ­
      t io n         E ngineers w as n ot in stitu te d for th e purposes o f science                   A pplying th ese rules to th e case of B ritish Launderers’                    t io n
        v.                                                                                                                                                                               v.
B orough of          ex clu siv ely . I cannot agree, therefore, w ith w h at w as said             R esearch A ssociation, th e first ta sk is to interpret th e                 B orough of
  H endon            ab ou t th e rating case in th e later revenue case ( 1 ). The                 m em orandum , articles and b y-law s o f th a t association and see            H endon
   R a t in g                                                                                                                                                                        R a t in g
A u t h o r it y .   decision in th e later case w as th a t th e In stitu tio n o f Civil          w h at are th e purposes for w hich it w as in stitu ted . T he m em bers     A u t h o r it y .
                     E ngineers w as estab lish ed for charitable purposes on ly. T hat             are firm s in th e laundry and cleaning industries w ho p ay an
 Denning L.J.                                                                                                                                                                      Denning L.J.
                     decision has no bearing here. It is ob vious th a t an association             annual subscription va ryin g w ith th e size o f their businesses.
                     m ay b e estab lish ed for charitable purposes only, and y e t not             V iew ing th e nature and ob jects o f th e association as a w hole,
                     be in stitu ted for th e purposes o f science exclu sively .                   I th in k it p lain th a t th e association is in stitu ted n ot o n ly for
                        T he other case to w hich I m u st particularly refer is B ritish           th e purposes o f scien ce, but also for th e purposes o f th e m em bers
                     N on-F errous M etals Research A ssociation v. Borough o f St.                 o f th e association and oth ers engaged in th e industry. It is
                     P a n cra s (2 ). T he D iv isio n a l Court there seem s to h a ve been       in stitu te d for th e purposes (inter alia) o f encouraging and
                     m uch influenced          b y th e C iv il Engineers case about                im proving th e education o f persons w ho are engaged in th e
                     “ charitable purposes o n ly .” If th e y had put it on one side,              said in d u stry, 3 (a) ; of dissem inating inform ation b y giving of
                     as th e y m igh t h a ve done, because it w as a decision on a different       ad vice, 3 (b) ; and m ak in g know n the nature and m erits of
                     sta tu te, th e y m igh t, I th in k , h a ve com e to a different co n ­      processes, an d so forth, 3 (d ). T hese purposes are not m erely
                     clusion. A pp lyin g th e principles I have sta ted , I th in k th e           in cid en tal to th e purposes o f science. The association cannot,
                     decision in th e N on-F errous case w as w rong.                               therefore, be said to be in stitu ted for th e purposes o f science
                        T he second question is w h at is th e proper w a y o f seein g             ex clu siv ely . E ven if I had a n y doubt on th e interpretation of
                     w h eth er a society is “ in stitu ted ” for those purposes. D o es th e       th e articles, how ever, it is rem oved b y th e purposes w hich
                     exem p tion depend on th e purposes of th e so ciety as defined in             th e association in fact pursue. T he brochures about their
                     th e m em orandum o f association, or on th e purposes w hich                  a c tiv itie s (such as courses for stu d en ts, develop m en t visits and
                     th e so ciety in fact pursue ?                                                 tech n ical ad vice at m em bers’ laundries, and so forth) show th a t
                        In m y opinion, in cases w here there is a m em orandum o f                 th e y pursue th e purposes o f th eir m em bers w ith as m uch zeal
                     association , it should be regarded as th e b est evidence o f th e            a s th e y pursue th e purposes o f science.
                     purposes for w hich th e so ciety w as in stitu ted . If it appears                Mr. R ow e says, how ever, th a t quarter sessions cam e to a
                     clearly from th e m em orandum th at som e o f th e purposes for               conclusion of fact in h is favour w ith w hich th e D ivision al
                     w hich th e so c ie ty is in stitu te d are n ot th e purposes o f science,    Court sh ou ld not have interfered. On th is point it is im portant
                     literature or th e fine arts or in cid en tal thereto, th en th e              to distinguish betw een prim ary facts and th e conclusions
                     so c ie ty can n ot claim th e benefit o f th e exem p tion , even though      from th em . P rim ary fa cts are facts w hich are observed b y
                     it does n ot for th e tim e being in fact pursue those alien purposes,         w itn esses and p ro v ed b y oral te stim o n y or fa cts proved b y th e
                     Reg. v . Cockburn (3 ). If, how ever, there is no m em orandum                 production o f a th in g itself, such as original docum ents. Their
                     of association , or if th e m em orandum is not clear on th e p oint,          determ ination is e ssen tia lly a question of fact for th e tribunal
                     as for in stan ce, if som e o f th e purposes m a y or m ay n o t be           o f fa ct, and th e o n ly q u estion o f law th a t can arise on them is
                     in cid en tal to th e purposes o f science, literature or th e firie           w hether there w as an y evidence to support th e finding. T he
                     arts, th en regard m a y properly be had to th e purposes w hich               conclusions from prim ary fa cts are, h ow ever, inferences deduced
                            (1) [ 1 9 3 2 ] i f . B . 1 4 9 .     (3) 16 Q . B . 4 8 0 .            b y a process o f reasoning from them . If, and in so far as,
                                                                                                    th o se conclusions can as w ell be drawn b y a laym an (properly
                                                                                                                                       1   Fvch    3*0.
472                                         • k i n g ’s b e n c h   d iv is io n .          [1949]    1 K. B.                  KING S BENCH DIVISION.                                                               473

      C. A.          in stru cted on th e law ) as b y a law yer, th e y are conclusions of            w as in th e D ivision al Court there w as evid en ce of voluntary                                  C. A .

      1948           fact for th e tribunal o f f a c t : and th e o n ly q u estion s o f law         contributions o f 1 , 1 3 2 /., and o f a governm ent grant of 5 0 0 1.
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1948
                     w hich can arise on th em are w hether there w as a proper direction              T he court in its judgm ent said th a t th e volu n tary contributions
   B r it is h                                                                                                                                                                                           B r it is h
    L aun­           in point o f l a w ; and w h eth er th e conclusion is one w hich                 am ounted to 1 , 6 3 2 /. T hat m ay w ell have been a slip. It w as                               L aun­
  derers’            could reasonably be drawn from th e prim ary fa cts : see                         q u ite im m aterial w hether th e y w ere 1 , 1 3 2 /. or 1 , 6 3 2 /., but th a t               derers’
 R esearch                                                                                                                                                                                              R esea rch
  A s s o c ia ­     Bracegirdle v . O xley (1 ). If, and in so far, how ever, as th e                 casual sta tem en t h as been treated in subsequent cases in th e                                 A s s o c ia ­
      t io n         correct conclusion to be draw n from prim ary fa cts requires,                    D iv isio n a l Court as a decision th a t a governm ent grant is a                                  t io n
       'v
                     for its correctness, d eterm ination b y a trained law yer— as,                   volu n tary contribution, see H ornsey School o f A r t v . Edm onton                                  v.
B orough of                                                                                                                                                                                           B orough of
   H endon           for in stan ce, because it in volves th e in terpretation o f docum ents          U nion (1 ), th e N on-F errous M eta l case (2 ), and W estm inster                             H endon
   R a t in g                                                                                                                                                                                            R a t in g
A u t h o r it y .   or because th e law and th e fa cts cannot be sep arated , or                     C ity C ouncil v . R o yal U nited Service In stitu tio n (3 ).
                                                                                                                                                                                                      A u t h o r it y .
                     because th e law on th e p oin t can n ot properly be understood or                   N one of th ese cases g iv e s an y reasons in support of th a t
 Dinning L.J.                                                                                                                                                                                          Denning L.J.
                     ap plied excep t b y a trained law yer— th e conclusion is a                      view . Mr. R ow e argued th a t w e should n o t u p set those
                     conclusion o f la w on w hich an ap p ellate tribunal is as com p eten t          decisions after fifty years but th e y w ere n ot uniform . A ll th e
                     to form an opinion as th e trib u n al o f first in stan ce.                      tim e there w a s a d ecision o f th e D iv isio n a l Court th e other
                        A p p ly in g th ese principles to th e case sta ted , th e prim ary           w ay : for in M a y o r o f L iverpool v. W est D erby U nion (4 ),
                     facts are sta ted in para. 2 (a) to (j). Paragraph 2 (k ) contains                one of th e grounds o f th e decision w as th a t a grant b y an
                     a conclusion o f fa ct, b ut it is n ot a conclusion on th e question             education a u th o rity w as n ot a volu n tary contribution.
                     at issu e . The q u estion is w hether th e association w as in stitu ted         K en n ed y J. said em p h atically th a t to ca ll it “ a volu n tary
                     for th e purposes o f science ex clu siv ely . T hat is, a conclusion              ‘ contribution is to do violen ce to th e ordinary m eaning of
                     of law to be draw n from th e prim ary fa cts, particularly, but                  “ lan gu age.” M oreover, upon th e q u estion w hether annual
                     n ot ex clu siv ely , from th e m em orandum and articles o f                     subscriptions w ere vo lu n ta ry con trib u tion s th e H ouse of
                     association, and in volves q u estion s of interpretation of those                Lords in th e A r t U nion o f London v . Overseers o f Savoy ( 5 )
                     d ocum ents and o f th e A ct. The D iv isio n a l Court w ere able,              case overruled a course o f decisions goin g b ack for fifty years.
                     and indeed bound, to form th eir ow n opinion as to th e proper                   So we should overrule th ose on th is p oin t. In m y opinion,
                     conclusion to be draw n from th ose prim ary fa cts, and I find                   therefore, a governm ent grant is n ot a v olu n tary contribution.
                     m y self in entire agreem ent w ith them .                                        I t follow s th a t th e association is here n ot en titled to exem ption
                         T he final q u estion is w hether a so ciety w h ich is supported             from rates. It is n o t in stitu te d for th e purposes o f science
                     in part b y a governm ent grant can be said on th a t account to                  ex clu siv ely : and it is n o t supported in w hole or in part b y
                     be “ supported in part b y volu n tary con trib u tion s.”                        volu n tary con trib u tion s. In m y opinion, th is appeal should
                         In m y opinion, “ volu n tary con trib u tion s ” are p aym ents              be dism issed.
                     m ade w ith o u t com pulsion and w ith o u t a n y view to recom pense,
                                                                                                          B u c k n i l l L .J. I agree th a t th e ap p eal should be dism issed
                     save th e gratitude of on e’s fellow m en. T h ey are paym en ts
                                                                                                       for th e reasons given b y D enning L .J. in h is judgm ent, to
                     m ade b y p rivate citizen s for th e public b en efit, and out of a
                                                                                                       w hich I have n oth in g to add.
                     sense o f public d u ty , th u s relieving th e sta te o f an expenditure
                     w hich otherw ise it m ight h av e had to bear. T h ey do n ot                       J e n k i n s J.    I also agree.
                     include govern m en t grants. N o ordinary person w ould regard                                                                               A p p e a l dism issed.
                     an in stitu tio n w hich w as supported on ly b y governm ent
                     grants as being supported b y volu n tary contributions. This                        Solicitors for occupiers : C allingham , Griffith & Bate.
                     view is borne o u t b y th e w ords of Lord H alsbury in A rt                        Solicitors for rating au th ority : Leonard W orden, Town Clerk
                      U nion o f London v . Overseers o f Savoy (2 ).                                  o f H endon.
                         I t is in terestin g to trace, how ever, how a different decision                (1) 7 0 J. P . 121 ; 4 L . G . R . 1 78 .   (3) [1 9 3 8 ] 2 A l l E. R . 5 4 5 .
                                                                                                          (2) 1 6 R . a n d I . T . C a s e s         (4) 6 9 J . P . 2 7 7 ; 3 L . G . R . 6 4 7 .
                      haS been reached in som e cases in th e D ivision al Court. W hen
                                                                                                       13 6.                                          (5) [1 8 9 6 ] A . C . 2 9 6 .
                      th e case of th e R o ya l College o f M u sic v. St. M argaret’s V estry (3 )
                                                                                                                                                                                  C. G. M.
                             (!) [ 1 9 4 7 ] K. B. 349.                 (3) [1898] 1 Q. B. 304.
                                                The Weekly Law R eports 27 N ovem bJB B 87      The Weekly Law R eports 27 November 1987
1640                                                                                                                                                                        1641
                                                                                       [1987]   1 W .L.R.        Reg. v. Portsmouth Coroner. Ex p. Anderson (D.C.)

                           [q u e e n ’s   b e n c h d iv is io n ]                                 The following cases are referred to in the judgment of Mann J.:
                                                                                                    Reg. v. Greater Manchester Coroner, Ex parte Tal [1985] Q.B. 67; [1984] 3
                                                                                                        W .L.R. 643; [1984] 3 All E.R. 240, D.C.
  * REGINA v. PORTSMOUTH CORONER, Ex parte ANDERSON                                                 Reg. v. Southwark Coroner, Ex parte Hicks [1987] 1 W .L.R. 1624; [1987] 2
                                                                                                        All E.R. 140, D.C.
1987   July 28; 31                                                    Lloyd L.J. and Mann J.        Reg. v. Surrey Coroner, Ex parte Campbell [1982] Q.B. 661; [1982] 2
                                                                                                        W .L.R. 626; [1982] 2 All E .R . 545, D.C.
            Coroner—Inquest—Verdict—Death on A rm y training course—
                Coroner’s direction on death by misadventure—Jury’s verdict o f                     No additional cases were cited in argument.
                accidental death— Whether material difference between verdicts o f
                death by misadventure and accidental death— Whether cause o f                       A p p l i c a t i o n for judicial review.
                death aggravated by lack o f care                                                   The applicant, Victor James Anderson, the father of Sapper Vincent
                    The applicant’s son was a sapper who, while attending a                     James Anderson, deceased, applied for judicial review, pursuant to
                diving course at the Royal Engineers Diving Establishment,                      leave granted by Farquharson J., of the inquisition into the death of his
                went for a run and then changed into a dry diving suit and                      son conducted by Her Majesty’s Coroner for Portsmouth, Mr. John
                embarked on a further run. He collapsed and died shortly                        Foster Glanville, on 17 and 18 July 1986. The applicant sought an order
                afterwards from hyperpyrexia. The surgeon commander, who                        of certiorari to quash the inquisition and an order of mandamus directing
                carried out the post mortem was of the opinion that the death                   the coroner to hold a fresh inquest on the grounds that there was no
                could have been avoided if his instructors had understood the                   evidence to sustain the jury’s finding of accidental death and the verdict
                risk of prolonged exercise followed by strenuous exercise
                                                                                                should have been one of death by misadventure; that the coroner failed
                wearing a totally sealed rubber suit. At the inquest into the
                death of the deceased, he gave evidence and expressed the                       to advise the jury that there was evidence on which they could find that
                opinion that the only way death could have been avoided after                   death was aggravated by lack of care; and that the jury failed to
                the deceased had collapsed would have been by an immediate                      consider whether the death was aggravated by lack of care.
                intravenous injection of a rehydrate and further medical help to                    The facts are stated in the judgment of Mann J.
                cool him. The coroner directed the jury that the only possible
                verdicts were death by misadventure and accidental death and                        Patrick Elias for the applicant.
                that the distinction between the two verdicts was that in the
                                                                                                    Robert Beecroft for.the coroner.
                former the death resulted from the unintentional consequences
                of an intended act while accidental death resulted from an
                unintended act. He gave no direction on whether the cause of                                                                                   Cur. adv. vult.
                death had been aggravated by lack of care. The jury returned a
                verdict of accidental death.                                                        31 July. M a n n J. read the following judgment. There is before the
                    On the applicant seeking judicial review and for the                        court an application for judicial review. Leave to move was given by
                inquisition to be quashed on the grounds that the verdict of                    Farquharson J. on 31 March 1987. The applicant is Mr. Victor James
                accidental death was not sustainable and that the coroner ought
                to have directed the jury that there was evidence on which they
                                                                                                Anderson, who is the father of the late Sapper Vincent James Anderson.
                could find that the cause of death was aggravated by lack of                    Sapper Anderson died in tragic circumstances on 15 July 1986 at the age
                care:—                                                                          of 19. The respondent is Her Majesty’s Coroner for the City of
                    Held, dismissing the application, (1) that the ordinary                     Portsmouth who, on 17 July and 18 November 1986, held an inquest on
                meaning of “misadventure” was no different from that of                         the death of Sapper Anderson. On the latter day a jury returned a
                “accident” but the latter was used more frequently in modern                    verdict of “accidental death,” and this conclusion was recorded on the
                English; that the practice of drawing a distinction between the                 inquisition. The relief sought is an order of certiorari to quash the
                two verdicts depending on whether the act causing the death                     inquisition and an order of mandamus directing the coroner to hold
                was an intended or unintended act was a distinction without
                purpose or effect; and that, accordingly, there was nothing
                                                                                                another inquest. The grounds on which that relief is sought are two: (i)
                wrong in law in the jury’s verdict of accidental death (post,                   the jury’s verdict was one which no reasonable jury could have achieved,
                pp. 1645g— 1646 e ).                                                            and (ii) the coroner failed to direct the jury that they could on the
                    (2) That although rehydration equipment available at the                    evidence add to their verdict that the death was aggravated by lack of
                time of the deceased’s collapse might have ameliorated his                      care.
                condition, the cause of the deceased’s death was not aggravated                     An application was made by the applicant to the Attorney-General
                by the absence of such equipment; that in a case of accidental                  for his fiat under section 6 ( l)( fe ) of the Coroners Act 1887. That
                death it was unlikely that the cause of death could be aggravated               application was refused. Nothing turns upon the refusal in these
                by lack of care; and that, in the absence of any evidence of lack
                of care the coroner had been correct in not directing the jury on
                                                                                                proceedings. I merely record it. Any matter which could be raised under
                that issue (post, pp. 1646E-F, 1647 h— 1648a ).                                 section 6 can be raised in proceedings for a judicial review. An inquest
                    Reg. v. Surrey Coroner, Ex parte Campbell [1982] Q.B. 661,                  occupies no peculiar position so far as judicial review is concerned and
                D.C. and Reg. v. Southwark Coroner, Ex parte Hicks [1987] 1                     all the familiar grounds of challenge are available: see, for example,
                W .L.R. Case 208, D.C. applied.                                                 Reg. v. Greater Manchester Coroner, Ex parte Tal [1985] Q.B. 6 7 , 83a.
                                         T h e W eekly Law R eports 27 N ovem ber V             The W eekly Law R epo rts 27 Novem ber 1987
                                                                                                                                                                         1643
1642
                                                                                                I W .L.R .        Reg. v. Portsmouth Coroner, Ex p. Anderson (D.C .)   Mann J.
Mann J.         Reg. v. Portsmouth Coroner, Ex p. Anderson (D.C .)             [19871

    I turn to the facts. Sapper Anderson volunteered for a diving course                A       inquests. The rules currently having effect are the Coroners Rules 1984
at the Royal Engineers Diving Establishment. On 15 July 1986, he was                            (S.I. 1984 No. 552). I must refer to some of them. Rule 36 provides:
on the course at Portsmouth. First, that morning he went for a run in                                “(1) The proceedings and evidence at an inquest shall be directed
ordinary clothes. Second, and immediately thereafter he changed into a                               solely to ascertaining the following matters, namely—(a) who the
dry diving suit, which is of its nature a sealed suit allowing no ventilation                        deceased was; (b) how, when and where the deceased came by his
of the body, and so dressed Sapper Anderson embarked upon a run                                      death; (c) the particulars for the time being required by the
across mud flats where, after a while, he collapsed. Death occurred                     _            Registration Acts to be registered concerning the death. (2) Neither
shortly thereafter.                                                                                  the coroner nor the jury shall express any opinion on any other
    The death resulted from the effects of heat hyperpyrexia. The                                    matters.”
coroner’s post mortem examination was conducted by Surgeon
Commander J. D. Buchanan, R .N ., and in his report he wrote:                                   Rule 41 provides:
                                                                                                    “Where the coroner sits with a jury, he shall sum up the evidence
      “While strictly speaking this is a case of death due to natural
                                                                                                    to the jury and direct them as to the law before they consider their
      causes, I feel that the circumstances are such as to make this an
                                                                                        C           verdict and shall draw their attention to rules 36(2) and 42.”
      avoidable death. The deceased was an ordinary young soldier who
      would not have been aware of the risks of wearing a totally sealed                        Rule 42 provides:
      rubber suit following prolonged exercise, and then continuing to
                                                                                                    “No verdict shall be framed in such a way as to appear to determine
      take further strenuous exercise. He would have been ignorant of the
                                                                                                    any question of—(a) criminal liability on the part of a named
      risks of hyperpyrexia and death in these circumstances. These risks
                                                                                                    person, or (b) civil liability.”
      should have been understood and foreseen by his instructors.”
                                                                                        D        Finally, I should refer to rule 60 which, under the rubric “Forms”
   Surgeon Commander Buchanan gave evidence at the inquest. In
                                                                                                 provides:
response to the following question:
                                                                                                      “The forms set out in Schedule 4, with such modifications as
    “In this case it appears from the temperature from which he was                                   circumstances may require, may be used for the purposes for which
    suffering when he was seen in hospital, he was beyond that aid
                                                                                                      they are expressed to be applicable.”
    point of recovery?”
                                                                                                     Form 22 in that Schedule is the form of inquisition. I need not read
 he said:                                                                               ^        it all. It contains in its body;
     “Certainly at the time he reached hospital he was beyond recovery
                                                                                                       “The following matters are found:—
     because the haemorrhage had already taken place into the lungs                                    “ 1. Name of deceased (if known):
      and there was nothing anybody could have done about that, but it
                                                                                                       “2. Injury or disease causing death:
      is possible that at the stage when he initially collapsed if he had                              “3. Time, place and circumstances at or in which injury was
      received intravenous rehydration and cooling then [with] medical
                                                                                                            sustained:
      help he might have been saved.”                                                       F          “4. Conclusion of the jury/coroner as to the death:
     Those then are the facts of the matter. I should recite some of the                                “5. Particulars for the time being required by the Registration Acts
 provisions which are material under both primary and secondary                                             to be registered concerning the death: . . . ”
 legislation. Section 3(1) of the Coroners Act 1887, as amended by                                  There follows after the substance of the form a number of notes.
 section 30 of and Schedule 2 to the Coroner’s (Amendment) Act 1926,                             Note 2 is a note to the item “Injury or disease causing death,” and it
 provides:                                                                                       provides:
      “Where a coroner is informed that the dead body of a person is                        ®        “In the case of a death from natural causes or from industrial
      lying within his jurisdiction, and there is reasonable cause to suspect                         disease, want of attention at birth, or dependence on, or non­
      that such person has died either a violent or an unnatural death, or                            dependent abuse of, drugs insert the immediate cause of death and
       has died a sudden death of which the cause is unknown, or that                                 the morbid conditions (if any) giving rise to the immediate cause of
       such person has died in prison, or in such place or under such                                 death.”
       circumstances as to require an inquest in pursuance of any Act, the
       coroner, whether the cause of death arose within his jurisdiction or                 H        Note 4 is a note to the item “Conclusion of the jury/coroner as to the
       not, shall, as soon as practicable, issue his warrant for summoning                        death,” and reads:
       not less than seven nor more than eleven good and lawful men to                                “(a) Where the cause of death is one to which note 2 applies, it is
       appear before him at a specified time and place, there to inquire as                           suggested that one of the following forms be adopted:—
       jurors touching the death of such person as aforesaid.                                         “C.D. died from natural causes.
     In the exercise of powers conferred by the Coroners (Amendment)                                  “C.D. died from the industrial disease of
                                                                                                      “C.D . died from dependence on drugs/non-dependent abuse of
  Act 1926, section 26(1), the Lord Chancellor has from time made rules
  for regulating the practice and procedure at or in connection with                                  drugs.
                                          The Weekly Law Reports 27 N o v e m f^ il9 8 7       The W eekly Law R eports 27 Novem ber 1987
1644                                                                                                                                                                   1645
Mann J.           Reg. v. Portsmouth Coroner, Ex p. Anderson (D.C.)               [1987]       1 W .L.R.         Reg. V. Portsmouth Coroner, Ex p. Anderson (D.C.)   Mann J.
       “C.D. died from want of attention at birth.                                         A   coronership by Schedule 2 to the Act of 1887. Section 37 of that Act
       “(In any of the above cases, but in no other, it is suggested that the                  provided:
       following words may, where appropriate, be added: ‘and the cause
       of death was aggravated by lack of care/self-neglect’.) . . .                                “The Schedules to this Act shall be construed and have effect as
       “(b) In any other case except murder, manslaughter, infanticide or                           part of this Act, and the forms given in any of those Schedules, or
       stillbirth, it is suggested that one of the following forms be adopted:                      such other forms as the Lord Chancellor from time to time directs,
       “C.D. killed himself.                                                                        may be used in all matters to which they apply, and when so used
                                                                                           g        shall be sufficient in law.”
       “C.D. died as a result of an attempted/self-induced abortion.
       “C.D. died as a result of an accident/misadventure.                                         There was in Schedule 2 a form of inquisition. Two examples of how
       “Execution of sentence of death.                                                        to set out the circumstances of death were given. The first is:
       “C.D. was killed lawfully.”
                                                                                                    “(a) That the said C.D. was found dead on the     day of      in the
I need not read further. I turn from the rules and their Schedule.                                  year aforesaid at            in the county of       , . . . and (b)
    In pursuance of his obligation under rule 41 the coroner summed up                              That the cause of his death was that he was thrown by E.F. against
this case to the jury. He concluded his summary in this way:                                        the ground, whereby the said C.D. had a violent concussion of the
    “Therefore it only remains for you to consider the verdict. Well,                               brain and instantly died . . . ”
    there are really only two verdicts open to you and the second one is                            The circumstances of the death are then, according to the Schedule,
    not of great importance. It is either a misadventure or an accident.                        to be followed by the jury’s conclusion, because the Schedule continued:
    The definition between these two is a very fine distinction. In short                       “Here set out the conclusion of the jury as to the death, as, for
    a death from a misadventure is a death which results from taking a                     D    example,” and against the side note “By misadventure” is this conclusion:
    risk of some sort or having a risk taken upon you as sometimes                              “that the said E.F. by misfortune and against his will did kill the said
    perhaps happens even in medical circles. And here you may think                             C .D .”
    that in running this course in this dry suit over this course there was                         A second example as to how matters may be set out is in these
    a risk although it was not known to anyone then that disaster or                            terms: “That the said C.D. did on the        day of     fall into a pond of
    tragedy would result. If I may quote from the current edition of a'                         water situate at         , by means whereof he died.” There are again
    book entitled Coroners’ Inquiries Guide to Law & Practice (1985)                            specimens of how to .set out the conclusion of the jury and against the
    by Burton, Chambers & Gill, the verdict of ‘accident is used for an                    E    side note “By misadventure” is this conclusion: “do . . . say that the said
    unintended act and misadventure for an intentional act that is                              C.D. by misadventure fell into the said pond and was killed.”
    attended by unintentional misfortune,’ which is what happened in                                The first example might now seem a case of accident or just possibly
    this case. A short analogy of that is perhaps of a man up a ladder                          a case of involuntary manslaughter. The second is, in any ordinary use
    or a woman up a ladder I should now say, painting the guttering or                          of contemporary language, an accident.
    painting the eaves, and falling off the ladder. That would be an                                Schedule 2 was revoked by rule 6 of the Coroners Rules 1927 (S.R.
    accident but a fine distinction is if the brush slipped out of the hand                P   & O. 1927 No. 344). The only mention now made of the word
    along the gutter and he or she took the risk of leaning out to                              “misadventure” is in Note 4 to Form 22, where it appears as I have
    retrieve it and fell off the ladder. That is the fine distinction which                     quoted as “accident/misadventure.” The draftsman of the note may have
    would result in technically a verdict of misadventure; a risk taken                         thought that the words were interchangeable. If he did, I do not think
    which did not succeed and resulted in death. So, of those two                               he was writing in defiance of ordinary language. The Oxford English
    verdicts, which are the only two possible, you may well think that                          Dictionary gives us three meanings and there is no addition effected by
    death from a misadventure, death resulting from the risk of running                         the 1976 supplement: “1. Ill-luck: bad fortune. . . . 2. . . . unlucky
    in this dry suit, would be the proper verdict to return.”                              G   accident. . . . 3. Homicide committed accidentally by a person in doing
                                                                                                a lawful act, without any intention of hurt.”
    The passage which I have quoted plainly posits that there is a
distinction between “accidental death” and “misadventure.” In selecting                             The meaning of “misadventure,” which is a word I suspect now little
accidental death, which the jury in fact did, Mr. Elias for the applicant                       employed in ordinary speech, is in my view indistinguishable from that
now says that they made a selection which no reasonable jury could                              of “accident.” A distinction was, as will have appeared, put to the jury
have made. The only reasonable response, says Mr. Elias, to the                                 by the coroner and in so doing he was acting in accord with what Jervis
coroner’s summing up and on the evidence was a response of                                 „   on Coroners, 10th ed. (1986), p. 194 says is sometimes suggested. Under
“misadventure.” I think there could be some force in that submission if                         the rubric “Accident/misadventure,” it is written:
there is in truth a distinction between “accident” and “misadventure.” If                           “No distinction is drawn between accident and misadventure in the
there is not, the point must fail.                                                                  verdict. It is sometimes suggested that accident connotes something
    The concept of “misadventure” has never been considered in this or                              over which there is no human control, or an unintended act, while
any other court, nor has this or any other court considered whether the                             misadventure indicates some deliberate (but lawful) human act
concept is different from the concept of “accident.” The word                                       which has unexpectedly taken a turn that leads to death. Even if
“misadventure” seems to have been introduced into the field of                                      this distinction exists in logic, it is clear that coroners have not
                                                                                                  V ol. 1                                                             o..
                                          The Weekly Law R eports 27 N o v e n ^ ^ v l9 8 7           T he W eekly Law R eports 27 N ovem ber 1987
1646                                                                                                                                                                          1647
Mann J.          Reg. v. Portsmouth Coroner, Ex p. Anderson (D.C .)                 [1987]            1 W .L.R.         Reg. v. Portsmouth Coroner, Ex p. Anderson (D.C.)   Mann J.

    observed it in practice, and accordingly, for statistical purposes, the                   A            board. The jury returned a verdict of ‘an accident aggravated by
    verdicts are treated as being the same.”                                                               lack of care.’ In another case, reported on 5 July 1985, a drunken
                                                                                                           mother slept while her baby was savaged by the family alsation dog.
   Thurston’s, The Law and Practice on Coroners, 3rd ed. (1985), p. 145,                                   The jury returned ‘lack of care.’”
contains this passage under the rubric “Accident and misadventure”:
                                                                                                      Croom-Johnson L.J. continues, ante, at pp. 1 6 3 3 f— 1634b:
    “To a large extent the distinction between accident and misadventure
    is a matter of semantics and the two are often used interchangeably.                      g            “The history of the verdict ‘lack of care’ indicates that it is
    It is submitted that a verdict of accident is the appropriate verdict                                 appropriate only to the physical condition of the deceased as causing
    to return when the death is caused by an occurrence which could                                        the death and should not be used to indicate a breach of duty by
    not have been foreseen, whereas misadventure should be reserved                                        some other person. Questions of criminal negligence amounting to
    for those circumstances when the death occurred as the result of a                                     manslaughter were always a different problem and now that they
    lawful or unlawful intentional human act unforseeably leading to                                       are out of the way the verdict of ‘lack of care’ can be given its
    death.”                                                                                                original and proper meaning. It should generally be regarded as the
                                                                                              C            other side of the coin to self-neglect, and consequently was an
    The distinction is indeed sophisticated, if distinction there be, and it                               inappropriate verdict in the case to which I have referred of the
is a distinction drawn where in the ordinary meaning of language, in my                                    child who drowned in the Serpentine. The verdict in that case of ‘an
judgment, no distinction is to be found. It is distinction which seems to                                  accident aggravated by lack of care’ was, in any event, illogical. The
me to be without purpose or effect and, on any view, it lacks                                              lack of care in supervising the bathing party may have been the
consequence. Coroners and their juries would be relieved of an                                             cause of the accident, but it did not aggravate anything at all. Mr.
unnecessary burden and verdicts on deaths occurring in similar                                n            Fitzgerald [junior counsel for the applicant], in his speech in reply,
                                                                                                  D
circumstances could become consistent if the contrast between “accident”                                   submitted that the lack of care which could form the basis of the
and “misadventure” is eliminated from consideration. In my judgment,                                       verdict could be a legitimate method used by the jury of expressing
“accident” is all that is requisite and the word “misadventure” which had                                  a view that there was a culpable breach by someone of a legal or
an apparent vogue in 1887 should now be given its quietus as signifying                                    moral duty to take care of the deceased which would be distinct
some contrast with “accident.”                                                                             from the general duty of care on which the modern law of
    It follows accordingly that, in my view, the point on unreasonableness                                 negligence is based. He listed a number of special relationships
fails. The only possible verdict was that of accident.                                        E   E       where the deceased would be dependent on that other person.
    There remains Mr. Elias’s second point, that is to say, that the                                       Being in prison was one of them. There is no need to presuppose
coroner failed to direct the jury that they could on the evidence add to                                   the existence of such a range of duties. What the verdict of ‘lack of
their verdict that Sapper Anderson’s death was aggravated by lack of                                       care’ presupposes is that some other persons had at least the .
care. There was the evidence, to which I have referred, from Surgeon                                       opportunity of rendering care (in the narrow sense of that word)
Commander Buchanan that had intravenous rehydration equipment been                                         which would have prevented the death. There is no need to go
available on the mud flats where the deceased collapsed, he might have                        F            beyond that, although in many circumstances such persons would
been saved.                                                                                       F       have had a duty, either legal or moral. The opportunity should
    “Lack of care” is a verdict which, in appropriate circumstances, a                                     have been a real opportunity of doing something effective. This
jury can return: see Reg. v. Surrey Coroner, Ex parte Campbell [1982]                                      verdict should not be used as a means of levelling disguised
Q.B. 6 6 1 , which is unaffected on this point by Reg. v. Greater                                          criticism at people who do not act in an emergency or take a wrong
Manchester Coroner, Ex parte Tal [1985] Q.B. 67. What are or are not                                       or inadequate decision in such cases."
appropriate circumstances can be discovered from a consideration of the
judgments in this court in Reg. v. Southwark Coroner, Ex parte Hicks                          G   q      The grounds upon which relief is now sought complain of the failure
[1987] 1 W .L.R. 1624. Croom-Johnson L.J. said, ante, at p. 1631b~e:
                                                                                                      to give a direction that “lack of care” of itself was a possible verdict. In
                                                                                                      the light of the observations of Croom-Johnson L .J., such a complaint
       “Whether such a verdict is either permissible or appropriate depends                           would seem to me to be untenable, despite what Surgeon Commander
       first on the meaning to be given to the word ‘care.’ The prime                                 Buchanan said at the conclusion of his post mortem report. The
       meaning is that of physical attention, preventing death from                                   argument of Mr. Elias is for a direction that the jury could have, on the
       starvation, exposure, or bad nursing or medical care. Since the                                evidence, added to their verdict that death was aggravated by lack of
       great extension in this century of the concept of a legal duty of                      H   H   care. I do not understand how death can be aggravated by lack of care,
       care, breach of which may lead to an action in tort for negligence,                            but I do understand how a cause of death can be so aggravated and I
       there is now growing up the notion that ‘lack of care’ means also a                            proceed on the basis that this is what the applicant intended by his
       breach of such a duty. We have had cited to us a recent case                                   application.
       reported in ‘The Times’ newspaper for 19 September 1985. A boy                                     I ask myself: “Was the cause of Sapper Anderson’s death aggravated
       aged six, a non-swimmer, was taken to the Serpentine lido in Hyde                              by lack of care?” I must to that return the answer: “N o.” The absence
       Park in a party of children. It seems the excursion was not properly                           of rehydration equipment did not aggravate the cause of death. The
       supervised. He drowned and his body was recovered under a diving                               presence of the equipment might have ameliorated the condition which
                                                The W eekly Law R eports 27 N o v er^ ^V l9 8 7         The Weekly Law R eports 27 Novem ber 191

1648
Mann J.            Reg. v. Portsmouth Coroner, Ex p. Anderson (D.C.)                       [1987]

in fact led to death but its absence did not aggravate. In my judgment,                             A
the coroner was correct in not raising the question of aggravation by
lack of care. I add that I do not decide that aggravation by lack of care
is never appropriate in a case of accidental death but, like Croom-
Johnson L.J. I think that such a case is unlikely in the extreme: see
ante, p. 1634g.
     For the reasons I have endeavoured to express, I would refuse this
application. But I add this, (i) The applicant expressly disclaimed any                             B
criticism of the conduct of the inquest. It was, said Mr. Elias, conducted
with great sensitivity. I have read the transcript and, with respect, would
wholly agree. The coroner instructed counsel to appear before this court
but only, in effect, as an amicus. That seems to me to be a helpful and
responsible course. I found Mr. Beecroft’s arguments of great assistance,
(ii) There was here a sad death. I have had to discuss the matter in                                C
terms appropriate to the issue before the court, but I would not wish the
                                                                                                                                                   Note
applicant to think that I am insensitive to the loss of his son.
                                                                                                                      End o f starred cases o f this issue of The Weekly Law Reports.
   L lo y d L.J.    I agree.                                                                                          Cases following are those intended for publication in The Law
                                                                  Application dismissed.                              Reports.
                                                                  No order fo r costs.
                                                                                                    D
   Solicitors: Pannone Napier; County Solicitor, Hampshire County
Council.

            [Reported by Miss     G e r a l d in e F a in e r ,   Barrister-at-Law]


                                                                                                    E




                                                                                                    F




                                                                                                    G




                                                                                                    H
 34                                                   B O U S E OF L O B D S .^ ^                                         B O U S E OF L O B D S .                                  35

 33 February                   *^ea^ w ith him . Ju stice should n o t only be done,                      In directing a jury on a charge of manslaughter arising           1037.
                                                                                                      out of a motor accident, the Judge should, therefore, first     3    9 March.
 "■           ----- b u t should also be seen to be done, and w e can im agine                                                                                            33 April.
  B io b d a n .       nothing m ore unfortunate than th e m anner in which it w as                   tell the jury that the very high degree of negligence
                                                                                                      indicated in B a tem a n (19 Cr. App. R . 8 ) must be proved    A n d re w s v.
   SwmTj., dealt ou t to th e present appellant. In th e view of th e Court                           in order to establish the crime of manslaughter, and then       DS E C T O R or
                                                                                                                                                                      P u b lic Pbo-
  Pintay, j !, th is sentence ought n o t to stan d , and th e order of th e Court                    go on to explain that that degree of negligence is not           s b c u tio n s .
 O o a a o rd , J ,    ,      ,
                           is th a t th e sentence be quashed and th e appellant discharged.          necessarily the same as that which is required to constitute
                                                                                                                                                                       Lord Atkin,
                                                                                                      the offence of dangerous driving, and then indicate the         Lord Finlaj,
                                                                              Sentence quashed.       circumstances in which the jury would be entitled to acquit         Lord
                                                                                                      of manslaughter and convict of dangerous driving.               Thankerton,
                                                                                                                                                                      Lord Wright,
                            Solicitor for the Crown: Solicitor lor Metropolitan Police.                                                                               Lord Boche.
                                                                                                      A ppeal b y th e prisoner from order of th e Court of
                                                                                                  Criminal A ppeal dism issing his appeal against conviction.
                                             [ in   th e h ou se   or   lo a d s.]
                                                                                                      T he appellant, W ilfred Andrew s, w as convicted a t Leeds
                                                          BEFORE'              ' ' .              A ssizes on D ecem ber 8 , 1986, of m anslaughter, and was
                                                                                                  sentenced b y du Parcq, J ., to fifteen m onths’ im prison­
                      LORD A TK IN , LORD FINLAY, LORD THANKERTON,
                                 LORD W RIGHT, LORD ROCHE.                                        m ent and to disqualification for life for holding a driving
                                                                                                  licence.
SAo’ iL d k            ANDREW S v . DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS                                   The follow ing statem en t of facts is taken from th e
 93 April.                              (on behalf of H is Majesty).                              opinion of Lord A tk in :—
                      Manslaughter—-Unintentional Killing b y Negligence—Motor Car                    T he appellant, a m an aged 87, w as em ployed b y th e
                         —Dangerous Driving—Degrees of Negligence Necessary to
                                                                                                  L eeds Corporation Transport D epartm ent a t their D onis-
                         Constitute Respective Offences—Summing Vp—B oad Traffic
                         A ct, 1980 (2 0 # 21 Geo. 5, c. 48), s. 11 —R oad Traffic A ct,          thorpe Garage. On Saturday, Ju n e 27, a t about 10.80 p .m .,
                         1084 (a )(2 4 # 25 Geo. S, c. 50) s. 84.                                 he w as directed to tak e a van to assist a corporation
                                  The standard of negligence required to constitute the           om nibus w hich had broken dow n a t W hingate, about three
                              offence of dangerous driving, contrary to s. 11 of the Road         to four m iles aw ay. A bout 10.45 a m an nam ed B inks
                              Traffic A ct, 1980, is not the same as that required to
                                                                                                  w as driving a saloon car dow n th e T ong R oad aw ay from
                              constitute the offence of manslaughter arising out of the
                              negligent driving of a motor vehicle. A person may drive            L eeds a t about ten m iles an hour. H e noticed about thirty
                              a motor vehicle at a speed or in a manner dangerous to              yards ahead Craven crossing th e road from B in k s’s near side.
                              the public within the meaning of the above section and cause        T he road is about 29ft w ide. The appellant, driving fa st,
                              death thereby, aiul y et not be guilty of manslaughter.
                                                                                                  over th irty m iles an hour, overtook B in k s’s car, and driving
                          (a)      B y the Road Traffic A ct, 1984, s. 8 4 : “ Upon the trial     w ell over on th e off side of th e road ran in to Craven,
                      of a person who is indicted for manslaughter in connection with
                      the driving of a motor vehicle by him, it shall be lawful for               w ho w as then w ithin three or four paces of th e kerb. H e
                      the jury, if they are satisfied that he is guilty of an offence under       w as carried on th e bonnet for a short period, thrown
                      section 11 of the principal Act [the Road Traffic Act, 1980,]               forward, and run over b y th e van. The appellant, who
                      (which relates to reckless or dangerous driving) to find him
                                                                                                  im m ediately after th e accident nearly ran in to a pedal
                      guilty of that offence, whether or not the requirements of
                      section 21 of the principal Act (which relates to notice of                 cy clist, did n ot stop . H e returned to th e garage after 1 1 ,
                      prosecutions) have been satisfied as respects that offence.”                statin g th a t he had n ot found th e om nibus.
                                                                                                                      H OUSE OF L O B D S.                                            37
36                                             H O U SE OF L O K D S ^ ^


     1937.       W hen challenged a d ay or tw o later, the appellant                        and because he was so doing som eone was killed, the                            1937.
                                                                                                                                                                       8 * 9 March.
8 Js 9 March.                                                                                appellant was gu ilty of m anslaughter. I t w as at one tim e               32 April.
  22 April.   denied th at he had travelled along the Tong R oad on th e
             Saturday n igh t. A t th e trial he said he w as unable to                      settled law th a t any unlawful act causing death am ounted                An d r e w s v .
 ANDREW S V.                                                                                                                                                           D ir e c t o r o f
D IRECTO R OFrem em ber th e journey a t all. There was no dispute th a t in                 to m an slau gh ter: S e n i o r , [1899] 1 Q. B . 288, but th is view    P u b l ic P r o ­
P u b l ic P r o ­
             fa ct th e appellant w as driving th e van which killed Craven.
 s e c u t io n s .
                                                                                             of th e law no longer obtains as a result of th e decision of              s e c u t io n s .


                                                                                             th is Court in S t r i n g e r (24 Cr. A pp. R . 8 0 ; [1988] 1 K . B .    Lord Atkin,
Lord Atkin, The road w as w ell lighted and there were people about.                                                                                                   Lord Finlay,
Lord Finlay,     T h e follow ing passages occurred in th e sum m ing-up of                  704) and th e passing of section 84 o f th e R oad Traffic A ct,              Lord
    Lord                                                                                                                                                               Thankerton,
Thankerton, du P arcq, J . :                                                                 1934. In S t r i n g e r (su pra), it w as held th a t a verdict of
                                                                                                                                                                       Lord Wright,
Lord Wright,                                                                                 N o t G uilty o f m anslaughter w as n ot incom patible w ith a            Lord Boche.
Lord Boche.    “ T he law is th is, th a t if a m an is doing an unlawful act
                      — if he is doing som ething which th e law says th a t he m ust        verdict o f G uilty of dangerous driving on th e sam e facts,
                      n o t do— and because he is doing it and in th e course of doing       and th e reason m ust be th a t the m ens rea necessary to
                      it he k ills som ebody, then h e is gu ilty n ot only of th at         con stitu te each offence is different.
                      unlaw ful a ct, b u t o f m anslaughter.” . . . “ If h e is               [ S w i f t , J . : The jury in th a t case m ay have acquitted

                      d riving [a m otor veh icle] recklessly, he com m its an offence       of m anslaughter because th ey were n ot satisfied th a t death
                      w hether he kills anyb od y or w hether h e does n o t, but if         resulted from the dangerous driving.]
                      b ecause h e is driving recklessly som ebody is k illed, then             There w as no dispute in th a t case th a t death did result
                      h e is g u ilty o f m anslaughter.” . . . “ I f you thought            from th e dangerous driving.
                      th a t although he drove recklessly, and although he drove at              M anslaughter arising out of th e driving o f a m otor car
                      a speed or in a m anner dangerous to th e public, w ithin the          requires som ething m ore than an offence under section 11
                      words o f [section 11 of th e R oad Traffic A ct, 1980,] b ut          of th e R oad Traffic A ct, 1980, and death caused thereby.
                      th a t it w as n ot because of th a t th at [th e deceased] w as       O therw ise, an offence of careless driving under section 12
                      k illed , th e law would en title you to convict him n ot of           w hich resulted in death would am ount to m anslaughter too,
                      m anslaughter, b u t of dangerous driving. B u t in this ease          on th e authority of S e n i o r (supra).
                      I am bound to tell you th a t if you think th a t he w as driving         [ G o d d a r d , J . : The offence under section 12 is only a
                      recklessly and in a dangerous m anner w ithin th e m eaning of         sum m ary offence, and n ot an indictable m isdem eanour.]
                      those words,* and it w as because o f th a t th a t [th e deceased]        Further, if section 84 of th e R oad Traffic A ct, 1984,
                      w as k illed , t h e n i t is you r bounden d u ty to convict him of   did n ot purport to alter th e law relating to m anslaughter,
                      manslaughtCT.’^ ^ ^ ^ ^ #'|iig,v.;r,»v.                                it can only apply where th e dangerous driving was not the
                         T he appellant appealed to th e Court of Criminal Appeal            cause of death. Such a contingency m ust be of so lim ited
                      — T he Lord Chief J u stice, Mr. J u stice Sw ift, and Mr. Ju stice    an occurrence th at it can hardly be supposed th a t Parlia­
                      Goddard— w ho heard th e appeal on January 26, 1987.                   m ent w ould have thought necessary to provide for it.
                                                                                                 [ T h e L o r d C h i e f J u s t i c e : The section cannot be an
                          G . S . W aller, for appellant. The ground of th e appeal is       invitation to a jury to return a verdict of G uilty of dangerous
                      th a t th e direction of th e Ju d ge w as wrong in law in telling     driving where th ey are satisfied th at th e prisoner is gu ilty
                      th e jury th a t if th e appellant w as driving recklessly w ithin     of m anslaughter. I t m ust apply to cases where there is a
                      th e m eaning o f section 11 of th e R oad Traffic A ct, 1980,         lack of nexus betw een the dangerous driving and the d eath .]
38                                               H O U SE OF LO K D S.                                                     HO U SE OF L O R D S.                                   39

    1987.                 G. W. Wrangham for th e Crown, w as n ot called on to                   for th e life and sa fety o f others as to am ount to a crime             1937.
8 & 9 March.                                                                                                                                                           8 * 9 March.
   22 April,           argue.                                                                     against th e State and conduct deserving punishm ent.”                  22 April.
A n d re w s v.                                                                                   For those last words m ight properly be substituted th e A n d r e w s v .
D ir e c t o r o f        T h e L o r d C h i e f J u s t i c e : This appellant w as convicted   words “ and to call for a conviction ” , because to speak D i r e c t o r o f
P u b l ic p r o -                                                                                                                                                     P u b lic P ro
 b e c u t io n s .   a t Leeds A ssizes before du Parcq, J ., of m anslaughter. H e              of punishm ent in th a t con text m ight appear to convey to a SECUTIONS.
 Lord Atkin, w as sentenced to fifteen m onths’ im prisonm ent and w as                           careless m ind som e confusion betw een th e function of the Lord Atkin,
^"Lord**^' also disqualified from driving a m otor car during his life.                           jury and th e function of th e Ju d ge. A part from th a t trifling LordLord Finlay,

LorTwright                 now aPPea^s against conviction, and th e ground of his                 variation, there is th e statem en t of th e law .                    Thankerton,
                                                                                                                                                                       Lord Wright,
Lord Roche,           appeal is th a t th e Ju d ge m isdirected th e jury.                           T hen there com es a series o f cases, which are com m only Lord Roche.
                           T he fa cts o f th e case were sim ple and clear.          [H is       called “ m otor m anslaughter cases ” , th a t is to sa y , cases
                      Lordship sta ted th em , and continued.] T he com plaint is                 where death has been brought about in connection w ith or
                      th a t th e J u d g e did n o t adequately direct th e jury, or m is­       b y reason of th e driving of a m otor car, and our attention
                      directed th em , on th e law relating to m anslaughter. Mr.                 has been directed to S t r i n g e r (supra), th e judgm ent in
                      W aller has p u t th a t com plaint very clearly in h is ingenious          w hich rem ains unim paired.
                      and attra ctiv e argum ent, and th e com plaint is crystallised in              A fter th e decision in th a t case there was enacted in the
                      a passage, reiteratin g another passage, w hich occurs a t th e             R oad Traffic A ct, 1934, a particular section which seem s to
                      conclusion o f th e very careful sum m ing-up. [H is Lordship               have given rise to som e m isapprehension. [H is Lordship
                      then read th e la st of th e tw o passages from th e sum m ing-             read section 34 and con tin u ed .] I t w ould be idle and indeed
                      up set ou t ab ove, and con tin u ed .] T he argum ent developed            im proper to speculate on th e reasons w hy th e Legislature
                      b y Mr; W aller som etim es says and som etim es suggests th a t            enacted th a t section. A ll th is Court has to do is to observe
                      there has been a change in th e law relating to crimes of this              th e section w hich has been enacted. I t would be strange,
                      kind. T his Court is n o t conscious of any such change.                    and in our opinion wrong, to p u t upon th at section an
                      The considered judgm ent o f th is Court in B a te m a n (1925),            interpretation which involves either of tw o conclusions—
                      19 Cr. A pp. R . 8 , rem ains as it was at th e tim e o f its delivery.     either th a t b y enacting th a t section Parliam ent w as intending
                      I t is a little im portant to bear in m ind th a t th e topic there         to vary th e crim inal law under th e head of m anslaughter, or
                      being d ea lt w ith w as th e true difference betw een negligence           th a t Parliam ent w as in vitin g a jury who were satisfied th at
                      which g ives rise t o a claim for com pensation on th e part of             a prisoner had com m itted m anslaughter to refuse to convict
                      an individual and negligence which calls for correction on                  of m anslaughter and to convict instead of the offence of
                      th e part of th e S ta te , and th e passage which p ut th e m atter        reckless or dangerous driving. I t seem s to this Court th a t
                      as concisely as it can be p u t is as follows (p. 13 ): “ The fore­         th a t section is plainly an enabling section, and enables a
                      going observations deal w ith civil liab ility. T o support an              jury upon th e trial o f a person charged w ith m anslaughter
                      indictm ent for m anslaughter th e prosecution m ust prove                  to convict o f reckless or dangerous driving notw ithstanding
                      th e m atters necessary to establish civil liab ility (except               th a t notice of prosecution for reckless or dangerous driving
                      pecuniary lo ss), and, in addition, m ust satisfy th e jury th a t          under th e principal A ct has n ot been given.
                      th e negligence or incom petence of th e accused w ent beyond                  In our view th e Judge was perfectly correct in his
                      a mere m atter o f com pensation and show ed such disregard                 sum m ing-up, and there is no reason for interfering w ith the
40                                            H O U SE OF L O R D S.                                                H O U SE OF L O B D S .                                       41

      1987 . conviction.   I t is n o t even sought to vary th e sentence                  relating to m otor car offences. There is no reason to                         1987.
                                                                                                                                                                    8 <fc 9 March.
   32 April,   passed. T he appeal m ust b e dism issed.                                   suppose th a t in th e year 1900 th e Ju d ges envisaged new                22 April.
                                                                                           statu tes relating to new m ethods of transport. The effect               A n d re w s v.
D ir e c t o r   of            Pr^soner appealed to th e H ouse of Lords under a                                                                                    D ire c to r o f
                                                                                           of th e recent decision in S t r i n g e r (supra), was th a t if a
P u b l ic P r o -    fiat given b y th e A ttorney-G eneral.                                                                                                       P u b lic P ro ­
 8E C U T I0N S .                                                                          jury returned a verdict of n ot gu ilty of m anslaughter and              s e c u tio n s .

 Lord    A tk in ,            R usseH Vick, K.C., for th e appellant. The law              g u ilty of dangerous driving on th e sam e facts, death having           Lord Atkin,
LorLordla7’                 reSar<i to involuntary manslaughter is not well settled.                                                                                Lord Finlay,
                                                                                           been adm ittedly caused b y the driving, those verdicts were                 Lord
Thankerton,           I t appears to be clear th at an unlawful' act causing death         n o t inconsistent. The reason m ust be th a t there is a differ­        Thankerton,
Lord Wright, .  .„         .»     »      .         . . .             ,      .                                                                                       Lord Wright,
 LordBoohe. justifies a verdict o f m anslaughter, b u t it is n ot clear w hat            ence in the degree o f negligence necessary to constitute the             Lord Boche.
                       amounts to an unlawful act. In early days the term                  respective offences. [H e referred also to B a te m a n (su pra).]
                      received a very wide definition. [He referred to Hale’s                   W ith regard to the application of section 84 of the R oad
                       Pleas of the Crown (Vol. 1 , pp. 475-6) ; Foster’s Crown Law        Traffic A ct, 1984, different Judges have taken different
                       (pp. 258, 2 6 1 ) ; E ast’s Pleas of the Crown (Vol. 1 , pp. 255-   view s, b u t the- section show s th a t Parliam ent is still desirous
                      2 6 8 ) ; F enton (1880) (1 Lewin C.C. 1 7 9 ) ; Sullivan (1886)     of leaving to the jury th e question whether th e negligence
                       (7 Car. and P . 641), and P ackard (1841) (Car. and M. 286).]       proved in any case, although sufficient to create a statu tory
                      The law has, however, subsequently changed. I t was                  offence, goes further and is sufficient to establish the crime
                       held for the first time in F ranklin (1888), 15 Cox C. C. 168,      of m anslaughter. This question w as, in effect, w ithdraw n
                      th at mere civil trespass was not a sufficient ground on             from th e jury b y du P arcq, J ., in h is sum m ing-up, and
                      which to base a charge of manslaughter, though in                    there appears to be som e inconsistency betw een directions
                      Stephen's Digest of the Criminal Law (1926 ed., art. 294),           contained in recent sum m ings-up relating to the kind of
                      in addition to acts punishable as crimes, acts constituting          unlaw ful act w hich is sufficient to con stitu te m anslaughter.
                      actionable wrongs were included in the category of unlaw­            [H e criticised various passages in th e sum m ing-up.]
                      ful acts which might give rise to manslaughter, the state­
                      ment being, presumably, based on the older authorities.                     G. S . W aller, follow ing for the ap p ellan t:
                      In Seniob (1899), 1 Q. B . 288, it was apparently laid down              There m ay be a degree even of reckless driving resulting
                      th at any breach of statute which caused death would                 in death which falls short of m anslaughter. If the law is
                      amount to manslaughter, whether the act forbidden gave               th a t any reckless or dangerous driving w hich causes death
                      rise to a summary or to an indictable offence. I t appeared,         am ounts to m anslaughter, section 84 of the R oad Traffic
                      too, to be established by ,-that date that in all cases              A ct, 1984, can only be given one of three possible interpre­
                      where an improper way of doing a lawful act had been                 tation s : ( 1 ) if a t th e m om ent of im pact th e driver was
                      made the basis of a charge of manslaughter, the degree of            driving carefully, b ut there w a s'so m e antecedent or sub­
                      impropriety was a m aterial fact, and th at the question             sequent dangerous driving on his part, then he m ay be
                      whether the degree was sufficient to constitute manslaughter         found gu ilty of th a t dangerous d riving; (2 ) the application
                      was one for the jury.                                                o f the section m ust be lim ited to a case where death was
                           The law, however, as laid down in Senior (supra),               n ot caused b y th e dangerous d riving; ( 8 ) in a case where
                      has undergone a change in view of recent legislation                 the elem ents of m anslaughter are present, if there are also
42                                            B O U S E OF L O R D S.                                                B O U SE OF L O R D S.                                      43
     1937.           present some mitigating circum stan^^ such as the youth                involuntary hom icide which the old writers adopted. These                   1937.
8    <fe9 March. . .. . .                                ’         . . .
                                                                                                                                                                       A 9 March.
    22 April,   of th e driver, then th e jury are entitled to convict of the               were tw o fo ld : ( 1 ) H om icide arising from the doing of
                                                                                                                                                                   8
                                                                                                                                                                       22 April.
An d r e w s u .    lesser offence on ly. N one of these interpretations can be             an act in itself law ful, which was hom icide per in fo rtu n iu m ;
                                                                                                                                                                    A n d re w s v .
Dir e c t o r o f   considered satisfactory.   [H e referred to a num ber of                and ( 2 ) hom icide arising from the doing of an unlawful              D ire c to r o f
PUBLIC rBO*
                                                                                                                                                                   P u b lic P r o ­
 8ECUTIONS.         sum m ings-up a t A ssizes which were w ithin his recollection          a ct, which was m anslaughter. There has, how ever, been                s e c u tio n s .
Lord Atkin.         an<^ th e m anner in which different Judges had d ealt w ith            n o agreem ent on w hat constitutes an unlawful act.                    Lord Atkin,
L°r<Lord'a^' th e interpretation to be placed on th e above section .] The                  Stephen in his D igest of the Crim inal L aw (1926 ed.                 Lord Finlay,
                                                                                                                                                                       Lord
Thankerton. trend o f authority has been to increase the degree of                          arts. 294 and 314) derived from the old authorities the                Thankerton,
Lord Wright,                                                       e
Lord Roche, negligence necessary to establish th e crim e of m anslaughter.                                                                                        Lord Wright,
                                                                                            inclusion of alm ost every kind of wrongful act under the               Lord Roche.
                                                                                            head of “ unlaw ful a c t.” [H e referred also to F oster’s
                           T h e Solicitor-G eneral (S ir Terence O ’Connor, K .C .)        Crown L aw (page 290), E a st’s Pleas of the Crown (V ol. 1 ,
                              (A rth u r M orley, K .C . and G . W . W rangham w ith         p p. 257, 261), and B lackstone’s C om m entaries (1884 ed .,
                          . him ), for th e Crown:                                           Ch. X IV , p. 192).] I t is subm itted, how ever, th a t unlawful
                         I f th e sum m ing-up be regarded as a w hole, it w ill be          acts can be classified under tw o d istin ct heads. The first
                     found th a t th e Judge righ tly directed th e jury on th e degree     includes all acts which are intrinsically unlaw ful, and the
                     o f cu lp a b ility which should attach to th e crim e of m an­         second all acts which are in their nature law ful, but become
                     slaughter. I f th e m atter rested on th e direction given in           unlaw ful because th e y are done negligently. W here an act
                    th e first o f th e passages cited ab ove, it m ight well be th a t     is in itself law ful th e d u ty to exercise care m ay arise either
                     th e proposition of law therein contained could n o t b e . con­       because responsibilities are undertaken or because th e act
                    sidered entirely sa tisfa c to r y .\ The Ju d ge, how ever, deviated   itself is a potential danger unless done w ith care. B a t e ­
                    from th a t proposition in subsequent passages. On several              m a n . (supra) properly falls w ithin th e first of these tw o
                    later occasions he used words which were com pletely apt                last-m entioned heads. The pristine rigour of the old law
                    to exclude cases arising under section 12 of th e R oad Traffic         was dim inished as tim e w ent on b y a very strict insistence
                    A ct, 1930 [ i.e ., where th e driving had m erely been w ithout        on the causal chain being proved, and th at is really the
                    due care and a tten tio n ] from th e degree o f crim inality           explanation of th e decision in F r a n k l i n (supra).
                    necessary to con stitu te m anslaughter. A t the very end                    W ith regard to th e interpretation of section 34 of the
                    of th e sum m ing-up there is a passage extrem ely favourable           R oad Traffic A ct, 1934, th e section enables an act of
                    to th e appellant, in 'which th e Ju d ge em phasised the               dangerous driving to be punished where it is not linked
                    necessity of both lim bs of section 11 being established— th at         up w ith the d eath , e .g ., where it occurred at a tim e
                    is to sa y , b oth reckless and dangerous driving— if the jury          antecedent to th e death. W here, how ever, recklessness of
                    were to convict of m anslaughter. f                                     behaviour is proved, and death results, there is alw ays an
                        W ith regard to th e general law o f m anslaughter, the             am ple degree of culpability to establish th e crime of m an­
                    old writers divide hom icide in to voluntary and involuntary            slaughter. I t is conceded, how ever, th a t the sam e principle
                    hom icide. I t is not necessary to consider the voluntary               m ay not alw ays apply to a case of dangerous, as distinct
                    ty p es, as the w hole of the doctrine which has created the            from reckless, driving. The question of the degree of negli­
                    m odern difficulties arises ou t o f the sub-divisions of               gence which w ill support a charge of m anslaughter is one for
44                                             B O U SE OF L O B D S .
                                                                                                                            h o u se   of   lo rds.                                 45

  *937.    th e jury and no artificial classifica^^n of negligence in to                             A p ril 2 2 .— L o r d A t k i n : M y L ords,— This is an appeal      1937.
8*9 March. .                                                                                                                                                           8 * 9 March.
   22 April,          different categories is necessary or desirable.                [H e was     under the necessary certificate of the A ttorney-G eneral from          22 April.
 A n d re w s v.     sto p p ed .]                                                                an order of th e Court of Criminal A ppeal dism issing an A n d r e w s v .
D ir e c t o r o f
P u b l ic P b o -          G. Russell Vick, K.C., in r e p ly :                                  appeal b y th e appellant from conviction on a charge of man­ D i r e c t o r o f
                                                                                                                                                                       P u b lic P ro ­
 SECUTIONS.                          ,   .                  .
                         lh e    Judge   in   his   sum m ing-up,        after   referring   to   slaughter. The appellant w as tried before du Parcq, J ., at s e c u t i o n s .
Lord Finlay, section 84 of th e A ct of 1934, in effect told th e jury th at                      L eeds A ssizes in D ecem ber, 1936, and being convicted was Lord Atkin,
 Thankerton on         fflCts of th e case before them th ey had n o discretion                   sentenced to be im prisoned for fifteen m onths and was LordLord             Finlay,

                                                                                                  disqualified for life from holding a m otor driving licence.          Thankerton,
Lord Wright, left to return a verdict on the lesser charge. T he sum m ing-                                                                                                Lord Wright,
 Lord Bocha.       1 1   1 1
                     up should, how ever, have dealt first w ith th e question- of                    H e w as indicted for m anslaughter, the particulars of Lord Roche.
                     m anslaughter, and th en passed to th e alternative verdicts                 offence being th a t on June 27, 1936, he unlaw fully killed
                     open to th e jury under section 84. The jury should have                     W illiam B urton Craven. The appeal is based solely on an
                     been asked to s a y : W as th e appellant g u ilty of (a) m an­              alleged m isdirection and no issue is raised as to the facts,
                     slaughter ; or (b ) reckless driving; or (c) dangerous driving?              which can be stated shortly.
                     There m u st be a difference in th e degree o f negligence                       [H is Lordship then stated th e fa cts as set out above
                     necessary to con stitu te th e respective offences. I t is w orthy           and co n tin u ed :] On these facts there would appear to have
                     o f n ote th a t th e M otor Car A ct, 1908, s. 1 , fixed one com m on       been a very clear case of m anslaughter, and the only ques­
                     p en a lty for reckless, dangerous or negligent driving, but th at           tion which arises is whether th e learned Judge correctly
                     m th e R oad Traffic A ct, 1980, th e term “ n egligen t driving ”           directed th e jury.
                     has dropped o u t, and th e distinct offences o f “ reckless
                                                                                                      Of all crim es m anslaughter appears to afford m ost
                     driving ” , “ dangerous driving ” , and “ driving w ithout due
                                                                                                  difficulties of definition, for it concerns hom icide in so m any
                     care and a tten tion ” have been created.
                                                                                                  and so varying conditions. From th e early days, when any
                       L ord Atkin : I th in k all your Lordships h ave com e to                  hom icide involved p en alty, the law has gradually evolved
                 th e conclusion th a t th is appeal ought to be dism issed, but                  “ through successive differentiations and integrations ”
                 inasm uch as th e case involves m atters of public interest                      un til it recognises murder on the one hand, based m ainly,
                 and there has been a very careful argum ent addressed to                         though n ot exclu sively, on an intention to k ill, and man­
                 you r L ordships w ith regard to th e w hole law o f m an­                       slaughter on the other hand, based m ainly, though not
                 slaughter, it seem s desirable th a t your L ordships should                     ex clu sively, on th e absence of intention to kill but with the
                 tak e som e little tim e to put in to w riting th e reasons for                  presence of an elem ent of “ unlaw fulness ” which is the
                 w hich you have arrived at th at conclusion.                                     elusive factor. In the present case it is only necessary to
                      In accordance, however, w ith th e practice w hich is                       consider m anslaughter from th e p oint of view of an unin­
                 con venient in crim inal cases, it is better th a t th e decision                tentional killing caused by negligence, th a t is, the om ission
                 th a t th e appeal be dism issed be given now . In th e special                  of a d u ty to ta k e care.
                 circum stances of th e case, the sentence w ill rim from the                        I do not propose to discuss th e developm ent of this
                 d ate of conviction.                                                             branch of th e subject as treated in the successive treatises
                       The H ouse took tim e for consideration.                                   of Coke, H ale, F oster, and E a st, and in th e judgm ents of
46                                     B O U S E OF L O B D S1
                                                                                                                     B O U SE OF L O R D S.                                               47

8 * 9*March             ^ our*s to     found either in directions to juries by           ap p ly to determ ine whether the negligence, in the particular                        1937.
  33    April,         individual Judges, or in the more considered pronounce-           case, am ounted or did not am ount to a crim e, the Judges                         8 * 9 March.
                                                                                                                                                                              22 April.
  A s d b e w s v. ments °f the body of Judges which preceded the formal                 have used m any epithets, such as ‘ culpable ’, ‘ crim inal ’,
                                                                                                                                                                             A n d re w s v .
Puwjc°Peo^ Court of Crown Cases Reserved. Expressions will be found                      ‘ g r o s s ’, ‘ w ic k e d ’, ‘ c le a r ’, ‘ c o m p le te ’. B u t, w hatever   D ire c to r o f
  SEctiTiowa. which indicate th a t to cause death by any lack of due care              ep ith et be used and w hether an ep ith et be used or n ot, in
                                                                                                                                                                            P u b lic P r o ­
                                                                                                                                                                             s e c u tio n s .
  Lord Atkin, will amount to manslaughter, but as manners spftened                      order to establish criminal liab ility th e facts m ust be such                      Lord Atkin,
    rLordlay’ ^          the law became more humane a narrower criterion                th a t, in th e opinion of th e jury, th e negligence o f th e accused              Lord Finlay,
                                                                                                                                                                                Lord
f i r S S f t appeare<*' After aU» manslaughter is a felony, and was                    w ent beyond a m ere m atter of com pensation betw een sub­                         Thankerton,
 Lord Boche. capital, and men shrank from attaching the serious conse­                                                                                                      Lord Wright,
                                                                                        jects and showed such disregard for th e life and safety of                         Lord Boche,
                   quences of a conviction for felony to results produced by            others as to am ount to a crim e against th e S tate and con­
                   mere inadvertence. The stricter view became apparent in              d u ct deserving punishm ent.”
       i           prosecutions of medical men or men who professed medical                 H ere again I think, w ith respect, th a t th e expressions
                   or surgical skill for manslaughter by reason of negligence.          used are n ot, indeed they probably were n o t intended to
                   A s an instance I will cite W i l l i a m s o n (1807) (8 C. & P .   b e, a precise definition of th e crim e. I do n ot m yself find
                   685), where a man who practised as an accoucheur, owing              th e connotations of m ens rea helpful in distinguishing
                   to a mistake in his observation of the actual symptoms,              betw een degrees of negligence, nor do th e ideas of crime
                  inflicted on a patient terrible injuries from which she died.         and punishm ent in them selves carry a jury m uch farther
                  To substantiate the charge of manslaughter, Lord Ellen-               in deciding w hether in a particular case th e degree of
                  borough said “ the prisoner must have been guilty of                  negligence show n is a crim e and deserves punishm ent. B ut
                  criminal misconduct, ■ arising either from the grossest               th e substance of th e judgm ent is m ost valuable, and in m y
                  ignorance or the most criminal inattention.”                          opinion is correct.      In practice it has generally been
               The word “ crim inal ” in any attem p t to define a crime                adopted by Judges in charging juries in all cases of man­
           is perhaps n o t th e m o st helpful, b ut it is plain th a t th e           slaughter by negligence, whether in driving vehicles or
           Lord Chief J u stic e m ea n t to in d icate to th e jury a high             otherw ise.
           degree o f n egligence. S o, at a m uch later d ate, in B a t e ­                The principle to be observed is th a t cases of man­
          m a n (1925) (19 Cr. A p p . R . 8 ) a charge of m anslaughter                slaughter in driving m otor-cars are b ut instances of a
          w as m ade again st a qualified m edical practitioner in s i m i l a r        general rule applicable to all charges of hom icide by
          circum stances to th o se o f W i l l i a m s o n (supra). In a con­          negligence. Sim ple lack of ta re such as w ill constitute civil
          sidered judgm ent o f th e Court th e Lord Chief Ju stice, after              liab ility is n ot enough. For purposes of the crim inal law
          p ointing o u t th a t in a c iv il case, once negligence is proved,          there are degrees of negligence, apd a very high degree of
          th e degree of n egligence is irrelevant, said (a t p . 11 ) :                negligence is required to -be proved before the felony is
          " I n a crim inal Court, on th e contrary, th e am ount and                   established. Probably of all th e epithets th a t can be
          degree of negligence are th e determ ining question. There                    applied “ reckless ” m ost nearly covers th e case. I t is
          m ust be m en s re a . ” A fter citin g C a h i l l v . W r i g h t (1856)    difficult to visualise a case of death caused by “ reckless ”
          (6 E . & B . 891), a civil case, the Lord Chief Justice pro­                  driving in the connotation of th a t term in ordinary speech
          ceeded : “ In explaining to juries the test which they should                 which w ould not ju stify a conviction of m anslaughter. B u t


                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                       —            B O U SE OF L O R D S.                                     49
 a                                            B O U SE OF L O R D ]
48                                                               •
                                                                                             of dangerous driving. B u t, apart altogether from any                    1937.
                   it is probably n ot all-em bracing, for “ reckless ” suggests an                                                                              8 <fc 9 March.
      1987.                                                                                  inference to be drawn from section 84, I entertain no doubt
8 <fe 9 March. indifference to risk, whereas th e accused m ay have appre­                                                                                          22 April.
   33 April.                                                                                 th at the statu tory offence of dangerous driving m ay be
                   ciated th e risk and intended to avoid it and y e t shown sue                                                                                  A n d r e w s t>.
 An d r e w s « .                                                                            com m itted, though th e negligence is n ot of such a degree        D ir e c t o r o p
D ir e c t o r o p
                   a high degree of negligence in th e m eans adopted to avoid                                                                                   P u b l ic P ro ­
P u b l ic P r o ­                                                                            as w ould am ount to m anslaughter if death ensued. As an           s e c u t io n s .
                      th e risk as w ould ju stify a conviction.      If th e principle of
 s e c u t io n s .
                                                                                             instance, in th e course of argum ent it w as suggested th at a      Lord Atkin,
 t JTIkin             B a t e m a n (supra) is observed, it will appear th a t the law of
                                                                                             m an m ight execute the dangerous m anoeuvre of drawing             Lord Finlay,
 E d n f f i ’. m anslaughter has n ot changed b y th e introduction of m otor                                                                                       Lord
                                                                                              out to pass a vehicle in front w ith another vehicle m eeting      Thankerton,
 Tbaokerton> vehicles on th e road.                D eath cause,! b y their negligent                                                                            Lord Wright,
                                                                                             him and be able to show th at he w ould have succeeded in           Lord Roehe.
 ta d JtoSK* driving, though unhappily m uch m ote frequent, is to be
                                                                                             his calculated intention b ut for som e increase of speed in
             treated in law a s death caused b y any other form o f negli­
                                                                                             th e vehicles in front— a case very doubtfully of m an­
                      gen ce, and juries should be directed accordingly.
                                                                                             slaughter b u t very probably of dangerous driving,
                          I f th is view be adopted it w ill be easier for Judges to              I cannot think of an ything worse for users of the road than
                      d isentangle them selves from th e m eshes of th e R o a d Traffic      the conception th a t no one could be convicted of dangerous
                      A cts.    Those A cts have provisions w hich regulate th e              driving unless his negligence w as so great that if he had
                      degree of care to b e tak en in driving m otor vehicles. They          caused death he m ust h ave been convicted of m anslaughter.
                      have no direct reference to causing death b y negligence.               I t therefore w ould appear th a t in directing the jury in a
                      Their prohibitions, w hile directed, no doubt, to cases o               case of m anslaughter th e Ju d ge should in th e first instance
                      n egligen t driving, w hich if death b e caused w o u l d justify       charge them su bstantially in accordance w ith the general
                      con viction s of m anslaughter, exten d to degrees o negligence         law , th at is, requiring the high degree of negligence
                      of less gravity.                                                        indicated in B a t e m a n (supra), and then explain th at that
                          Section 12 of th e R oad Traffic A ct, 1980, im poses a             degree of negligence is n ot necessarily the sam e as that
                      p en alty for driving w ithout due care or attention     This           which is required for the offence of dangerous driving, and
                      w ould apparently cover all degrees of negligence. Section 11           then indicate to them th e conditions under which they
                      im poses a penalty for driving recklessly or at a speed or in           m ight acquit of m anslaughter and convict of dangerous
                       a m anner w hich is dangerous to th e public. There can                driving. A direction th a t all they had to consider was
                       no dou b t th a t th is section covers driving w ith such a high       whether death w as teaused b y dangerous driving w ithin
                       degree of negligence as th a t if death were caused th e              section 11 of the R oad Traffic A ct, 1980, and no more
                       offender w ould h a v e com m itted m anslaughter. B u t the          would in m y opinion be a m isdirection.
                       converse is n o t tru e, and it is perfectly possible th a t a m an       In dealing with the sum m ing-up in the present case I
                       m ay drive a t a speed or in a m anner dangerous to th                feel bound to sa y , with every Tespect to the learned and
                       public and cause death and y e t n o t be gu ilty of m an­            very careful Judge, that there are passages which are open
                                                                                             to criticism . In particular at the beginning of his charge
                       slaughter.
                                                                                             to the jury he began w ith th e statem ent that if a m an kills
                           The L egislature appears to recognise this b y th e pro­
                                                                                             another in the course of doing an unlawful act he is guilty
                       vision in section 84 of th e R oad Traffic A ct, 1984, th a t on
                                                                                             of manslaughter, and then proceeded to ascertain what the
                       an indictm ent for m anslaughter a m an m ay e convic e
                                                                                                  V ol. 26.                                           4
                                                                                                               HOUSE OF LORDS.                                            51
gQ                                           B O U SE OF L O R D S.


    TOT.    unlaw ful act w as b y considering section 11 of th e H oad
' V I S ? ' Traffic A c t, 1980. U th e sum m ing-up rested there there                                 [ i n THE HOUSE OF L O R D S .]
                    have ^      m isdirection. There is an ob vious ddler-
                                                                                                                   BEFORE
                 ence in th e law o l m m slau gh ter betw een doing an unlaw ful
                                                                                       LORD ATKIN, LORD THANKERTON, LORD RUSSELL OF
■S S iS r        act and doing a law ful act w ith a d e p e e of                         KILLOW EN, LORD W RIGHT and LORD ROCHE.
 , J T ,r        w hich th e le g isla tu r e m akes crim inal. I f it were otherwis
Lord Finlay, aman who kiUed another while driving without due care
          and attention would e x n ecessitate cojmmit manslaughter.
T h o r to n .                                                                               THORNE v . MOTOR TRADE ASSOCIATION.*                                1937.
                                                                                                                                                               9,12 A 13
S S E C - But as the summing-up proceeded,. the leaned Judge                                                                                                    April.
                                                                                       Uttering L etter Demanding Money with. Menaces—Reasonable                8 Jun*.
          reverted to, and I think rested the case on, the principles                      xind Probable Cause—Trade Association—Price Protection
          which have been just stated. On many occasions he                                —Stop List—Rule whereby Fine might be Paid as Alterna­
          directed the attention of the jury to the recklessness and                       tive—Demand in Furtherance of Promotion of Trade
                                                                                           Interests—Sum Demanded not Extortionate—No Offence
          high degree of negligence which the prosecution alleged to                       Committed—Larceny A ct, 1916 (6 8f 7 Geo. 5, e. 50),
          have been proved and which would justify them in con­                            s.29 (1).
          victing the accused.                          ♦
                 On consideration of the summing-up as a whole I am                             B y the Larceny A ct, 1916, s. 29 (1) : “ Every person
                                                                                           who (i) utters, knowing the contents thereof, any letter or
           satisfied that the true question was ultimately left to e                       writing demanding of any person with menaces, and without
           jury, and that on the evidence the verdict was inevitable.                     ■ any reasonable and probable cause, any property or valu­
           For these reasons I came to the conclusion that the appeal                      able thing . . . shall be guilty of felony. . . . ”
                                                                                                Rule 14 ( 1 ) of the rules of a trade association provided :
           should be dismissed.                                                            “ No member of the association shall supply, directly or
                  L ord       T h a n k e b to n : My Lords, I have had the                indirectly, any trade goods . . . to . . . any person whose
                                                                                           name is placed upon the stop list. . . . ” Rule 15 (1) pro­
           privilege of considering the opinion which has just been                        vided that in case of a breach by any member of rule 14 (1)
            d e l i v e r e d by the noble Lord on the Woolsack, and I                     “ the council or price protection committees shall have
            desire to express my complete concurrence in it.                               power . . . to make an order that the name of such member
                                                                                           . . . be placed upon the stop list, unless within twenty-one
                    L o e d W b x g h t , M.R.: My Lords, I also agree, and I              days such member . . . pays to the association a fine
                  am asked by my noble and learned friend Viscount Finlay,                 within limits to be laid down by the council ” .
                  who   h a s     had the privilege of considering the opinion
                                a l s o
                                                                                                Held, an agent of the association might lawfully write
                                                                                           requiring a person to pay a sum of money and give an
                  which has just been delivered, to say that he agrees.                    undertaking to comply with the association’s rules as an
                                                                                           alternative to having his name put on the stop list.
                      L oed R oche        : My Lords, I also concur.                       Although such a letter would constitute a demand of money
                                                              Appeal   dism issed.         with menaces, there would not be an absence of reasonable

                                                                                          *    This civil case is included in these Reports as it decides
                      Solicitors : C. Butcher & Simon Bum s, for Morrish, Nelson       an im portant question of criminal law, on which conflicting
                   & Co., Leeds, for appellant.                                        views had been expressed by the Court of Criminal Appeal and
                                                                                       the Court of Appeal.
      980                                       All England jy^v Reports                                                [1981]      1All'II       HL                                              R v Caldwell                                      961
      have been quite content w it h planning permission for the second bungalow, I am boon
      tt»say that I am at a loss to understand why planning permission for a building of;tf§|
      original bungalow design, was granted. Counsel for the Secretary of State, with his.uaisiS
                                                                                                                                                                                            R v Caldwell
      c a n d o u r, c o n fe sse d that lie was equally surprised. It does suggest that there i                                                 HOUSE O F LORDS        .         .                     '       "       .   '              '         '   ’
      error in rea so n in g b y th e p erso n r esp o n sib le for m a k in g th e decision o f the Secretary of                                LORD WILBERFORCE, LORD DIPLOCK, LORD EDM 0 ND-DAV 1ES, LORD KEITH O F KINKEL AN D LORD
     State in this case.                                  .... . •         .........                                                             ROSKILL
          I        also fin d it d iffic u lt to u n d ersta n d th e referen ce th at th e d e c isio n sh o u ld be granted                     I o t h , I 1 t h DECEMBER 1 9 8 0 , J 9 t h MARCH 1 9 8 1        '                                    '
     an th e ap p eals in a g r e e m e n t with the view taken b y the inspector. It is true th at the^
     inspector did recommend that planning p e r m issio n should be granted but it is reasonably 5                                           b Criminal law - Damage to property - Recklessness whether property would be destroyed en­
     clear that he only did so because of his erro n eo u s c o n c lu sio n that the original p e r m is s io n                                damaged - Recklessness - Whether defence o f drunkenness available - Criminal Damage Act
     was s till in existence. The reference b y the inspector to largely u n d e v e lo p e d country anif"                                       1971, s 1(1).                                             ■   '           '   '                  ; ;
 .   in te n sific a tio n of residential, development and o th er applications seems clearly to indicate*
     that the inspector was adverse to the g r a n tin g of p la n n in g permission but for the pre-:‘                                         Criminal law - Damage to property - Damage to property with intent to endanger life or bang
     e x is t in g p e r m issio n w h ic h h e r eg a r d e d as s till valid .       .                      ...                               reckless whether life would be endangered - Reckless - Whether defence of drunkenness available
          Next it is to be noted that the Secretary of State says that the history is 'a vitally material                                     c -Criminal Damage Act 1971, s 1(2).                       '                      . ..      '
      consideration. The reference to history must b e because of the' expired planning!
      permission; as I have indicated such an expired planning permission can be a relevant;!                                                   The respondent had done some work for the owner of a hotel as the result of which he
      consideration but 1 find it very difficult to see how it could ever'be regarded in                                                        had a quarrel with the owner, got drunk and set fire to the hotel in revenge. The fire was
 ■ few est of this case as being 'a vitally material consideration’. While the weight to Be?                                                    discovered and put out before any serious damage was caused and none of the ten guests
   . given to a particular consideration is for the-Secretary of State such a conclusion indicates'!                                            in the hotel at the time was injured. The respondent was indicted on two counts of arson
     that either the person responsible for making the decision on behalf of the S e o e ta r y 'o ljf                                        “ under s 1(1) and (2f of the Criminal Damage Act 1971. At his trial he pleaded guilty to
     State misdirected himself, or h e was acting perversely. In either event his decision was                                                  the lesser charge of intentionally or recklessly destroying or damaging the property of
  . ,wrong In law ..It is therefore not necessary for me to decide which is the appropriate label                                               another, contrary to s 1(1), but pleaded not guilty to the more serious charge under s 1(2)
 • to apply.. I su sp ect, however, that the person responsible for the decision has failed to                                                  of damaging property with intent to endanger life or being reckless whether life would
    -appreciate the d is tin c tio n between a situation where there is an existing -planning                                                   be endangered. He claimed that he was so drunk at the time that the thought that he
     p e r m is sio n w h ic h is still valid,-and the position where there was a former planning'”'                                            might be endangering the lives of the people in the hotel had never crossed his mind.
   - permission which is no longer valid because it became time expired. I say,this because':;                                                e The trial judge directed the jury that drunkenness was not a defence to a charge under
     the very words vitally material, consideration’ appear in Spackman v Secretary of Statefor                                                 s 1(2) and he was convicted. On appeal, the Court of Appeal allowed the appeal' on the
' ■ the Environment [197?] 1 AH ER.25.7 at 261 per Willis j. In Spackman it •was-a previous*                                                    ground that the mental element of intention or recklessness in regard to endangering life
     planning permission which-was still in existence, which Willis j regarded as a Vitally1'                                                   referred to in s        was a matter of specific intent going beyond the actus reus and
     material consideration’. ■■ .* : -                 . - ...   . .                       .- \                                                therefore had to be establishedas a separate ingredient of the offence, and drunkenness
       -1 .was referred to Spackmans case by counsel for the applicants because I was asked on                                                ^ could accordingly be a good defence. The Crown appealed to the House of Lords.
    behalf of the applicants if the-matter was-going back to the Secretary of State to indicate «
    the Secretary of States approach to the question of the trenches was- wrong, bearing in/'--.                                                H eld (Lord Wilberforce and Lord Edmund-Davies dissenting on the reasoning)—When
- .mind that decision. I do not, I am afraid, agree. -As .far as the trenches are concerned, it %                                               used in a criminal statute such as the 1 9 7 1 Act the term ‘reckless’ was used not as a term
  -seems to m e. th a t the Secretary .of State’s decision w a s a p e r fe ctly proper-one, and, indeed, '-t                                   of legal art but in the popular or dictionary sense of meaning ‘careless, regardless or
    probably the only possible .one, bearing in m in d th e facts o f th is case. Spademan's case is \!                                         heedless of the possible harmful consequences of one’s acts’. As such- the term
    quite d iffe re n t because the trenches which were dug in the wrong position were intended. .;                                             encompassed both a decision to ignore a risk of harmful consequences flowing from an
    for the house for which permission had been given, and not a property of different-'i                                                     9 act which the accused had recognised as existing and also a failure to give any thought to
  d e sig n . ■                                                                    .   .        .    .    .   .     .   .   .   .               whether there was any risk in circumstances where, if any thought were given to the
   .. It follows that I quash the.Secretary of States decision to grant planning permission for' .S                                             matter, it would be obvious 'that there was. Accordingly, the restricted form of
'         bungalows and also quash his decision to grant permission for the retention of the-                                                   recklessness which formed an ingredient of crimes of malice and subjective or objective
  hut. ■ • ■                                     ...                                      : ^..S                                                tests of recklessness were not relevant to determining the issue of recklessness under the
                                                                                                                                                1 9 7 1 Act. Thus a person, was -guilty #;WcBess:Iy destroying or damaging property
  Decision of the Secretary o f State quashed.                         •                   -'       •' ■

 Solicitors:Sherwood &Co (for the appellants); Treasury Solicitor; Francis ir Parkes,
 (fo r th e sec o n d resp o n d en ts).         '              ■                                        '•
                                                                                                                                                 to-e
                                                                                                    K Mydeen Esq                                 by intentions         or recklessly destroyin .or damaging j                       ary to s 1(2




                                                                                                                                                 11 Section 1 is set out at p 863 e f, post
                                                rnvitiiyranutawnw poiX S                                  LISBIJ 1 All ER

                 life of another might be endangered. It fdflkfed, therefore, that, where a person w                                   that Co®!put imposed a sentence of three years’ imprisonment on count 2. The court
[ ||p            accused of an offence under s i of the 1971 M K n d the charge was framed so as to chanf                            ■ refused an application by the Crown for leave to appeal to the House of Lords but
                 the person only with intending to destroy or damage the property of another under s j(j                            3 certified, under s 33(2) of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968, that the following point of law
                 or intending by the destruction or damage of property to endanger the life of anoth.                                  of general public importance was involved in its decision: whether evidence o f self­
                 under $ 1(2), evidence of self-induced intoxication could be relevant to the accused's                                induced intoxication could be relevant to (i) whether the defendant intended to endanger
                 defence; but, where the charge was, or included, a reference to the accused’s being                                   the life of another and (ii) whether the defendant was reckless whether the life of another
                 reckless whether property belonging to another would be destroyed or damaged                                          would be endangered within the meaning of s 1(2X6) of the 1971 Act. On 3rd July the
                S 1(1 J. or _being reckless .whether the life of another would be endangered Bv:                                    , House of Lords gave the Crown leave to appeal. The facts are set out in the opinion of
                destruction or damage of property under s 1(2), evidence of self-induced intoxication was                              Lord D ip lo c k .                     ■                  ...
                irrelevant. Accordingly, it was irrelevant that the respondent had failed to g
                thought to the risk of endangering the lives of residents in the hotel because of his sell-                             Neil Denison QC and Kay BlundeU-Jones for the Crown,                                                         -
                induced intoxication.. Since, however, it made no practical difference to the respondent                                Martin Thomas QC an d David Thomas fo r th e r esp o n d en t.              ■         .■ ■■ ■          ■
                whether the., appeal were dismissed or not,'the appeal would" be dismissed (Lord
                Wilberforce and Lord Edmund-Davies concurring in dismissing the appeal because'tie**’                               c Their Lordships took time for consideration.                        ' ^   -           . '           .   - ^    :
                agreed with the Court of Appeal) (see p 963 b c, p 964 a to c, p 966 ef, p 967 a 6 and i to
                p 9 6 8 e, p 9 7 2 b and g and p 9 7 3 c to e, post).            ■ ; . :-                                               19th March.    T h e fo llo w in g o p in io n s w e re delivere.d.     :       .         .   -             --v"
                :..':pirector o f Public ProsecutionsvMajewski [1976] 2 All ER 142 applied.
                _ . ^ r i g g s [ i 9j 7 l l AU ER 475, R vParker [J977^ A l l ER 3?f RvStephenson [ i 979l z                           LO ED WILBERFORCE. M y L ords, i would dismiss the appeal and answer the
                All ER 1198;and R v Orpin [ 1980J 2 All ER 321 overruled.                                                               certified questions as suggested by my noble and learned friend Lord E d m u n d -D a v ies.
        . Notes                                                                                                                     ^ LORD DIPLOCK. My Lords, the facts th at g a v e rise to this appeal are simple. The
          'Forthe'offenee of destroying or damaging property, see “i i Halsbury*s Laws (4th Edn)                                        respondent had been doing work for the proprietor of a residential hotel. He considered
           para ,306, and for cases on the subject, see ^ Digest Reissue) 1439-1440, 12,690-                                            that he had a grievance against the proprietor. ■ One night he got very d ru n k and in the
                l %nr'th Criminal
                         r ■ ■ 1 Damage
                                  rv,   A i 97I, s ., see 41 Halsbury’s Statutes
                                                                          ''                                                            early hours of the morning he decided t o revenge himself on the proprietor by setting
                                        Act                                      (3rd Edn) 409,                                 ■       fire to the hotel, in which some ten guests were living at the time. 'He broke a w in d o w
                                                                                                                                        and succeeded in starting a fire in a ground room flo o r ; but fo r tu n a te ly it was discovered
            . Cases, re£e»ec! to lit opinions                                                                                           and the flames were extinguished before any serious damage was caused . At his trial he
            •                                                                *42 , [V977I AC 443 , [ 1976] 2                            said that he was so drunk at the time that the thought that there might be people In the
                 rTL     f w i 4« J 3,'5’      V PP/ ^      2’ HL:     1197513 A,i ER 296’          AC 443,                             hotel whose lives might be endangered if it were set on fire had never crossed his mind.
                                                                 R:.5,CA, .4(I)Digest(Reissoe) 54, 2SS.                                  ' He was indicted at the Central Criminal Court on two counts of arson under s i ( i ) a n d
                                                                                                                                        (2) respectively of the Criminal Damage Act 1971- T hat sec tio n reads as fo llo w s:
        ' R vB rW 'B 977l ^ AliER 47^ 4 1 9 7 7 ] 1 WLR 605,'63 Cr App R 215, CA, 15 Digest /
        . „JReissue) 440, 12,691.                           :      .                     6 1                                        f    '   . ‘(1) A" p erson w h o without la w fu l excuse destroys or damages any property
                                                                                                                                              belonging to another intending to destroy or damage any such property or being
        V                      2. All ER 412, [1957] 2 QB 396, [1957] 3 WLR 76, 121JP 451,41
        /           App R, i55»-CCA, 1:5 Digest (Reissue) 1198, 10,292.'                    ' v       ■                                       reckless as to whether any such property would be destroyed or damaged shall be
            ' I t<ypriscM (1977) '65 Cr App R 50, CA, Digest (Cont Vol E)' tz6, 25ia.                                                         guilty of an offence.          ■
              R v ffr m [ i9 8 a ) 2,A11 ER'3.21,'[1.980] i'WLR 1050,70 Cr App R 306, CA.                                                      ■■ ‘(2) A person who without lawful excuse destroys or damages any property,
                                                                                                                                              whether belonging to himself or another—(a) intending to destroy, or damage any
                                             3 7 , 119771   1 W L R   6 0 0 ’ 63   C r   A p p    R   2!I>   C A >    15        3   g         property or being reckless as to whether any property would be destroyed or
                                                                                                                                              damaged; and (b) intending by the destruction o r damage to endanger the life of
            8                                                                            j™           ™- -           jp -   •                 another or being reckless as to whether the life of another would b e th ereb y
                                                                                                                                              endangered; shall be guilty'of an offence.. . ...... . . '                         ..
                                                                                                                                                 ' ‘(3) An offence committed under this section by destroying or damaging property
                                                                                                                                              by fire shall be charged as arson.’           ...... .. .: .. r                  ^
            A ppeal                                                                               '                  •          ^   ^ v Count 1 contained the charge of the more serious offence under s 1(2) which requires
             O n 24 A 'M ayi 9j 9 tiyrespoiyOTt.’jm es'C atiw dV i^'ranviaey at theC ^tral Criminal                                   intent to endanger the life of another or recklessness whether the life of another w o u ld
             Courc before Mi^s .Recorder Sonthworth QCand a jury,’'on two counts of arson, namely #                                   be endangered. To this count the respondent pleaded not guilty. He relied on his self­
             without lawful .excuse damaging the property of another intending, to damage it "or ''2                                  induced drunkenness as a defence on the ground that the offence under stib-s (2) was one
            being reckless whether it would be damaged and intending to'.endanger the .life.of ' | |                                  of ‘specific intent' in the sense in which that expression was used' in speeches, in this
            another or being reckless whether the life of another would be endangered, contrary to /                                • House in Director o f Public Prosecutions v Majewski [1976] 2 AH E R 142,11977] AC 443.
            s. 1(2) of the Criminal Damage. Act 1.97 1 (count 1). and. without lawfnl"excuse damaging                                 Count 2 contained the lesser offence under s i ( i ) t o which the respondent pleaded g u ilty .
            property of another intending to damage it or being reckless whether it would be                                             The recorder directed the Jury that self-induced drunkenness was not a defence to'
            damaged, contrary to s 1(1) of the 1971 Act (count 2). He was sentenced to three years*                                   count i, and the jury convicted him on this count. The recorder sentenced him to three
            imprisonment on count 1, no sentence being passed on count' zv"-'He appealed to the                                       years’ imprisonment on count 1 but passed no sentence on count 2, the lesser offence, to
                     11           APPfa^; Criminal Division (Lord Widgery CJ, Eveleigh Lj and O’Connor j),                            which he had pleaded guilty. On appeal the Court of Appeal held that her direction to
            which allowed his appeal on count 1 on 31st March 1980 and quashed his conviction on                                      the jury as to the effect of self-induced drunkenness on the charge in count 1 was
                                              - ...         lo w   «icfjuiu>                [l^O iJ      I Ail t K            HL                                  n v uaidw eti (Lord utpiocKj                                               K5
    wrong. They set aside the conviction on that c o u j f c u t left the sentence of th ree'
                                                                                                                             matter i i ^ ^ n t jn R v Cunningham); but it was not directed to and consequently has no
    im p r is o n m e n t u n c h a n g e d as they considered it t5( f an appropriate sentence on count »
                                                                                                                          g bearing on. the meaning of the.adjective.‘reckless’ in s i o f th e Criminal Damage Act
       So “ waf ° nly * pyrrh!c victory for the respondent; but it left the law on criminal                                   197 1. T o u se i t fo r th a t p u r p o se c a n , i n m y v ie w , o n ly b e m is le a d in g .               ....
    damage and drunkenness le a state of some confusion.                                                                        ,.My Lords, the restricted meaning that the Court of Appeal in R v Cunningham had
      :The question o f law certified for the opinion of this House was:
                                                                                                                             placed on the adverb ‘m a lic io u s ly ’ in the Malicious Damage Art 1861 in cases where the
    , _ ■ Whether e v id e n c e o f se lf-in d u c e d intoxication can be relevant to th e following                       prosecution did not rely on an actual intention o f the accused to cause, the damage that
      ;. questions^a) Whether the defendant intended to endanger the life of another; and                                    was in fact done called for a meticulous a n a ly sis b y t h e ju r y of the thoughts that passed
         (b ) W h e th e r the defendant was reckless as to whether the life of another would be *                        jj through the mind of the accused at or before the time h e did the a c t that caused the.
     • .endangered, w ith in the meaning of Section 1(2)(b) of the Criminal'Damage Act                                       damage, in order to see on which side of a narrow dividing line they fell. If it had crossed
                                                                                                                             his mind that there was a risk that someone's property might be damaged but, because
                                                                                                                             his. mind was affected by rage or excitement or confused by drink, he did not appreciate
     . ' The question recognises that under s 1(2)(&} there are two alternative states of mind as                            the seriousness of the risk or trusted that good luck would prevent its happening, this
    respects endangering the life of another, and that the existence of either of them on the                                state of mind would amount to malice in the restricted meaning placed on that term by.
    part of the accused is sufficient to constitute the mens rea needed to convert the lesser „                           c the Court of Appeal; whereas if, for any of these reasons, he did not even trouble to give
    offence under s 1(1) into the graver offence under s 1(2). One is intention that a                                       his mind to the question whether there was any risk of damaging the property, this slate
    particular thing should happen in consequence of the actus reus, viz that the life of                                    of mind would not suffice to make h im g u il ty of an o ffe n c e under die Malicious Damage
   another person should be endangered (this was not relied on by the Crown in the instant '
                                                                                                                             Act 1861....                        k. :r ,                                                          ,'..^...;fc..i ';/>*}
   case}.' The other is recklessness .whether that particular thing should happen or not. The '                                   N e ith e r state, o f mind seems to me to be lessblameworthy-than the other; b u t, i f the
   same dichotomy ofmentes reae, intention and recklessness, is to be found throughout                                       difference between the two constituted the distinction between,what,does and what does
   the section: in sub-s {,) and para (a) ofsub-s (2) as well as in para (b); and reckkss' as d                           (j not in legal theory a m o u n t to a guilty, state ;of mind for. the purposes of a .sta tu to r y
 ' des® P a w ,r f * » e . o f mind must be given the same meaning in each of them.                          °               offence o f damage to p r o p e r ty , it would not be a practicable d is tin c t io n fo r u s e i n a.trial .:
 ■ xy-My. Lords, the C r im in a l Damage Act .1971 .replaced almost in their entirety the m a n v                           by jury. _The only person, who knows, what, the accused’s mental processes were, is the
   and d e ta ile d p r o v is io n s o f th e M a lic io u s Damage Act 1861. Its purpose, as stated in its                 accused himself, and probably not,even h e can r ec a ll th e m .a c c u r a te ly when the cage o r
   Ipng'.nde w a s j o r e v u e the law .of England and .Wales as to offences, of damage to                                 excitement under vvh ich he acted has p assed, .or he has sobered, op if he were under the
              theJaw                 7 ° f the Act suSgests>«          have been hoped that it would also                    influence o f drink at the relevant tim e.. I f the acqused gives evidence that because of b is
                                                                                                                          g rage, excitement or drunkenness the risk o f particular harmful c o n s e q u e n c e s o f h is acts
       In :tb e.:-i8 6 i fAct,-the                    consistently used to describe the mens rea that was a *                simply did n o t o c c u r to h im , a jury.woujd find it hard to ^ s a t i s f i e d b e y o n d reasonable
  aecessarj..element In .the multifarious offences that the Act created w a s m a lic io u s ly ' .a ":                      doubt that his true mental process was not, that, but was the slightly different mental
  technical ^expression,;.aot .readily intelligible to juries,. which became the s u b je c t, o f'?                         process required if o n e applies the restricted meaning of ‘being reckless as t o whether
  c o n s id e r a b le ju d ic ia l e x e g e s is. T h is culminated in. a judgment of the Court o f C r im in a l
                                                                                                                             something would happen,.adopted by th e C o u rt o f Appeal in MvCmmngkam..:
  Appeal.® R. vCunningham [,957! 2 All ER 412 at 414, [1957] 2 QB 396 at 399 which                                              . My Lords, 1 can see no reason why Parliament when it decided to revise the law as.to
  approved, as an accurate statement of the law, what had been said by Professor Kenny in f                               f offences, of damage to property should go..out of its....way to p e r p e tu a te fine, and
' his Outlines ofCnm m al Law (1st Edn, 1902): ' ■                              •' ‘         •••>•.■•; - *           '
                                                                                                                             impracticable distinctions such as these, between one mental state and a n o th e r. .One
               , i ' *j? an^ stat“ tory definition of a crime "malice” must be taken . . . as requiring                      would think, that the sooner they were got rid of the better.                                           vrr. ;           ,■>
     -
         : '                 '■■■ • intention m Art th+| - ' a s t . x v u i a i KUiUUt i_____.
               e ith e r ft) a n a c tu a l
              r r\ \t                                                                    litH I
                                                                                                l ,r - ^ . , t -.-M          .. When cases under s 1(1) of the new Act, in which the Crown’s case was based on the
          or (is) .recklessness as .to whether such harm should occur or not (i.e. th e accused has':                        accused having been reckless as to whether. . . .property would b e destroyed or damaged’,
          t k T S f o f ft)    J>articu^ar ^in(^ harm might b e done, and yet has gone on to take'"                          first came before the Court of Appeal, the question as t o the meaning of the expression
                                                                                                                          g ‘reckless’ in the context of that subsection appears to 'have. been, treated as. soluble simply
                                                                                                                             b y posing and answering what had b y th e n , u n fo r tu n a te ly , b e c o m e a n o b se ssiv e question
     My Lords, in this passage Professor Kenny was engaged in'defining for the benefit of                                    among English lawyers: is the test of recklessness subjective o r objective ?, T h e first .two
  students the m e m m g o f ‘malice*                          art in criminal law. To do so he used                         reported cases, in b o th o f w h ic h judgments were given off the cuff, are R v Briggs [1977]
 .ord inary E n g l i s h words in. their popular meaning. Among'the words'he. used was '
                                                                                                                             1 AH ER 475, [i?77].» WLR 605 and R y Parker [1977] a All ER. 37 »'0 .977 l 1 WLR
  recklessness., the noun" derived from;',the adjective 'recHess'fof which the popular or                                    600.. Both classified the .test of recklessness as subjective. .This led the court in R y Briggs
 dictionary meaning Is .careless, 'regardless,' or fieediesr o f th e ' possible harmful h                               h [J977] 1,All ER 475 at 477-478, [ i 977j i WLR .605 at 608 to say: ‘A man is reckless in
 consequences of ones acts. It presupposes that, if thought., were given to the matter by                                    the sense required when he ca’rries out a deliberate act knowing that there is some risk -
 the doer before the act was done, ic .would have been a p p a re n t to him that there was a real                           of damage resulting from that act but nevertheless continues in the performance of that
.risk of its h a v in g the relevant harmful consequences; but, granted this, recklessness                                   act.’ This leaves over the question whether the risk of damage may not be so slight that
 covers a w h o le r a n g e o f sta te s o f m in d from failing to give any. thought at all to w h e th e r                even the most prudent of men would feel justified in,'taking it, but it excludes that kind
 ri* and ’w A 7!n: f A ° X h a rm U cons«l«enceS, to.recognising the.existence.of.the                                        of recklessness that consists of acting without giving any thought at all to whether or not
           nevertheless deciding to ignore it... Conscious of this imprecision in the popular /                          j there is a n y risk of harmful consequences of one’s act, even though the risk is great and
 meaning of recklessness as descriptive of a state of mind, Professor Kenny, in th e U s a g e 1                             w0uld.be obvious i f any thought were given to the matter, by the doer o f the act. -,-Rjv
quoted,..was, as it seems to me, at pains to indicate by the words in brackets the particular                                Parker, however, opened the d o o r a chink by adding as an a lte r n a tiv e to th e actual
species within the genus, reckless states of mind, that constituted ‘malice’ in criminal                                     knowledge of the accused that there is s o m e risk of damage resulting from his act and his-
law. This parenthetical restriction on the natural meaning of recklessness was necessary                                     going on to take it, a mental state described as ‘closing his mind to the p b v io u s fact’.that
to a n explanation o f th e meaning of the adverb maliciously’ when used as a term of art                                    there is such a risk (see [ 1 9 7 7 ] 2 All ER 3 7 at 40, [ 1 9 7 7 ] . J WLR 600 at 604)..' • ....
m the description o f a n offence under the Malicious Damage Act 1861 (which was the
                                                                                                                              . .R v Stephenson [1979] 2 All ER 1198, [1979] QB 695, the first case in which there was
         f Z r ___________                      Atl England Law Reports                             [1981] 1 All ER              HL                                 R v Caldwell (Lord Diplock)                                               987
                   .... .                                                                         '•
     fuH argument, though only o n one side, and a r d P e d judgment;slammed the door
                                                                                                                                 in part as OTjective’ in current legal jargon. Questions of criminal liability are seldom •
               3th Iessftrestnaed interpretation o f ‘reckless’ whether particular consequences '                          a solved by simply asking whether the test is subjective or objective. ■ '.: ■■                           ■             ■
                      tba! 0"S m a lty ap p m ved m Briggs. The appellant, a tramp, Intending to                                     In my opinion,'a person charged with an offence tinder s i ( j ) of the 1971 "Act':» '
     pass the night in a hollow in the side of a haystack, had lit a fire to keep himself w a L -
     w iL e ls t      f  h - Sack itsdfca“«htfire- At his trial, he was not himself called a s #
     m te M n a r h ! M CA ' T St ^ . e v i d e n c e oa his behalf that he was'schizophrenic'
                                                                                                                                ‘reckless as to whether or not any property would be destroyed or damaged’ if (1) he does'
                                                                                                                                an act which in fact creates an obvious risk that property will be destroyed or damaged
                                                                                                                                and (2) when he does the act he either has not given any thought to the possibility of
                Th -A t,           sameaMta r t0 foresee or appreciate risk as a mentally normal                                there being any such risk or has recognised that there was some risk involved and has
     person. ■The judge had given to t h e ju r y the direction o n the meaning of reckless that j
                                                                                                                           If   none the less gone on to do it. That would be a proper direction to the jury; cases in the
     rtfk vf"- apProvf <?,n. v Partef- The argument for the appellant on the appeal was that                                    Court of Appeal which held otherwise should be regarded as overruled.                                             ,T
     this let in an objective test whereas'the test should be'entirely su b je c tiv e . I t was
                                                                                                                                     W here the charge is under s 1(2) the question of the state of mind of the accused must
    ta ttre s e d b y copious citation from previous judgments in civil and criminal cases where '
                                                                                                                                be approached in stages, corresponding to paras (a) and (&). The jury must be satisfied
    C o u S T r th e C ^ w         ° r rec“ f ssness> had been used by judges in various concern.                               that what the accused did amounted to an offence under s 1(1), either because he actually
                    £f f ™ wn expressed his agreement with the submissions for the appellant "                                  intended to destroy or damage the property or because he was reckless (in the sense'that
    ^     S       e n tt0f th e S.m C° nta!f a n anaIysis o f a number of th e cited cases, mainly in'                     q    I have described) whether it might be destroyed or damaged. Only if they are so satisfied'
    the field o f c iv il law. These cases do not disclose a uniform judicial use o f t h e t e r m s - a nKd M
                                                                                                                                must the jury go on to consider whether the accused also either actually intended’that the
                                                                                                                                destruction or damage of the property should endanger someone’s life or was reckless (in
                                                                                                                                a similar sense) whether a human life might be endangered.
 ' 'S S T “                                           i lie court, however, reached its final conclusion by *                     ■. Turning now to the instant case, the first stage was eliminated by the respondent’s plea'
'. :                                                                       Parliament in replacingthe 186%                      of guilty to the charge under s 1(1).' Furthermore he' himself gave evidence that his
''i f 'h e                             h                                                                                   (j   actual intention was to damage the hotel in order to revenge himself on the proprietor!
 :                                         * « * ^ damaging propmy, in favour of the more                                       As respects the charge under s 1(2) the prosecution did not rely on'an actual intent of the'
                     K— - g          2 ?       1d amage'm Y 'such property"* bdngrecWessas i®                                   r e s p o n d e n t to endanger the lives of the residents but relied on his having been reckless'
:■:           Z-      Pro|^ rty        b? destroyed*, it nevertheless1intended the words m U                                    whether the lives of any of them would be endangered. His act of setting fire to It was' :
    ■ interpreted in precisely the"'same' 'sense.' as;that'in wh.vfc.'A*
                                                                                                                                o n e which the jury were entitled to think created an obvious risk that, th e liv e s o f th e
                                                                                                                                r esid e n ts would be endangered; a n d th e only defence with which your'Lordships’ are"' '
                                                                                                                           g    concerned is that the respondent had made'himself so drunk as to render him oblivions'
                                                               "any such assumption in ati l e t whose declared' '>1§1§I        of that risk. If the only mental state'capable of constituting the necessary mens rea'for. '
                                                               V a s f n h ffA n m c n f                      „j .
                                                                                                                                an offence under s' 1(2) were th a t e x p r e sse d in' the words ‘in t e n d in g b y the destruction or
                                                      <             ,             ™ 'ofthese'’                                  damage'to endanger the life of another*, it would' have been necessary'to""consider
'       w V ~ ~ '7 J            ,7 w*«r*'ls:“ au  by 1971 become a term of legal art with                                       whether the offence was to be classified as one of ‘specific’ intent for the purposes o f the-
             k -T      esotenc meaning than that which it bore in ordinary speech, a                                            r u le of law which this House affirmed and applied in Director a f Public Prosecutions’v.
.m eaning which surely includes not only deciding"' tiTlgnore a risk of harmful t
                                                                                                                           f    Majewski [ 1 976] 2 A ll E R 142, [ 1 977] A C 4 4 3 ; a n d th is i t p la in ly is. But this is not, in'my
  consequences resulting from ones acts that one has recognised as'existing, but also failine
                                                                                                                                view, a relevant inquiry where ‘being reckless as to whether th e life of another would b e
                                                                                                                                thereby endangered’ is an alternative mental state that is capable of c o n s titu tin g the
     '         »        ..°      7T                               w e;ooviG us mac t a e r e was. •                             necessary mens rea of the offence with which he is charged..                                      ■:     i::--. \ : ... -
 tb l r «          atCaR ^        ^         thf Iatttr StaK ° fm ind is neither more nor less 'subjective'                           The speech of Lord E lw y n -J o n es LC in Majewski. with which Lord Simon, Lord
 £ i f        5                   1               n0thin& “ is 8 statement of the obvious; 'mensxea i s f                       K ilb ra n d o n and I agreed, is authority that self-induced intoxication is no defence to a
 S*fc«                      r   e
                                almi It" T Kd WmSelf* theftmehedid Phy&alaa
                            * 5 af us reus ofthe offence; « cannot be the mental state o f some non- ■
                                                                                                                           g    crime in which recklessness is enough to constitute the necessary mens rea (see [1976]'2
 e x is t e n t , foyfk>tneticai p e r so n .       t-                                                                          All ER 142 at 150-151, [1977].AC 443 at 474-475). 'The charge in Majewski was o f
                                                                                                                                assault occasioning actual bodily harm and it was held by the majority o f the House,
                                                                                                                                a p p r o v in g R vV en m [ 1975] 3 A ll E R 7 8 8 a t 7 9 4 , [ 1 9 7 6 ] 1 Q B 4 2 1 at 428, that recklessness
                                                                                                                                in the use of force was sufficient to satisfy the mental element in the offence of assault.
 * ?2 S - f f ™    I T t 1ban^ fuI^conseqoeeces:to foUow^oes'call'for some consideration '!                                     Reducing oneself by drink or drugs to a condition in- which the restraints of reason and
                     o f th e o r f f al7 P « * n t''in d iv id u al would have reacted to a similar 'j                    /j   conscience are cast off was held-to be a reckless course of conduct and an integral part of
situation.- If there w ere nothing' in "the’circumstances ‘that oughrto have''drawn the '■
                                                                                                                                the crime. Lord Elwyn-Jones LC accepted as correctly stating English law the provision
attention o f ani ordinary prudent Individual to'the possibility "of that kind of harm ful'v
c o n s e q u e n c e , t h e a c c u s e ! w o u ld n o t b e desrrih<“H[ a? ‘r*»/4rh»ee* *n                   r \
                                                                                                                                in § 2.08(2) of the American Model P e n a l 'Code:                         ' , ' ..       .
  . . .       •.        •    :» - —        —      pvbbWMty; n or, ir the r isk ot t h e h arm
                                                  tllU iu tu u ic                                                                >: ■ ‘When recklessness establishes an element of the offence, if the actor, due to self-
t      h       e       '     t hat ^ ^ “ ^ P r a d e n t individual on due consideration of                                          induced intoxication, is unaware of a risk of which he would have been aware had
                                                    k aS “ S W        could the accused be /                          ■    .         he been sober, such unawareness is immaterial.’                      ..
aescrtoea as reckless m its ordinary sense if, having considered the risf'fie'derided m
                                                                                                                                   So, in the instant case, the fact that the respondent was unaware of the risk of
ignore it. (In this connection the gravity of the possible harmful consequences w
                                                                                                                                endangering the lives of residents in the hotel owing to his self-induced intoxication
an im portant factor. sTo endanger life most be one of the’most grave)' So to this
                                                                                                                                would be no defence if that risk would have been obvious to him had he been sober.
SZ Z                                                                                 »     S p e d M h tc                          My Lords, the Court of Appeal in the instant case regarded the case as turning on
 ppeal in Stephenson and Briggs, o f foreseeing that a particular kind of harm mia
                                                                                                                                whether the offence under s 1(2) was one o f ‘specific’ intent or ‘basic’ intent. Following
happen and yet going on to take the- risk of it, it involves a test that would be describ
                                                                                                                                a recent decision of the Court of Appeal by which it was bound, R v Orpin [1980] 2 All
                                                                                                                    •j • '■M l Cu                                      n v u a iu w e ii ^ o r u c u in u n a -L /a v re sj

           intent in c o n tr a st ftnhe o ffe n d , ^      ^           j j f c c e u n d e r s ! (2) w a s one of .                                      ‘m h ®ny statutory definition of a crime “malice” must be taken: not in. the old
           right if the o n ly m m t e l f n f , f ” * ^ W* T W3S o f b a s k in « n t . T h is w ,                                                  vagiHsense of “wickedness” in general, but as requiring either (i)an actual intention
           e n d a n g e r the life 0 f another For*° f “ n s n t u t “ | th e o ffe n c e were an actual intention t                      a         to do the particular kind of harm that in fact was done, or (ii) recklessness as to
           offences of specific ind ha«v •* ,         — reasons I have given, however, classification'll                                             whether, such harm should occur or not (i.e. the accused has foreseen, that the
           h a r m fu l consequence will r i u f r f “ 1ITeIe! a n t w h e r e ^ “ 8 rec k less whethera particula.                              . particular kind of harm might be done, and yet has gone on to take the risk of it).
             . My Lords, the                                       “ ,sasuffidf nt alternative mens rea.                                             It is neither limited to, nor does it indeed require, any: ill-will towards the person
          view of the Court o f AddmI a                 .g ,up wa?,not a m ®del of clarity. Contrary to the                                          injured.’ ^;                      ■ - 'j    '.        • ."      ■ ■■      .: ■ ■.     ;
          respondent was reckle^ whether^b/l® “ f                            * ^ " 7 that “ decidin« whether                               b   Byrne J’s comment was laconic and unqualified: ‘We think that this is an accurate
          the fact that, became o f hit Hnmt                ^              ,n ts ,n th e hotel wo»W be endanger* ""
         irrelevant;; but there were            " nkenness* he ^ailed to give any thought to that risk w                                       statement of the law . . . In our. opinion, the word “maliciously” in a statutory crime
         Appeal which your L o r^h.vl              CntIclsm* ° f th e summing up made by the Court                                             postulates foresight of consequence.’ My Lords, my noble and learned friend Lord
                                                                                                                                               Diplock somewhat dismissively describes Professor Kenny as having been ‘engaged in
         makes no practical difference r l i                                      been invited to consider, since
                                                                                                                                               defining for. the benefit of students the meaning of “malice” as a term of art in criminal
         Since it. is not worth while sam d ^ J &P                    M              r the aPP®aIis all°wed or nc
         the appeal                   , : sPendlng time on going into these criticisms, 1 would dismi                                          law’, adding: .. ..",               .. •                     .    .■             .....
                                                                                                                                           c           ■      ■■     ^               '
                                                                                                                                                    . ■ ‘To do so he used ordinary English words in their popular meaning, "Among the
     ' offence'wnder s                                             ^                 * uesti? ns: <a> if the c^ r g e of an                          words he used was “recklessness”, the noun derived from the adjective “reckless”, of
        d e fe n d a n t o n ly w it h 'imendinv hv rh a ma? C I 971 is amed so as 10 charge the                                                     which the popular or dictionary meaning is “careless, regardless, or heedless, of the
        the life o f another*, evidence of r f i f ? trU? - ° n'0r            86 [° f the p r o p e n y ] to e n d a n g e r                         possible harmful consequences of one’s acts”. It presupposes that, if thought were
        (b)if the charge is, orIncludes a if!              in t o x ic a tio n can be relevant to his defence;                                       given to the matter by the doer before the act was done, if would have been apparent
    ..' a n o th e r w o u ld th e r e h v fv>   ’    r efer e n c e t o h is b e in g reck less as to w h e th e r t h e life o f         ^      . to him 'that there was a "real risk of its''having the relevant 'harmful consequences'
        relevant.                 ^       be “ Angered*, evidence .of                 s e lf-in d u c e d in to x ic a tio n is not                  , . . This parenthetical restriction" on the natural meaning of recklessness was
                                                                                                                                                     necessary-to an explanation of the meaning of the adverb “maliciously" when used
                                                                                                                                                     as a term of art in the'description of an offence under the Malicious Damage''Act
       LO RD E D M U N D *na vtfs                                 ,    t
                                                                                                                                                 . . 1 8 6 1 (which was the matter in point in R v Cunningham); but it was not directed'® .
    'V' appeal most be'''tJBm'i«,.j' - r ’ - * ’ v V ’ ^ respectfully poncur in holding that
                                                                                           that this                                            . >.and consequently has no bearing on the meaning of the adjective “reckless” ins 1 of
     ■.. should Be' answered' {»' ' m-.'?eve,t!,efess consider thar one of the "certified quesi
                                                                                          questions                                        e       ; the Criminal Damage Act 1971.’. (Emphasis added.,)               • .■ ; .-
       . L o rd s h ip s :" 'A n d 'I^ f jc v e 'r W A ^ ''^ 1? 7 favoured by a.majority of’.yqaQj
                                                                                                is of                                       I have to say that I am in respectful, but profound, disagreement. The law in action
                                                                             m m " *“                re“                                    compiles its own dictionary. In time, what was originally the common coinage of speech
                                                                                                                                            acquires a different value in the pocket of the lawyer than when in the layman’s purse.
                                  ,hkh                                                                                                      Professor Kenny used lawyers’ words in a lawyers’ sense to express his distillation of ah
                                                                                                                                            important part of the established law relating to mens rea, and he did so in a manner
                ‘(i) A person who withnnr i3„,f i '           .                                       t                                   f accurate not only in respect, of the law as it stood in 1902 but also as it has.been applied
      ■■Kf?' belonging t o a n e ih e r inrpnrf- <- ,4 excuse d e str o y s or damages any' property                                        in countless cases ever since, both in the United Kingdom and in other countries where
             reckless as to whether an* «         0       or d a m a g e a n y such property or being                                       the common law prevails: see, for example, in Western Australia, Lederer v Hitchins
                     of an Offenee. any SU(* . ProPerty wo«W b e d e s tr o y e d or damaged shall ix                                       [1961] WAR 99, and, in the United States of America, Jethro Brown s General Principles
                                                                                                                                            of Criminal Law (2nd Edn, i960, p 115). And it is well known that the' 1971 Act was in
            w h e th e r M ongifle ^ h i m ^ I f lawful excuse destroys or damages any property,
                                                                                                                                            the main the work of the Law Commission, who defined recklessness by saying: ''"" '. ‘
     'v''-^property.’o r" W fJ .'Rcktess                  1       “ tendinS t0 destroy w damage any g
                                                    '■J « h e r any'property would be'destroyed or                                        ^    . ... ' ‘A person, is reckless if, (a) knowing that there is a risk that an event may result
            another                                                                                  ..                                                from, his conduct, or that a circumstances may exist, he takes that ■risk, 'and (b) it. is
                                                                                                                                                ...... unreasonable for him to take it, having regard to the degree and nature o f the risk
;                                                                          thC Iife ° fan0ther W°B,8d bC                                          ' which he knows to be present.’            -       "".                 ''- ' '     :
     J-. • % f ir e s M be” c ^ r g e r a7 a er      t r * rthiS SeC ti° n    by destroying ^ damaging,                           ^        , (See Working Paper no 31, Codification of the Criminal Law: General Principles: The
                                                                                                                                             Mental Element in Crime (16th June 1970).)                .            . . .          . .. .
    constitutes'Veckfessne^:t,ln n4 lhere ^ T t° mmeTS of Part» h r importance, (i) What                                                        It was surely with this contemporaneous definition and the much respected decision
    commonly (and under&tandahf                a ^ ? (2) w f l a t >s th e mens rea of the offence                                           of R v Cunningham in mind that the draftsman proceeded to his task.of drafting the 1971
    questions forthwith..' • M abW knoTO « aggravated arson’ in s 1(2)©?;. I turn to these                                                   Act.                                                ..     .                   '
                                                                                                                                                It has therefore to be said that, unlike negligence, which has to be judged objectively,
    (.1) Recklessness                                                            ~                                                •        . recklessness involves foresight of consequences, combined with an objective judgment
                                                                                                                                          ! of the reasonableness of the risk taken. And recklessness in vacuo is an incomprehensible
 the word W ic io u s l'y ^ W h T * 1^ 5811655 ^   increasingly displaced in statutory crimes                                                notion. St must relate to foresight of risk of the particular kind relevant to the charge
    R v Cunningham [1957} a AIIrp       qUently g,ven rise t0 difficulty in interpretation. In                                        -      preferred, which, for the purpose of s 1 ( 2 ) , is the risk of endangering life and nothing
    of Criminal Appeal J m l h h        “ V l b t 5J ] 2 .Q B 396 at 399 B ym ejin the Court                                                 other than that.                                             .       .                  ... ,
.Kennys Outline o f C r im in a l I             a    ? W ln g Passa8e which has appeared in                                                   . So, if a defendant says of a particular risk, ‘It never crossed my mind’, a jury could not
         ....       .wwwiml Law from its first edition in 1902 onwards: .
                                                                                                                                             on those words alone properly convict him of recklessness simply because they considered
                                                 •y,a,,u *-aw nepons                       11981 j 1 All E f J                                 R v Caldwell (Lord Edmund-Davies)
                                                                                                                       HL                                                                                                           971

       that the risk ought to have crossed his mind, d f c g h 'h is words miVhr wpII 1 *
                                                                                                                    to a houllPwaUer 1 J, giving the judgment of the Court of Appeal, Criminal Division,
       S s           "ifsiiss ce- Bu/ * « ■ * « * - 3 K               vfi ”    e   s                             g, said:                                                                -'   '■ --'"¥ «=
                                                                                                                       ’.      ■. ■ ‘. ... we are of die opinion in this .case that the unlawful act. relied on by-the
                                                                                                                               learned judge of damaging the building of another by fire involved a basic intent ■
       S       B       g       g      g       ?       S       S       S        J           e       B                           ,.'. It would have been different in our view if the intent had involved the question
    im p o m n tbwuere,
                 w h e ? erecklessness
                          °rld k k S T " ?is an elementdefendant’s state chareed
                                                                         of ™ "d and
                                                                                 « therefor                             .... of danger to the life of others, as' in .subsection '{2} o f section .1 of the Criminal
     /npoirant                                          in the offence                                                  ... Damage Act 1971, because that would not Be inherent in the actus reus if there was
    Criminal justice ^ c t 1967 has laid down that:                  . ■                                         "             an intention to endanger the life of another or recklessness as to whether the life of
                                                                                                                               another would be endangered or not. As I have already stated, in oar view this was
            W * S 1 ^ " l £ “ E L n , d ? e ™ in in 8 » h “ h “ » P « ™   l» ! c                                          .... a crime of basic in ten t, . . and therefore the defence of drunkenness does not.avail
                                                                                                                         .... at all: see D.P.P. v. Majewski ([1976] 2 All ER 142,[1977] AC443J ’ , .... ,
                                                                                                                   And in R v Stephenson [1979] 2 All ER 1198 at 1204, [1979] QB 695 at 704, where the
                                                                                                                 C charge was laid under s i(i), Geoffrey Lane LJ' said:                    " . - r vy-v                                  -
                                                                                                                                  '.‘There is no doubt that the subjective-definition,of..“recklessness” does produce
                                                                                                                                difficulties. One ofthem , which is particularly likely to occur in practice, is the.case
                                                                                                                                of the person who.by self-induced intoxication by. drinks or drags deprives Himself '
                                                      wV * ? E K 3 S .fr& .                                                     of the ability to foresee the risks involved'in. his actions. ■ Assuming, that by reason
                                                                                                                     . -4" of his intoxication he. is not proved to .have foreseen the relevant risk, can he be said'
   in rh J^ ^ ^                                      view expressed by the learned recorder fierse
                                                                                                                        . { to, have been “reckless”?.. Plainly not,,unjess cases, o f self-induced intoxication are.aa ■
   at 608, she directed the jury at one stage in these terms:                          1       J       6C                     .exception..to the. general rule.. ..In qur Ju’d gment.the .decision of the House of Lords ' •’ ■;
                                                                                                                                in Director, of Public Prosecutions %'MajewM makes it clear that they are such an ' \
                                                                                                                            , ."exception, ./Evidence pf self-iiiducecJ mtpxfcarion such as to'negative mens rea. is V ■ '
                                                                                   S n° y°UAtaT :                      . . . , defence to' a cfiarge which required proof o f a “specific intent”,'but not to a charge ' :
                                                                                                                               of any other crime.' The'Criminal’Damage Act .1971, s' .1,(1)' involves’no specific
                                                                                                                        . intent:'see R. v p ’Driscott. , Accordingly, it is no'defence under the 1971 Act for a
                                                                                                                              . person to'say. that he was deprived by .self-induced.intoxication of .the ability to '
                                                                                                                             ,’foresee or appreciate an. obvious risk.’
                                                                                                                      That Geoffrey Lane LJ was referring’in his final sentence only to s 1(1) of the Act is tnadfe                       ;
           “ » „ r wi,h-           to,h coo” ° “                          5                                           clear by its context, and in R v Orpin [1980] 2 All ER 321at 32j-3iz4, [f 980] 1 WLR io'56
                                                                                                                 f    at 1054 Eveleigh LJ said:                            •.■nw.y-'.i::, ; -j.
 (2)       Tte ‘mens rea’ o f aggravated arson
                                                                                                                             , ‘The mental element, intention or recklessness, in the second, part of sub-s {2) is
 .the Criminal Damage Act' ^1071
                             re sp o n d ek»
                                 ’ Wirlr   n t with ‘Arson
                                                     r    *•contrary
                                                             .   ^ “to xSection 1 (2 ) and Crf nf
                                                                         u iu n I(2jana    (3)01.                             an aggravating circumstance which adds to the gravity of the actus reus which is
• terms:     -                          the particulars of the offence were in the following                         s r-: defined in the first part of that subsection.;. Although the proof of that additional
                                                                                                                    t:'-. ■element ill; often involve evidence as to possible or actual danger to life, the
       d a X S S W fiWdl        ? e 2f d day ° f December *978 without lawful excuse yon                         _ \ . additional aggravating factor ,ties in the mind. :. It js die mental attitude to the
              g     y fire a window frame and curtains kt the Hydro           ; ■h&ir%                                     ■          -.consequences, of an actus reus.. It goes beyond the actus reus itself, and, is therefore
       m e i n " im endittS ^ damage the said property or being reckless as' to whether fnv                                , to- be treated as a specific intent which, has to ^.established as an ingredient of the
       Me of 3 h 7 W° t            f f Sed Und intendin8 % * e said damage to endanger the                                    offence,. That being so, evidence of intoxication is relevant as one of those matters
                                                                                                                    x to be taken into consideration in determining whether or not the necessary mental ' -
       5 Ss?ssksst ”w“ er,he“ °f                                                               •*- u                         element existed. There is nothingjnconsistent in. treating an offence under sub-s
                                                                                                                 fl \ (i)as a crime of basic intent and an offence, under sub-s (2) as one of specific intent.
                                                                                                                             It is only the. second part of sub-s {2) which introduces a specific intent. The same
                                                                                                                    •; ; - words are used to denote the attitude of mind, but in the one case there is an act
property and an offence against theDerean 6                llaS/ “ [ures| oth ofail offence against                  , -..; stipulated corresponding to the mental state and manifesting its existence, whilst in
                                                                                                                             the other there is no such act.’. (Emphasis added.), .-h :a : :                              -
                                                                                                                     But the trial judge here unfortunately'failed to'differentiate between the different’
                                                                                                                 / types of arson embraced by s i of the 1971 Act by directing the jury without qualification
                                                                                                                   that ‘arson is an offence of basic intent*.' This led'her, !in purported pursuance of
f* 975 ] 3 'All ER 788 at 70J rio l« ? n R 36’ 441’ 442®,‘ AsJames LJ                      in R v Ferna            Majewski, to conclude that— ' '                      '                   ' ‘            ‘
S 's-PP'":s® «;d   rf t t 1
               55, where the charge was:one of manslaughter caused by setting "fire :
                                                                                                                                      :-          -       -’ - '                     -v V- .’/ '   . ' '■/ '   ■   v : ■; : '
                                                                                                                               ‘it is no defence for the accused, by reason of self-induced intoxication, to say that
                                                                                                                            -he-was senseless and so had neither “intent” nor “recklessness* with regard to what
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ,
      »7Z                                             AH England Law Reports                   [1981] 1 AH ER/                            HL          .       ’        R v Caldwell (Lord Edmund-Davies)                           973

             '                ' :M °ne bas% sirnPle act of A g fire to the curtains, with a view to                                      unable t^ ^ n c u r that your Lordships’ decision should now become the law of the land.
                                                is relied on for the commission of the .offence . . . if
            .... g n it in g t h e b u ild in g , is w h a t
                                                                                                                                     g For, as Eveleigh Lj said in R v Orpin [198a] 2 All ER 321 at 324, [1980] 1 WLR 1050 at
         / '-a Pf rf on ‘ i :        WItJl intent t£>set fire to something, that is a positive, basic act ‘                              1054:                    .;
                   t has w tth h‘m ;tbe equipment to. do it, he cannot then be allowed to say '
              Well, yes, I meant to set fire to that, but "that’s all.”’                 -             *;|gj||i                                        there is nothing inconsistent in treating intoxication as irrelevant when
                                                                                                                             tiSlt              considering the liability of a person who has willed himself to do that which the law
        In" my judgment, the Court of "Appeal, Criminal Division, was right in holding that                                                     forbids (for example, to do something which wounds another), and yet co make it
     A m direction c o n ta m e d tw o'errors.; "In "the" first place, 'despite her 'earlier,' c L e l                                          relevant when a further mental state is postulated as an aggravating circumstance
                                                                                                                                     b          making the offence even more serious.’.        c .-' ■- . - v.    ...           >.%-/-
                          % r 6 SUbjeCtlt T T Z ° fth e ^cKIessness’ test, the "recorder"inured £
        . i t -<rcj - SS" eSSLSta? IS                  tiley c o n s id e r ed that it was *. .va fair likelihood tha'iP                  By way of a postscript I would add that the majority view demonstrates yet again the
     . . . if the wind yras in the right direction, perhaps, to" fen the flames rather than peter ^                                    folly of totally ignoring the recommendations of the Butler Committee (Report on
     them out m. might have got a' g o o d h o ld of the furniture "in the room                              T hat w S :               Mentally Abnormal Offenders (Cmnd 6244 (*975)). paras 18, 53-58)..
     u n d o u b t e d ly ^ direction that th e ‘recklessness’ o f the accused's action was. to be judged :                               My Lords, I would dismiss the appeal.     /          "      ;
     o b je c tiv e ly . And the s e c o n d error lay.in directing the jury without qualification that (aY^
                                                                                                                                     C               '          '      /                                                     r„.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .
     S / w nh“ ' n 0^             Cf 0^          1V njent»and’ consequentfy> that (b) since Majewski it matters"                       LO R D K E IT H OF KINKEL. My Lords, J am in entire agreement with the reasoning
                                                                                                                                       contained in the speech of m y noble and learned friend Lord Diplock, which I have had
     p o|ib ili|th a l i i,i d m i c t J l y L h S                                       “                                ,he          the benefit of reading in draft. I would answer the certified questions In the manner
                                                                                                                                       which he proposes, and dismiss the appeal.

                                         S*at rff-»ndaced intoxication is no defence"ttf a’''crimein whicK                           (j LO RD ROSKILL. My Lords, I had prepared an opinion of my own in this appeal but
                                                                                                                                         h a v in g h a d th e advantage of reading in draft the speech of my noble, and learned friend.
                 ™           ns . r r i                                              >■- ■ * » »“ - 4
                                                                                                                                         Lord Qi.pl0cis.TaiB satisfied that no useful purpose would be served by delivering that
                                                                                                                                         speech. 1 agree in every respect with what my noble and learned friend has sad in his
                                                                                                                                         speech and with his proposed answers to' the questions certified. 'For the reasons he gives
                                                                                                                                         1 agree that this appeal should be dismissed.                                     \    ^
                                                                                                                                     e      '         :-
                                                                                                                                         Appeal dismissed.

                                                                                                                                         Solicitors: R E T Birch (for the Crown); Gordon & James Morton, (for the. respondent). V'1:;

                                                                                                                                          ....            -                                      - Mary Rose Plummer 'Barrister.


' , . ' 4; - ^ - : , ^ . . /J                 a n a recKiessnessas an ek
  specific,"tent was, I am convinced, never within "Ms contemplation.’-                                  .......................
 the co^ i c Z T n X T T i t                        <* A$ m T ”                   * * in qaashtog '
                      A        I(?x )         f bsntutlng a ,findi% of guilty "of arson'contriry to
 s i(i) a n d (3) o f th e 1971 A c t. It follows, theM ore,tk.tl-agree with' leamed'co&n'sel
 the respondent that the certified point of la w s h o u ld be answ eredV the"following S
 m a n n e r : *Yes, evidence of s e lf-in d u c e d i n t o x i c a t i o n 's ^



       v-        -- .           ... ".   u ia 5 v . « t i ' i y / 1 , - ’       j   .?             !:r
 -M yLords; It was "recently predicted that ‘There can hardly be any doubt that all crimes
of reckfassness except « M r d e r % i l l ; , H 0 w be held tft-'bfccL es-'tf b a s i c intent within ■
Majewsfa (see Gfanville'•'Williams, Textbodk of Criminaf 'Law ^ 9 7 8 , p '                  431)1."'That'""
prop e c y h a s b e e n promptly fu lfille d - by:the- m a j o r it y o f y o m Lordships, for, -with the ■
progressive displacement of ‘m a lic io u s ly ’ by Intentionally or-redsl^Iyf3|n%ahitpry

S n « J rT ,r^ irc ^ rv                  -Srave me come charged, if..eeddessn
constitute 10 mens,na the fact that it was committed'in drink can afford ik
jIS a, vvperry
             u ,Inrarr
                 „ „ g f«ti e
                            m o d „ce w e             J- __ f.         *            ..   -   -v:         =. \7:       i
M ajew* m y personal conviction that, on grounds of public policy, a p lea o f d r u n
law           S '* m u d          lntent and 50 exercise unlimited sway 'in the c r im ii
law (see [.,976] 2 All ER ,42 at ,68-170, [,977 ]AC 443 * 495 - 497 ). l a m nevertheless'
                                                                                                                           followingljjl'its of law of general public importance were involved in its decision: (1)
                                             R v L aw reU e                                                              g was mens rea involved in the offence of driving recklessly; (2) if yes, what was the mental
  HOUSE OF LORDS                                                                                                           element required; and (3) was the following a proper direction on a charge of driving
  LORD HAILSHAM OF ST MARYLEBONE LC, LORD DIPLOCK, LORD FRASER OF TULLYBELTON,                                             recklessly: ‘A driver is guilty of driving recklessly if he deliberately disregards the
  ROSKILL AND LORD BRIDGE OF HARWICH                                                                                       obligation to drive with due care and attention or is indifferent whether or not he does
  5th, 9th FEBRUARY, 19th MARCH 1981                                        ' :                                            so and thereby creates a risk of an accident which a driver driving with due care and
                                                                                                                           attention would not create’? On 24th July the House of Lords gave the Crown leave to
 Road traffic - Reckless driving - Causing death by reckless driving - Reckless - Mens rea •                         Ij    appeal The facts are set out in the opinion of Lord Hailsham LC.
 Mental element required - Proper direction to be given tojury - Road Traffic Act 1972, ss i , f t
 (as substituted by the Criminal Law Act 1 9 7 7 , 5 j o { 1)).                                                            D H Petjry-Davey for the Crown.
                                                                                           ■r,jLjlv-                       A Arlidge for the respondent.
                                                        '                                                s,
 The actus reus of the offence of driving recklessly, contrary to ss 1 and 2“ of the 1972 Act";
 is not m e r e l y driving without due care and attention but driving in a manner that creates                             Their Lordships took time for consideration.
 an obvious and serious risk of causing physical injury to any other road user or substantial                        C
 damage to property. The mens rea of the offence is driving in such a manner wit*                                           19th March, The following opinions were delivered.
 g i v j n g a n y t h o u g h t to the risk or, having recognised that it exists, nevertheless ta k in g w
 n s k . It is for the jury to decide whether the risk created by the accused’s driving was'*                              L O RD HAILSHAM OF ST MARYLEBONE LC. My Lords, the question in this
 b o t h - e t m o u s and s e r io u s , the standard being that of the ordinary prudent motorist as;
                                                                                                                           appeal is whether the conviction on 18th March 1980 of the respondent for causing death
 represented by themselves (see p 977 j to p 978 a and p 982 a t o e and / to p 983 g, p o s t i l                         by reckless driving should be restored. In my opinion it should not, both on the grounds
     R v Caldwell p 961, ante, applied, .                                                                            (j    on which it was quashed by the Court of Appeal, and on the more general ground about
     R v Murphy (William) [ 1 9 8 0 ] 2 All ER 3 2 5 overruled.            .                 . . .                         to be formulated by my noble and learned friend Lord Diplock, with whose conclusions
     Allan v Patterson 1 9 8 0 S L T 7 7 a p p ro v e d .      *                         -                                 and reasoning I wish to be wholly and unequivocally associated. If I proceed with a few
     Observations pn the need for brevity in summing up to a jury and in the conduct o f ?                                 observations of my own about the course of the proceedings, it is because 1 wish to draw
Crown Court trials generally (see p 975 / to j, p 977 e to h, p 979 b c and p 983 d to g, post).                           some lessons from them regarding the general conduct of trials on indictment, and not
                                                                                                                           because I wish to repeat in other words what my noble and learned friend is about to say.
                                                                                                          ■ ‘3#%
N otes             '' '                                                                                          ~   g        My Lords, it is notorious that there has grown up a serious backlog of cases for trial in
For causing death by reckless driving and for reckless driving, see 33 H a ls b u r y ’s Laws                              the Crown Court, and this is particularly the case in the South East and London. This
{3rd Edn) 622-623, paras 1047-1048.                                                                         .v ;           backlog has been a source of particular anxiety to me in both my terms of office, as I
     For the Road Traffic Act 1972, ss 1, 2 (as substituted by the Criminal Law Act 1977,                                  know it is currently to the present Lord Chief Justice. The causes of it are complex, and
s 5 0(1)), s e e 4 7 H a ls b u r y s S ta tu te s (3 rd E d n ) 1221.                                                     the remedies are therefore not particularly simple. But, so long as it persists, the whole
                                                                                                                           system of trial by jury, and the regard in which it is rightly held, are adversely affected.
Cases referred to in opinions                                                                                        f        My Lords, it is a truism to say that justice delayed is justice denied. But it is not merely
Allan v Patterson 1980 SLT 77, [1980] R T R 97.                                                                            the anxiety and uncertainty in the life of the accused, whether on bail or remand, which
R v Caldwell p 961, ante, HL.                                                                                              are affected. Where there is delay the whole quality of justice deteriorates. Our system
R v Evans [ 1962] 3 All ER 1086, [ 1963] 1 QB 4 1 2, [ 1962] 3 W L R 1 45 7 , 127 JP 4 9 , 61 L GR                         depends on the recollection of witnesses, conveyed to a jury by oral testimony. As the
   32, 47 Cr A p p R 62, CCA, 45 Digest (R epl) 87, 298.                                                                   months pass, this recollection necessarily dims, and juries who are correctly directed not
R v Murphy (William) [1980] 2 All ER 325, [1980] QB 434. [1980] 2 WLR 743, [1980]                                          to convict unless they are assured of the reliability of the evidence for the prosecution
  RTR 145, CA. ...... .                                                                                              g     necessarily tend to acquit as this becomes less precise, and sometimes less reliable. This
R v Sheppard [ 1980] 3 All ER 899, [ 1980] 3 WLR 960, HL.                                                                  may also affect defence witnesses on the opposite side. In the instant case, an accident
R ¥ Stephenson [ 1 9 7 9 ] 2 All ER 1198, [1979] QB 695, [ 1 979] 3 WLR 193, 143 JP 592, 69                                took place unexpectedly in a matter of seconds. The evidence at the trial included the
  Cr App R 213, CA, Digest (C orn V o l E) 161, 12,692a.                                                                   testimony of witnesses, present on the occasion, none of whom could have been expecting
                                                                                                                           a moment before it occurred that they were to be confronted with a desperate tragedy,
A ppeal                              :                                                                                     to the sequence of events in which in 11 months’ time they would be expected to testify
On 18th March 1980 the respondent, Stephen Richard Lawrence, was convicted at the                                    h     on oath.
Crown Court at Ipswich before Mr Michael W e is m a n , sitting as a deputy circuit judge,                                    Part of the delay in bringing cases to trial is due to the increase in the volume of
and a jury of causing death by reckless driving, contrary to s 1 of the Road Traffic Act                                   indictable crime brought to the Crown Court. But part also is due to the increasing
1972, as substituted by s 5 0 (1 ) of the Criminal Law Act 1977. He was sentenced to six                                   prolixity in the conduct of cases when they actually come to be heard. It cannot be too
months imprisonment and disqualified for holding a driving licence for three years. He                                     often stressed that verbose justice is not necessarily good justice. There is virtue, both
appealed to the Court of Appeal, C r im in a l Division (Watkins Lj, B o re h a m and                                      from the point of view of the prosecution and from the point of view of the defence, in
Hodgson Jj) which allowed his appeal on 20th May 1980 and quashed his conviction. •                                  /     incisiveness, decisiveness and conciseness, not only in addressing juries but in the general
On 23rd May the court refused an application by the Crown for leave to appeal to the                                       conduct of a case, the examination and cross-examination of witnesses, the submission of
House of Lords but certified, under s 33(2) of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968, that the                                      legal argument, and in summing up. A long trial is not necessarily a better one if a
                                                                                                                           shorter one would have sufficed. It is these considerations which lead me to analyse the
                                                                                                                           course of events in the present appeal, and not any desire to expand on or to qualify the
a Sections 1 and 2 are set out at p 981 b c, post                                                                          reasoning of my noble and learned friend.
     The course of events was as follows. On u ^ M a r c h 1980 in the Crown Court at                                 parked o n J B o p p o s it e side of the road to the off-licence. Mr Crowther stayed in the
  Ipswich the respondent (defendant) in these procWJngs was arraigned on an indictment                                van. Mrs cMKvther crossed the road and entered the off-licence. When she came out, she
  of great simplicity, it read as follows:                                         .                             a    stopped at the kerb. Her husband saw her blow him a kiss, and that was the last time he
            ‘Stephen Richard Lawrence is charged as follows:—                               .                         saw his wife alive. In crossing the road to return to the van there was a collision between
        ‘Statement of Offence:—                                                           •! >                        herself and the second of two motor cyclists. The cycle involved in the collision was
         . -'Causing death by reckless driving, contrary to section 1 of the Road Traffic 'Act                        driven by the respondent. Mrs Crowther was killed instantaneously. Her body was
         1972.          '                                                ’                                            carried 45 yards on the front of the cycle before the cycle stopped.
        'Particulars of Offence:—                                                                                         At the trial one solitary dispute of primary fact emerged. This was the speed at which
           ‘Stephen richamd Lawrence, on the 13th day of April 1979 at Lowestoft in the                               the cycle was travelling. The prosecution led evidence intended to show that the cycle
        County of Suffolk, caused the death of Yvonne Letittia C r o w t h e r , by driving a                        ■was travelling at a grossly excessive speed. Apart from the measurements on the road,
        m o t o r vehicle on a road, namely, Victoria Road, recklessly.’                                              there were witnesses of the accident, forensic evidence that the speedometer was jammed
                                                                                                                      at 77 m p h and as to the implications of this, and police evidence regarding the account
   I pause at this stage only to point out that, o w i n g i t o the d e la y s w h i c h have mounted up             of the accident by the accused.
   in the South East and London, this simple case ha; taken a whole year less one month to                       c        By contrast, the accused gave evidence and called witnesses who testified that the true
   come on for trial. That it took this length of delay to bring it on fo r trial is, of course, no                   speed only was 30 to 40 mph, technically illegal, since the area was built up, p o ssib ly
   criticism of the judge, counsel or solicitors in the present case. It is the cumulative result                     careless, but most improbably reckless.
  of the length and number of other cases with which your Lordships have not been                                         Given the nature of the case, one would hardly think that the case presented much
  concerned. . : .i                                                                                                  difficulty fora jury to try or for the judge to sum up in a manner calculated to lead them
    r The trial pursued its course during 13th (Thursday), 14th (Friday)and 17th(Monday) ‘                            to a just and safe conclusion. If they were satisfied with the prosecution evidence to the
  March 1980. The learned judge ..commenced his summing up onTuesday, 18th                                       ^   extent required by the burden of proof in criminal cases they could hardly fail to
  M a rc h . After this summing up and-an interchange b e t w e e n the two counsel and the                          convict. If they thought the defence evidence raised a reasonable doubt they could
  judge the j u r y retired at 11,28 am. They r etu r n e d at 2.15 pm after deliberating for 2                       hardly fail to acquit. In the event they convicted by a majority, and their verdict was set
  h o u r s a n d 47 minutes, when they were given i majority verdict direction. At 2.32 pm                          aside as unsafe and unsatisfactory on the ground that the two directions on recklessness
  the jury delivered a note to the -learned judge requesting further directions on the                               were so unclear. Neither the result, nor the delay in bringing the matter to trial, nor the
  meaning of driving recklessly’. ■ There was a further interchange between judge and                                course of the proceedings ought to afford any of us who are concerned in the
  counsel i n the absence of the jury. At 3.15 pm the jury were summoned back and given                          e   administration of justice in any capacity much cause for satisfaction.
  a further direction. At 3.43 pm the jury convicted the respondent by a verdict of eleven                                It has been said before, but obviously requires to be said again. The purpose of a
  to one, and after .the usual procedure the learned judge sentenced the respondent to six                           direction to a jury is not best achieved by a disquisition on jurisprudence or philosophy
  months i n prison and three years' disqualification.          ......          - .         , . :                    or a universally applicable circular tour round the area of law affected by the case. The
: i! On 2 o t h ,M a y 1980 the whole trial aborted, because the Court of Appeal quashed the                         search for universally applicable definitions is often productive of more obscurity than
  conviction.on.the grounds that .both directions left 'so much unclear as to render the                             light. A direction is seldom improved and may be considerably damaged by copious
 jury’s verdict unsafe and unsatisfactory'. So other cases in the Crown Court at Ipswich                         f   recitations from the total content of a judge’s notebook. A direction to a jury should be
  were delayed by the judge, time consumed to no purpose during the better part of a                                 custom-built to make the jury understand their task in relation to a particular case. Of
  week. But that has not been the end of the matter. At the request of the prosecution the                           course it must include references to the burden of proof and the respective roles of jury
 Court of Appeal certified the three q u e s tio n s as o f ‘general public importance’:                             and judge. But it should also include a succinct but accurate summary of the issues of
          'i- Is mens rea involved in the offence of driving recklessly? 2. If yes, what is the                       fact as to which a decision is required, a correct but concise summary of the evidence and
                               required? 3. Is the following on a charge of driving recklessly a
    . m e n t a l e le r p e n t
                                                                                                                     arguments on both sides, and a correct statement of the inferences which the jury are
       Proper direaion:’“A driver is guilty of driving recklessly if he deliberately disregards                  „   entitled to draw from their particular conclusions about the primary facts. In the present
 ‘ ^the obligation to drive with due care and attention or is indifferent as to whether or                            instance there was only one issue of primary fact, the speed at which the cycle was
      not he does's© and thereby'creates a risk of an accident which a driver driving with                            travelling, and I doubt whether a direction could have been faulted if the jury had simply
 • - due care and' attention would hot create”?’                 '        ' ’        ' '                             been told that if they were satisfied that the prosecution had proved that the accused had
  ’’ o*.v:                 s ;!>. ,L>         -xt t-i . v , -i: ■            '                                       been travelling at a grossly excessive speed they were entitled to infer that he had been
These three questions form, the substance of the appeal. In certifying them the Court of                             driving recklessly and as a result had caused Mrs C r o w t h e r ’s death, that if so they should
Appeal refused leave to appeal. .This was given subsequently by the Appeal Committee                             ^   convict, and that if they were not so satisfied they should acquit. As it is, 1 feel sure that
of your L o r d s h ip s ’ House, possibly because the question o f ‘r ec k le s sn e s s ’ in criminal cases         the C o u r t of Appeal were correct in their belief that the jury may well have been so
was already before your Lordships in. another context in R v Caldwell p 961, ante, in                                 bemused with the effect of the summing up that their verdict was unsafe and
which judgment has just been delivered.                                                                               unsatisfactory, and that, if only for this reason, the appeal must fail. The verdict cannot
    1 mention these facts because, altogether apart from the merits of the appeal, with                               be restored. ■
which my noble and learned friend Lord Diplock intends to deal, 1think there are lessons                                ■      There is, however, a second reason why, in my judgment, the appeal by the
to b e learned from these proceedings which ought urgently to be studied since they are j                        j    prosecution must fail. Of the three questions of law certified by the Court of Appeal, I
directly relevant to the serious delays to which I have now drawn attention. "                              .'        have no doubt that all three must be answered in the sense proposed by my noble and
    The facts of the case can be stated in stark simplicity.. On 13th April 1979 at                                   learned friend Lord Diplock. Since it follows from this that the third of these questions
approximately 8.30 pm, a husband and wife, Mr and Mrs Crowther, decided to drive                                      is answered in the negative, the learned judge’s direction which broadly followed the
their van to an off-licence in Lowestoft in order to buy some soft drink for the                                      formula contained in it was wrong in law. For this he can hardly be blamed since the
children. They arrived at their destination at approximately 9 pm. Their van was                                      formula broadly corresponds with that proposed by E v eleig h Lj in R v Murphy (William)
       [1980] 2 All ER 325, [1980] i QB434 (then ju&gkported), which, to the extent described
                                                                                                                                    to the latJIpT he .case for the defence was that the speed of the motor cycle was no more
       m detail b y my n o b le and learned friend, m usV considered overruled. 1also associate
                                                                                                                              g than 30 o^HSr most, 40 m p h and probably nearer to the former.
       m y s e l f w it h my noble and learned friend's affirmative answer to the first question, and
                                                                                                                                        All that the jury had to d o was to make up their minds whether, on that evidence, they
       the formulation of his answer to the second, with the reasoning leading up 10 which I
                                                                                                                                     were satisfied b e y o n d r easonab le doubt that th e d r iv e r w a s in fact d r iv in g a lo n g this
       also agree. Though it does not directly affect the three questions p o s e d I share the distate
                                                                                                                                     urban street, on which it was not disputed there was a good deal of other traffic, at a speed
       to r th e o b s e ss iv e use of the expressions ‘objective’ and 'subjective' in crime. In all
                                                                                                                                    somewhere between 60 and 80 mph. If they were so satisfied, even the defence did not
      indictable crime it is a general rule that there are objective factors of conduct which
                                                                                                                                    suggest that any sensible jury could come to any other conclusion than that he was
      constitute the so-called ‘actus reus’, and a further guilty state of mind which constitutes
                                                                                                                              t)    driving recklessly; whereas, if they thought that his own estimate of his speed at 30 to
      the so -c a lle d mens rea'. The necessity for this guilty state of mind has been in c r e a sin g ly
                                                                                                                                    40 mph might be right, they ought to have found him not guilty, for the prosecution
      emphasised of recent years (cfR vSheppard[,9So] 3 All ER 899, [1980] 3 WLR 960), and
                                                                                                                                    had n o t relied o n a n y o th e r aspect o f his d r iv in g as constituting recklessness, apart fr o m
      this I regard as a thoroughly praiseworthy development. It only surprises me that there                                       excessive speed.
     s h o u ld h a v e been any question regarding the existence of mens rea in relation to the
                                                                                                                                       I         find it difficult to conceive that so simple a case could have taken more than a single
     words reckless, recklessly’ or ‘recklessness’. Unlike most English words it has been in                                        day to try 20 years ago when, as a High Court judge, 1was trying cases of the then n e w ly -
     the English language as a word in general use at least since the eight century ad almost                                 c     created offence of causing death by dangerous driving. I warmly endorse what Lord
     always w i t h the same meaning, applied to a person or conduct e v in c in g a state of mind                                  Hailsham LC has said about the tortoise pace at which cases in the Crown C o u r t are
     stopping s h o r t o f d e lib e r a te i n t e n t io n , and going beyond mere in a d v e r te n c e , or, in fa             nowadays so frequently allowed to amble on. It makes the trial itself a less effective and
     modem t h o u g h not its etymological and original sense, mere carelessness. The Oxford '                                     reliable means of achieving a just result and is one of the main causes of the long delays
     Eng ish Dictionary quotes several examples from Old English, many from the Middle                                              between committal and trial which are nothing short of a disgrace to our legal system.
     English period, and many more from modem English. The word was familiar to the                                                    In the course of his summing up the deputy circuit judge gave to the jury a direction
     Venerable Bede, to Langland, to Chaucer, to Sir Thomas More and to Shakespeare. ■ In its                             d        as to what amounted in law to ‘driving recklessly’. This direction the Court of Appeal
    alternative and p o s s i b ly o ld e r 'pronunciation, and e t y m o lo g i c a ll y incorrect spelling                       described with justification, but also with the utmost sympathy, as confused. And so it
    (w r e tc h le s s , w r e t c h le s s ly , wretchlessness) it was known to the authors of the Articles of
                                                                                                                                   was, because it sought to combine the very recent definition o f ‘driving recklessly* in s 2
    religion printed in the book of Common Prayer.. Though its pronunciation has varied                                            of the Road Traffic Act 1972 that had been given by Eveleigh Lj in R v Murphy (William)
    so far as I know its meaning has not. There is no separate legal meaning to the word’
                                                                                                                                   [1980]         2 All ER 325, [1980] Q B 434 fthe Murphy definition”) with the definition of
    This retains its dictionary sense, a d e q u a te ly , I believe, expounded by my noble and                                    ‘reckless’ in s 1(1) o f th e Criminal Damage Act 1971 that had been given by Geoffrey
    le a r n e d fr ie n d Lord D i p o c k . It is, of course, true that, in a legal context, the state of
                                                                                                                          e        Lane Lj in R y Stephenson [ 1979] 2 All ER 1178, [1979] QB 695. This latter definition has
    mind described as reckless’ is discussed in connection with conduct objectively                                                been the subject of disa pp ro va l by this House in the immediately preceding appeal, R v
    blameworthy as well as dangerous, while in common speech it is possible to conceive (for                                       Caldwell p 961, ante.
   instance in the context of the winner of a military decoration in circumstances in which                                           The jury too must have found the direction confusing for, after three and a half hours'
      e is reckless of his own safety) of the use .of the word without a blameworthy                                               retirement, they sought further elucidation from the judge. In substance he repeated to
. connotation. ..Now that, my noble and learned friend, has given it a lucid legal                                                 them the Murphy direction and, after a further short retirement, the jury, by a majority
   interpretation I mist that it will cause no more trouble to the profession, academics or                               f        of eleven to one, brought in a verdict of guilty.
  juries. I also, associate myself with what he has said about the Scottish case of Allan v                                           The Murphy direction is in the following terms:
  Patterson 1980 S L T 77. R v Stephenson [ 1979] 2 All ER 1198, [1979] QB 695 was discussed
  before us, but in view of what has just been said before your Lordships in R v Caldwell d                                                ‘A driver is guilty of driving recklessly if he deliberately disregards the obligation
  961, ante there is nothing I can usefully add, except that I respectfully accept the view of                                          to drive with due care and attention or is indifferent whether or not he does so and
  the majority in that case.- Since the days of Noah, the effects of alcohol have been known                                            thereby creates a risk of an accident which a driver driving with due care and
  to induce the state of mind described in English as recklessness, and not to inhibit it, and                                          attention would not create.'
  tor that- matter-tt>;.rpmove inhibitions in the field of intention, and not to destorv                                  ^    Whether the Murphy direction is correct or not is the subject of the third question of
  intention. But that is a different question. ■                         ■ .                    ;                   y       law involved in the instant case that the Court of Appeal, in giving leave to appeal, has
       In the result theappeal fails/"'.'; • ( .                                                                            certified as being of genera! public importance. The other two are: ‘1. Is mens rea
 ' '                                                 v ■ ■■■',■: , , ,     -                                                involved in the offence of driving recklessly? 2. If yes, what is the mental element
 L O R B D IPLOC K . My Lords, on Good Friday, 13th April 19 7 9 , after night had fallen,                                  required ?’
 the respondent fthe d r iv e r ’) was riding h is motor cycle along an urban street in                                   ^    T o answer these question necessitates .in the first instance a brief reference to the
 L o w e s to ft . The street was subject to a' 30 mph speed limit and there was a good deal of                             legislative history of those road traffic offences that had for so many years prior to 1977
 other traffic using it at the time. The driver ran into and killed a pedestrian who was                                    been popularly known as ‘careless driving’ and ‘dangerous driving’ respectively.
 crossing the road to return from an off-licence shop to her car which was parked on the                                       The history starts with s 1 of the Motor Car Act 1903, which drew no distinction
 opposite side of the street. The driver was in due course tried on indictment for the                                      between driving ‘recklessly’ or ‘negligently’ or ‘in a dangerous manner’, so far as the
 o ff e n c e o f c a u s in g her death by driving a motor vehicle on a road recklessly, contrary to                       gravity of the offence was concerned. It was in the following terms:
s 1 of the Road Traffic Act 1972.                                             . .. •
                                                                                                                          j               ‘(1) If any person drives a motor car on a public highway recklessly or negligently,
     Apart from the very tragic consequences of this accident the case that the jury had to                                            or at a speed or in a manner which is dangerous to the public, having regard to all
try w a s a b o u t as simple and straightforward as any case can be in which the charge is one
                                                                                                                                       the c ir c u m s t a n c e s of the case, including the nature, condition and use of the
of driving recklessly The only question of fact that was in issue was the speed at which                                               highway, and to the amount of traffic which actually is at the time, or which might
the driver was travelling immediately before the impact. The prosecution’s case was that                                               reasonably be expected to be, on the highway, that person shall be guilty of an
the motorcycle was being driven at between 60 and 80 mph and probably much nearer                                                      offence under this A ct. . .'
       This remained the law until it was repealedjfche Road Traffic Act 1930, which madP
                  “         ? " ? US dnvin8 and         driving. The former was the more                  My L ollPyouf Lordships may take judicial notice of the fact that the amendment of
                                                                                                    g * 1 an<^ 2 of the Road Traffic Act 1972 by s 50 (1) of the Criminal Law Act 1977, which
    m.              UjWaS f j ie 0n lndktment as wel1 as summarily and the penalties that
    could be imposed included imprisonment and were heavier than those for careless                    followed on the Report of the Interdepartmental Committee on the Distribution of
    dnvmgs which was triable summarily only,                                           . .■            Criminal Business between the Crown Court and Magistrates' Courts in 1975 ( C m n d
      The description of the offence of dangerous driving was:       ,                .,               6323), w a s to restore th e difference in c u lp a b ility between d r iv in g o ffen ce s w h i c h
                                                                                                       attracted the severer penalties which could be imposed for offences under s 2 of the Road
            ‘!1.—(,J If any person drives a motor vehicle on a road recklessly, or at a weed''         Traffic Act 1972, and so justified the right of the accused to elect trial by jury, and the
         or 10 a manner which is dangerous to the public, having regard to all the                  t) offences under s 3 which did not attract penalties severe enough to justify any such right
         rheC^mStanCeSf° *         “ cIudl'ng the nature- condition, and use of the road, and          of election, and by this means to reduce the load of business in the Crown Court.
         the amount of traffic which is actually at the time, or which might reasonably be                The amendment took the form of substituting for ss 1 and 2 of the Road Traffic Act
     , expected to be, on the road. . .                                    5              1            1972 the following new sections:
             12.-—<() If any person drives a motor vehicle on a road without due care and
       , attentlon or without reasonable consideration for other persons using the road .. .*                   1. A person who causes the death of another person by driving a motor vehicle
                                                                                                            on a road recklessly shall be guilty of an offence.
   1°      Were ®dded by s 8 of        Road Traffic Act 1956 the new offence of causing death                  ‘2- A person who drives a motor vehicle on a road recklessly shall be guilty of an
   the 1      ° r dangerous dnvmg, the manner of driving involved in this offence being                     offence.’ .
   the same as under s . 2(.) o f the Road Traffic Act 1930.    .   .                       f
                                                                                                          The elimination of the reference to driving at a speed or in a manner dangerous to the
   of JhVR™ ?TiPffi0nf ° fthe ° ffenCes were ^produced in ss t and 2 and in s 3 respectively
   of the Road Traffic Act ,972.. Dangerous driving continued to be triable on indictment              public was obviously intended to remove the overlap between the offence in s 2 which
   as well as summarily- careless driving remained triable summarily only., . :.               ;       gave a right to trial by jury and the lesser offence in s 3 that did not, which had resulted
   . A,t«ough the adverb recklessly’ as descriptive of a manner of driving has been there"          d fro™ the decision in R v Evans. Section 3 creates an absolute offence in the sense in which
                                                                                                       that term is commonly used to denote an offence for which the only mens rea needed is
                   , Smg[e      J * 6 WaS Sp,k “P int0 two of          one was treated as much         simply that the prohibited physical act (actus reus) done by the accused was directed by
   S i m "           ha      ’      Pracdce 50 far * ,ivinS memory goes had been to charge             a mind that was conscious of what his body was doing, it being unnecessary to show that
   defendants with driving at a speed or in a manner which is dangerous to the public’and
  not with driving ‘recklessly. This is why the offence became populily fafownas                       his mind was also conscious of the possible consequences of his doing it. So s 3 takes care
                                                                                                       of this kind of inattention or misjudgment to which the ordinarily careful motorist is
                n0t as.’)eck,e|f ’ dnvlng: and juries, .when the trial was on indictment, were
     structed to consider whether in their judgment the defendant was driving in a manner           e occasionally subject without its necessarily involving any moral turpitude, although it
    hat was dangerous to the public. It was not thought necessary to confuse thTm by                   causes inconvenience and annoyance to other users of the road. So there is no reason why
  talking about subjective and ‘objective’ tests, although before 1963 they might have                 your Lordships should go out of your way to give to the new s 2 a wide ambit that would
                                                                                                       recreate the former overlap with s 3. ■         ■.                      ■                . .■
  whTh th tHaf t° / 0nVICt A dan8erous driving they must be satisfied that the way in                     My Lords, this House has very recently had occasion in R v Caldwell p 961, ante, to give
 o ro rtr      d*fendant was dnvm« was something worse than a mere failure to show
                                                                                                       dose consideration to the concept of recklessness as constituting mens rea in criminal
 s^rnarin         eratI° n            ?e°ple UsinS the road or some minor misjudgment of the       / law. ■ The conclusion reached by the majority was that the adjective ‘reckless’ when used
 situation or momentary lack of attention. As a Queen's Bench judge I used so to direct
 Junes myself, m trying cases of causing death by dangerous driving                                    in a criminal statute, ie the Criminal Damage Act 1971, had not acquired a special
     By its decision in R v Evans [ 1962] 3 All ER <086, [ 1963] 1 QB 412, however, the Court          meaning as a term of legal art, but bore its popular or dictionary meaning of careless,
 ofCnm .nal Appeal for practical purposes abolished the difference between the standard                regardless, or heedless of the possible harmful consequences of one’s acts. The same must
 of driving in careless driving and that involved in dangerous driving where danger to the            be true of the adverbial derivative ‘recklessly’.         ■                           . •
 public did in fact result. At the trial of Evans the judge had directed the jury f[ 1962] 3             The context in which the word ‘reckless’ appears in s 1 of the Criminal Damage Act
 AH ER 1086 at *087,[1963] 1 QB 412 at 413-414): ; ■■ •• ' • '             ■    1 n        13      g 197* differs in two respects from the context in which the word ‘recklessly’ appears in
                                                                                                      ss 1 and 2 of the Road Traffic Act 1972, as now amended. In the Criminal Damage Act
  ,, ,    . . in law it n a o w well settled that if the driving is in fact dangerous, and that        1971 the actus reus, the physical act of destroying or damaging property belonging to
       angerous driving is caused by some carelessness on the part of the accused, then               another, is in itself a tort. It is not something that one does regularly as part of the
      however slight the carelessness, that is dangerous driving.’                                    ordinary routine of daily life, such as driving a car or a motor cycle. So there is
                                                                                                      something out of the ordinary to call the d o e r ’s attention to what he is doing and its
^*963] ™<^B^fi2^r4i8)-^r0Ve^ 0n appeaI' .The coun ^ id ([1962] 3 All ER ,086 at 1088,              h possible consequences, which is absent in road traffic offences. The other difference in
                                                                                                      context is that in s 1 of the Criminal Damage Act 1971 the mens rea of the offences is
      . If a man in fact adopts a manner of driving which the jury think was dangerous                defined as being reckless whether particular harmful consequences would occur, whereas
     to the other road users m all the circumstances, then on the issue of guilt it matters           in ss 1 and 2 of the Road Traffic Act 1972, as now amended, the possible harmful
     not whether he was deliberately reckless, momentarily inattentive or even doing his              consequences of which the driver must be shown to have been heedless are left to be
     incompetent best.                                                                °
                                                                                                      implied from the use of the word ‘recklessly’ itself. In ordinary usage ‘recklessly’ as
 .T h is merging of the standards of defective driving that was to amount to the offences          j descriptive of a physical act such as driving a motor vehicle which can be performed in
                                                                                                      a variety of different ways, some of them entailing danger and some of them not, refers
                ^ nge? US, dnvl" g a c t i v e l y , leaving the only difference between the
two offences that m the latter danger to the public had in fact been caused, led to an                not only to the state of mind of the doer of the act when he decides to do it but also
increase m the number of cases in which the prosecution charged the defendant with                    qualifies the manner in which the act itself is performed. One does not speak of a person
                                                                                                      acting ‘recklessly’, even though he has given no thought at all to the consequences of his
e S rb e ^ W b y ljry 6                       ^                     ^      3,m°St invarial%           act, unless the act is one that presents a real risk of harmful consequences which anyone
                                                                                                      acting with reasonable prudence would recognise and give heed to. So the actus reus of
      the offence under ss i and 2 is not s i m p l y d r i v i n g M ^ o t o r vehicle on a road, but d r iv in t r           drawth e in ||J(lc e to which I h a v e referred, th e practical result o f a p p r o a c h in g th e
      it in a manner which in fact creates a real risk of harmful consequences resulting fro**;                          q u e s tio n o f w h a t c o n s titu te s d r iv in g recklessly in th e w a y that w as adopted b y th e L ord
      K. S in c e d r iv in g in such a manner as 10 do n o worse than create a risk of cansini'-                      8 Justice-General in Allan v Patterson is lik ely to b e a n y d ifferen t f r o m th e result o f
      in c o n v e n i e n c e o r annoyance to other road users constitutes the loser offence under * W.                in s tr u c tin g a j u r y in s o m e s u c h te r m s as I h a v e suggested a b o v e . The s a m e A ct ap p lies
      the manner of d r iv in g that constitutes the actus reus of an offence under ss 1 and 2 m r f                     to both c o u n tr ie s ; it w o u l d be u n fo r tu n a te i f th e in ter p r e ta tio n p u t o n it b y th e Scottish
      be worse than that ; it must be such as to create a real risk of causing physical injury to ’'                     courts d iffered from th at p u t o n it b y th e co u r ts in E n g la n d an d W ales.
     someone else who happens to be using the road or damage to property more substantial ":                                 I           w o u l d g iv e th e f o ll o w i n g a n sw er s to th e q u e s tio n s certified by th e C o u r t o f A p p e a l:
     than the kind of minor damage that may be caused by an error of judgment in the c o u r se '                      .      m e n s rea is in v o lv e d in th e o ffen ce o f d r iv in g recklessly; 2. th e m e n t a l element
     of parking ones car. .                                        _             ,                          ;.           r eq u ired is th at, b e fo r e a d o p tin g a m a n n e r o f d r iv in g that in fact in v o lv e s an o b v io u s a n d
         The Murphy direction, as it seems to me, is defective in this respect before one comes*                         serious risk o f c a u s in g ph ysical in ju r y to s o m e o th e r p erso n w h o m a y h a p p e n to b e u s in g
     to any question of mens rea. By referring to the duty to drive with ‘due care and i                                 the road or o f doing substantial d a m a g e to pro p erty , th e driver has fa iled to g iv e a n y
     attention, which is a direct quotation from s 3, it makes the standard of driving that                              th o u g h t to th e p o s sib ility o f there b e in g a n y su c h risk, or, h a v in g recognised th at th er e
     must be maintained, in order to avoid the more serious offence of driving recklessly the t                          was some risk in v o lv e d , has n o n e th e less g o n e o n to take it; 3. th e Murphy d ir e c tio n is
    same as in the less serious offence under s 3 and thus perpetuates the very mischief which                         c wrong          in th e respects referred to earlier.
    the 1977 amendments were intended to remedy. For when a decision has to be made                                               Sin ce th e d e p u t y circu it j u d g e g a v e to th e ju r y w h a t      was    s u b s ta n tially th e Murphy
    whether to prosecute a driver for an offence under s 2 instead of under s 3 the only                                       d ir e c tio n its e lf a n d also a s o m e w h a t c o n fu se d v e rsio n o f it an d b o th o f th ese sta ted th e
    material available to the prosecution is evidence of what the driver actually did, the actus f                             law to o u n fa v o u r a b ly to th e driver, th is appeal m u s t in m y v ie w be d is m is s ed .
    reus of the offence. The prosecution has no way of knowing at that stage, when the*,
    dioice of charge has to be made, what was the state of mind of the driver when or1'                                    ■     LO RD FRASER OF TU LLY BELTO N . M y Lords, 1 have had th e a d v a n ta g e o f
    immediately before he did it. I t can only infer this from what the driver was seen to d T                         d       r ea d in g in draft th e sp e ec h e s o f m y n o b le a n d lea rned friends L ord H a ils h a m L C a n d
   and any statement that he may have made. ; < • w .                                      r ■■ , ■ • ■  •                     L ord D ip lo c k , a n d 1 ag ree w it h t h e m . 1 w o u l d d is m is s this appeal.
   • 1turn now to the mens rea. My task is greatly simplified by what has already been safil ■
   about the concept of recklessness In criminal law in R v CaUweO. .-Warning was there "                                LO RD ROSKILL. M y Lords, I h a v e had th e a d v a n ta g e o f r ea d in g in draft th e sp e e c h e s
   given against adopting the simplistic approach of treating all problems of criminal5'                                 o f m y n o b le a n d learned fr ie n d s L o rd H a ils h a m LC a n d L ord D ip lo c k . I ag ree th at this
   baMttjr.w soluble by classifying the test of liability as being either 'subjective’ o r"                              app ea l fails fo r th e reasons g iv e n b y m y n o b le a n d le a r n e d frien d L ord D ip lo c k in h is
  gstpeiwe*;. lecfclessam 00 the part o f the doer of an act does oresuDDose thar rW k ■                               e s p e ec h . O n th e w id e r issu es w it h w h ic h m y n o b le a n d learned frien d s Lord H a ils h a m
   something in lie .ebcumstances that would have drawn the attention of an ordiaarf^"                                   LC a n d L o rd D ip lo c k deal, I w is h to ex p ress m y r esp e c tfu l c o n c u r r e n c e w it h w h a t th e y
  fn id en t individual to the possibility that his act was capable of causing the kind r f l                            h a v e said. I w o u l d o n ly a d d that b u t fo r th e tra g ed y in v o lv e d in th is case, the ch a r g e
  serious harmful consequences that the section which creates the offence was intended to ■'?                                  w o u l d h a v e b e e n o n e o f reckless d r iv in g w h i c h c o u ld a n d v e r y p ro b a b ly would h a v e b e e n
  prevent, and that the risk of those harmful consequences occurring was not so slight that %                                  hea rd in a m a g is tr a te s ’ court. It is difficult to b e lie v e th at a n y m agistrates' court w o u ld
  an ordinary prudent individual would fed justified in treating them as negligible. It Is f                                   n o t h a v e dealt w i t h th is case i f n o t in a m o r n i n g at least w i t h i n o n e fu ll d ay an d reached
  only when this is so that the doer o f the act is acting ‘recklessly* if, before doing the act, !                    f       th e correct a n sw er , w h a te v e r it m i g h t be.
 ■■he. either f a * to give any thought to the possibility of there being any such risk or »
  having recognised that there was such risk, he nevetherless goes on to do it.                       ■.           $           LO RD B RID G E OF HARW ICH .                          M y Lords, I h a v e had th e a d v a n ta g e o f r e a d in g in
            my vie*, an appropriate instruction to the jury on what is meant by driving                                        dra ft th e sp e e c h e s o f m y n o b le a n d learned fr ie n d s Lord H a ils h a m LC an d Lord D ip lo c k .
 jeddesstywouldfee that they must be satisfied of two things: fim, that the defendant w »                                      I f u lly a g r ee w i t h t h e m b o th . A c c o r d in g ly I t o o w o u l d d is m is s this appeal.
 in fact driving the vehicle in such a manner as to create an obvious and serious risk of
 causing physical injury to some other person who might happen to be using the road or tt                              g       Appeal dismissed. Certified questions answered inform indicated in Lord Diplock’s opinion,
 or doing substantial damage to property; and, second, that in driving in that manner the 9
 defendant diet w ifttlipjit.!»?ing given any thought to the possibility of there being any                                    Solicitors: Sharpe, Pritchard & Co, a g e n ts for M F C Harvey, Ipswich (for th e C r o w n );
 such risk or,                                      there,wassome risk involved had none the less                              Goldkorm, Davies & Co, a g e n ts for Norton, Peskett & Forward, L o w e s to ft (for th e
                                                                                       ■, , u‘c l o s «one                     r es p o n d e n t).
   ’iIt is for the jury to decide whether the risk created by the manner in which the vehicle
 was being driven was both obvious and serious and, in deciding this, they may apply the a                                                                                                                     M ary Rose      Plummer         Barrister.
 standard o f the ordinary prudent motorist as represented by themselves. ■■                         < ■
     j f satisfied that an obvious and serious risk was created by the manner of the
 defendant s driving, the jury are entitled to infer that he was in one or other of the states
of mind required to constitute the offence and will probably do so; but regard must be
given to any explanation he gives as to his state of mind which may displace the
inference.                             ■  : ... r. > .        ,      . .                  .
     My Lords in Allan v Patterson 1980 SLT 77, Lord Emslie in the High Court' of
Justiciary did apply the label ‘objective’ to the test of whether a driver was driving
recklessly within the meaning of s 3 of the Act. While for reasons set out in greater detail
in my speech in R v Caldwell I think it is desirable in all cases of criminal liability to avoid
the use of this label, I do not think that, having regard to the likelihood that the jury will
        492       .                     .   .                            -          1 I§           v,                             •                                                                 .,. '        ■.              ' ' 493
                                                                                                                                          ' . .:   . i In re Oayfani (HA.(E.))                         ...                 lo rd RoddB
                  * « «                         i- « a n tm   ( b l w ) .,,:.
                                                                                                                      L o r d TEMPtEMAN.''""'..My L o r is ,’fo r "the' reasons- advanced by m y noble
                                                                                                                 a n d le arn ed frie n d , L o td .R o sM lt, I would-allow' th e se appeals an d answ er
                                                                                                                 b o th certified'questions in th e "negative.
        inform ations ag ain st th e h u sban d and th e wife" a n d a jo in t information
        againsl' th e m b o th . I can see n o ra tio n a l objection to all tho se informa­
                                                                                                                                                                    A p p e a ls a llo w ed .
        tions being h e a rd an d d eterm in ed to g e th er. O f course," When..this .question^                                                                    C o s t s 'o f appellant: 1m i ."respondents '
       •. _ ' *       J?_»—»
                           -■—A
                              ^rr^
                                 ir>
                                   ,«              *4     rf"
                                                            S «
                                                              "*       tS
                                                                        itC
                                                                          * tlftH               O/^lT7"l C
                                                                                                         !   ^
       "arises* as                                                                                                                                                     fr o m c e n ir a t fu n d s .

                                                                                                                 ..: - S o licitors: ■ Sharpe, ■P ritch a rd & Co. for D. I. T o m lin s o n , N o rw ic h ;
■ c~
       is fo rtlc o m in g o tf?l» l6 % H cs th e re "is haproblem C'jflf su ch co n sen t is n o t              M e tc a lfe Copeman & Pettefar, K in g ’s L y n n . ' : ;         ;        ' ' ■
       fo rth co m in g , the ju stices should th e n consider th e riv al subm issions and ,                                                                                                                             M . I. H .
       u n d e r an y necessary advice fro m th e ir clerk , ra le as th e y th in k rig h t in
       M overall in terests o f ju stice. I f th e defendant is absent o r n o t repre-

                                                                                           m

                                                                                                                                                                     ;b o f    lo rds       ]

                                                                                                                          'v?'>
                                                                                                                 ■ R E G IN A         .        .     .        .     .      .        .           .       .         .         R e sp o n d e n t'.
                                                                                                                                                                        AN©
                                                                                                                 S E Y M O U R (E D W A R D )                .      .   - .             .           .        .        .     A p p e lla n t

                                                                                                                  1983    June 7;                                   L ord Diplock, L ord Fraser of Tullybelton,
                                                                                                                          M y 21                                         Lord RoskiO,. L ord Bridge o f Harwich".
                                                                                                                                                                                          and Lord Templeman.'.

     sho uld th ey o rd e r jo in t tria l in th e absence o f con sen t by o r on                                R o a d .-Traffic— R eckless' ■ driving— C a u sin g ':death by — O ffence —
                                                                                                                        W h eth er co-existing w ith ' m anslaughter— W hether ingredients
  ' " o f I h e d efen d an t.                                                                                              tw o .'offences c o e x te n siv e — D irection Y ta ;ju r y ^ P o w e r ..'o f ’ - - '
                                           ............................................. ~ ’ ,e'.practice        ; ;;v5 Prosecution to choose which offence 1 0 "charge— Joinder o f
                                                                                                                               __                               ’S3    nr~.*.4K*, ''-A*.* ton'll t** '>A\


                                                                          offenders b ein g trie d all                         Lord. Diplock.in Meg, ^/L a w ren c e I .tsrazj A J U .o w ^ z o -
                                                                                                                 ■■:;r r527 stated that the appropriate direction to a jury considering
                                                                                                                      Va.-charge of causing death by driving recklessly contrary to
                                                                                                                       i-section 1 '’o f the Road Traffic Act 19721 (as substituted by
                                                                                               ,,« x . stogie      vivisection 50 (1) o f the Criminal..Law.. Act,;,I977),:vas J i a t they .
        m ay arise but if justices ask                                                                           . ->.".should be. satisfied':
        m e s & s k ^ m a r n m fa ire s t th in g                                                               ■ "-'-yV;--'.. “ First, that the defendant was in fact driving the vehicle
                                                                                                                    : v:';.:-v-v in such a manner as to create an obvious and serious risk
        sion, fo r th e aim o f th e ju d icial pro cess is to secure a fa ir tria l a n d rales                 '- ;            of causing physical injury to some other person who might
                   ' ' '?■           _,               ji *■+*:-*Un4- .-^A am/4 msy* ',#*♦tk£slsnx?-t£i»                     V happen to be using th e 'ro a d *- —                !-
   "..of p r a c tic e :a n d p ro c e d u re &re.va e s ig n e u to iiu u c u u <uiu u w u u iw w » w ,
          M y: L o r is , :4n';thevresiilt:,:I' w ould allow these tw o appeals a n d refu se
   f t h e ;applications'; to r ; p i i c i a l ■ review. 1 would answ er b o th th e certified
   ::q uestion s in the negative. Since th e vappealsfto;.the K ing’s t y n n C row n-                                      The defendant while driving an 11 ton lorry on the highway
   : C ourt- w ere a iio n r a ^ ;.p e n iin g ' t h e 'applications, fo r ju d icia l..rev ie w .w hich ;         ^-attempted to posh a stationary motor car out of his way and ■
      have n o w failed , th ese cases m u st be rem itte d to th a t c o u rt to co n tin u e :;                  ','V;in so doing'crashed B» with whom h e'h ad recently quarrelled,
                                                                                                                    ^ 'between the tw o vehicles. B, who had just got out of the c a r , -.
    : w ith th e h e a rin g o f th e appeals. Y o u r Lordships may" think' it rig h t in                              was so severely Injured th at she 'died six 'days later. The    .
   '-.'all th e c ira iin sta n c e s o f .these appeals.. to;'brder th a t the costs of both the_
                                                                                                                     > Road Traffic Act            1972,   s. 1 : see post, p.   5 0 2 e -f.        .                            '
 'mm-    494
 IlMii

                                                                                                                             ■                          2    A.C,          :                Reg. v. Seymour (HJL.(E.))                .     ..      .. . .
                          ilfefm danl was Ja d lc lrfa n S convicted Q £pa»iaB gttef,..attd.w as“;                                              .             R eg. v. C hurch [1 9 6 6 ]'l" Q.B. 59;'t » S 5 J ''.-2 V J J t                     E1965i 2 M
                                                                                                                                               A                       E.R. 72, C C A .
                                                                                                                                                              R eg. v. G overnor o f'H o llo w a y'P riso n , Ex parte iewtw*#* [1982]

                         | to,receive:.aviary’s :yerdlct;upon the only count charged In the;;
                         r'lnffictment»vtfiat of rii'ansIanghter.'T.The'defendant'appealed oh''.'                                                             R eg .     ______        ^__ r ___ , t ___ ^ ____ . _.           ..................
                         * 'the- ground '.that' the .trial'"'judge had misdirected the 'jury ib ";                                                                  [1981] ! :A l E.R. 974, :HX.CE.).
                         f t l a t ; ;w lia ,e;iHaiBlaiighter:;,-^ s charged, and the, charge arose ;                                                        R eg . v . L o w e [1973], Q.B. 702; [1973] 2 W X.R. 481; [1973] 1 All E .E
III;'!                   .'■tout,of the. reckless'driving..'of ..the defendant ..on the highway,;;                                             g                    gQ5j (XA*
                             the directibh pn^uiuledJiifjReg;'■V ^L a w ren ce :.was'.inadequate';,                                                ■     W ^ R e g . v ’p ig g ' t m Z } 1 W .L.R. 762; 11982} 2 AB R R . 591, C A .
                         ''..'■'and. that In such circumstances the juryjsbould .be."directed
                         i: th at the prosecutionljmust'jfurtha' prove. that the defendant
                         itrecognised, th a t some', risk '.was involved and had nevertheless '.                                                        .> ,ifThe following additional cases were cited in argument                                 -. •••      .-ir-
                         '^proceeded to take that risk. H ie C o u rr'd f .Appeal (Criminal;;;                                                                C onnetty '-'V.-'D irector"of Pubtic Prosecutions ft9#C l A.C. 1254; [1964]
                           Divis!on> "dismissed th e appeal, '                                                                                                         2       W.L.R. 1145;":'[1964], 2 'A1 E.E.;4©I,.                      ^
                              O n appeal,:bf;;;tlie;:aefeii#attt-
                                                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                                                      MSl?
                                                                                                                                         t'    C
                                             the tkcB tm (£ n em :'w em                                                               ifif-
                                                                                                                                                              R eg. v. S to n e [1977] Q.B. 354; [1977] 2 WX.R* I © ’. t I9773 2 m                                         ]
                                                                                                                                                                   E.R. 341, C A .        '                            '
                                                                                                                                                              R e x v. B atem an (1925)'.®' '& A p p J t 8, C C A .
                          also to point ou                                 ler to constitute the offence of                                                   Hex v. Larkin [1943] K.B. 174; [1943] I A ll R R . 217, C.C.A.
                                                                                    caw ed ..by th e Manner ;
Ilf                                                            £st*fi'.S

                               Reg, v. Lawi                                                                                                                 H i s w as M -appeal by leave o f theHousT&r             ^
                                                                                                           J r n tm g f                                 Edward John-- Seym our, tfxom w 'judgm ent ""iatei' • 12 , - I t S » .
                                                                                                                                                        Court o f .Appeal; JCMmaM" K v ia o n )' "(W atkins L X . Lawson and Stephen
                                                                                                       ,                                                Brown JJ.) agaM t hfe lfe«vleticKi at Northampton G tow a Court (Bus       .)
                                                                      es' "i.t':”is"":.'for.' rose-
                         - ratio n and n ot fo r th e court to decide wtiat;®h»gCtJr''c ... ..                                                          o n January 15,1982, on aft indictm ent (joataining th e one count of mam
                           should :t* m ade against a particular .'defendant. In the"present';                                                     : v:^ sla u g h ter in
                                                                                                                                                         siaugnter     ift"«nlawfsiMf    M lM ng'Iris''A
                                                                                                                                                                          o m a w n u iy tounng  in s f l mcfa;;B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                w nar»w w s s%     uj. ''kis r e c H « .J o w a g « ,¥.;
                                                                                                                                               E .:;. i t'lorry.*iThe'.'appellaiit'was          s C T t « c e d ' W ' :f i w ; ' 'i e 8 K                        dis-
                                                                                                     ®l!                                            ' qualified for six yeais arid a' suspended sentence of nine m oolis
                           gone unpunished w e n though the jury h u g h t’:haye. convicted          111                                              V"mmt imposed eta Novem ber 13, 1980, fof^wounding a n i cnm in                                        ;
                           him of th e statutory offence, if charged,>;.coiiM not'.justify th e , iisii
                           joinder o f both charges ia a single indictment. In future if in n ® n                                                        to property was activated to take effect concurrently with the sentence oi
                           any case in England and Wales any such joinder should occur
                           it will be incumbent upon the trial judge to require th e j                                                                  five f 8®*                   . t              , _        , OAct|i,
                                                                                                                                                              h e facts ’are' stated m t i e opinion o f t o r i
                         , cation to elect upon which o f the two counts they wished to
                                                                                                    8HS
                                                                                                                                               ^                                      »»                                         tn r tht* aooelJant.          T his
                                                                                                                          ygigagSpg

                                                                                                                 o r:
                          second alternative, and there are good reasons why the Scottish
                                                                                                                                                        ' accordingly the statutory 'offence of tausirig death W
                          practice should continue as it is in Scotland (post, p. 499 d , f).                                                        .■ ■■■■ feary■ to'section' 1' of tM ’Road Traffic Act 1972 (as amended by section
                              Decfslo#?'of'.:tbe C ourt o f Appeal (Criminal Division)                                                           _ ""50 (l) of tie Criminal Law Act" 1977) s made bet, must the accased at tne
                           I'TM? 202
                          R.T.R.       affirmed............................................ ....................
                                  7(V. affirmed.                                                                                                G ' same, time be' guilty of tie common law offence of m andaughter or is the
                                                                                                                                                 . •■■■'&"ftiaterial'dffierdice fc tw e e a the two oflEences? I s the appe ^                                                  &
           The following cases are referred to in their Lordships’ opinions:                                                                      . ■ mission'there ls'a'inateriial difference.’;'The's.tatntorf © ffeice^w .m r ,
           A dvocate, H .M . v. Eam shaw (unreported), M ay 22, 1981; (Note), 1982                                                               ''          In ‘1956 by section'8 of tieR o a'd Traffic'Act."1956 b o ao se o f t h e r e t o c e
                                                                                                                                              ',            "of juries'to convict "manslau'ghter where death resulted from tte troiised s
           ■ Andrew s.        rctor o f P ublic P rosecutions [1937J''‘A»Q>5W i t m y i                                                       ■              driving'of a :motor vehicle'cm' the'public highway. The
            . ... A 1 E.R. 552, H.L.(E.).                                                                                                       B. - C t h is Offence for thisr’reason;'suggeste a
           D unn v. H .M . A d v o c a te , I960 l . C 55.                                                                                      : '.::..'''.'.''two"'offences»:that one is more serioos»''one less senous,- -in is ts mme          ,
           R eg. v. Caldwell [1982] A.C. 341; [1981] 2 W.L.R. '-St®;.'''[1981J 1 AM                                                                   :::              fact "that "one carries a raaximiim penalty of Me impnsonment; the
           ^W r-E.R.'96I,,'HX.(E.>.                                                                                                                        ; o f li« o f five years’ imprisonment'
         . 496 .                                                .-.                    .,        ■             .                                                                                                                             497
                                             Keg. ▼ . Seymour (HJL(E.) )               1 1 1 .- ■.' .               1*9*31             2 A.C.            |J ||      ,              Seymour (HLL.(E.>)
                   In Reg, v. Governor o f H o llo w a y Prison, Ex pmleYemtimgs [1983] 1;;.                                     .       ; asf'» r^ u ltIt ooff .that,
                                                                                                                                                                 t     dam age som e person by ch an ce w a s .H ie d , ..that could
           ■A.C. 624 it;w a s :I e H t i a t 't t e offence o f causing' d eath .by .reckless driving''-                                   not sustain a charge of manslaughter for manslaughter entails a knowledge
           : i s 5s t i l ’H a iiM a u g lite r;^ (l.;ila | Jfc ''in g ie 3 ie n ts''o f. the common law .offence,;             V bf-ifek to']ife\'.to"'anotlier; see, R e x Y . 'B d e m m '(19251,19 C r.A pp.R .„ 8 .; -I t
          V and'of'‘iie statutory offence ate co-exteiiswe.;:l;Oa'':.a'^'pmclical level tiiis,'.'                               ;'            .em phasised'.that 'lo t',,m a n s la a ^ te r';tlie ’ p o ssib ility ;o f , injury to an o th er
          : raises problems fo r If th e re is n o m ateria! '<ifference'':;|)etween'''tlie,,'two;',,                           '. '^person; m u st.. be';foreseen:;^Director of] Public Prosecutions.iy, Newbury '
          ; offences: (i) who decides which offence Is to be charged?; (ii) how is'the,:,                                      ■ ■' ..;;i'[19T7]            A .C 5P0, ‘SO^'wheare there is 'a.referen ce to^R exy^Larkm £1942)
             accused to be advised as to the plea?; (iii) when should a plea to>,the                                                    '...29 Cr.App.R. 18, on which relian c e,is^ p h ce d .
             statutory'offence.’lje accepted?^';.Further,suppose that .the'Indictment in the. .;                                B              A person can",lw coovicted of causing death by reckless" driving within
          .' present .case Md''»nfainei',lwo.;coiiiits;:\;.Ca)' manslaughter-and (b) causing'■                                     ' yR eg . v.. Lawrence [1982] A.C. 51(V > hojyas not actually aw are o f th e
             death by 'reckless' drM ngi-';tnJ!liiose circumstances is' jthe'judge bound to ;/                                             risk of h arm and who had given no thought to the possibility o f a risk of
             say to 'th e 'ju ry ,'“ .If you conMcl .tie'irfeu d an t on count 'two. h e must/also ;                                       harm. But su6h a person is not guilty of m an slau g h ter: see A n d r e w s v.
            be guilty .cm count one ” ? T hat p art..o f, t ie decision M Jennings. [1983] I;'.;!                                   .7 . D ire c to r o f P u b lic P ro secu tio n s [1937] A.C. 576.
             A.C,/.'624 wMci;'stat«,;;t|e:ateMe;.concliision' was .obiter because the main ;.                                               On the b a s is th e ,d e c is io n .in R eg.i i . :; ;I^ re « 'lIf8 2 } ;;A .C i.;5 1 0 ,
         :; Issue there was whether-the offence with which the acciise£l,;w as',ch^ed;;';                                            ’ three'possible;situations'".can'a r i s e : ; ; ® S n o w i n s k ; o f .
             in California was properly described as manslaughter (a) so as to come                                                   ^physical h arm to another person andgoes o n to ta k e th a t risk.. It is can-
                     a Schedule 1 to the Extradition Act 1870, and not whether the two :
                                   i    •        \   nri. _                                 . ius - it it. _t. gg       Jk '




                                                                                                                                                                                              *
                                                                                                                                       p e i & n S l i 'i s                                                             E'   «?.   •- ' •
          the continued existence of manslaughter via such a killing; but contends                                                     J S e X c o js e d takes bo t h o ^ t to th e possibility o f a risk an;
          t _______ *___________                 v-w._. *u- *_____a ____              /j\ -w.—




                                                                                                                                       statu to ry o ffen « :i» l""th e% ccu sa! M :& tegory;'|i i ) is            ..         .......... „    .......
                                                                                                                                       M # ^ |n |i s a p c !                   V. D irector o f Public Prosecutions [1937]
            down by Lord Roskill in that case were satisfied then the application by                                           -   A C - 576,'-581 ;et;''seq.,:':w liic l|,is;n e ce ss^ ,..to ;;co p sttu te ,m an sla u g h te ^ On ,
            the United States governm ent for the extradition o f.|lie .a a ;iise d ,w a s'in a a e ,.::                         E  the authority of that decision it is submitted that the trial judge should
       ..., —        i-;— i—               :n that ra s e there was ab u n d an t evideipe                                      ... ./';:''iinpress''''tipon 'In ju ry 'th a t a.:c a s e ' o f m anslau^ter.;is''inore;;sferigus, |h a n ;'§; .
                                                           Roskfll’s statement [1983] A.C.                                             case of committing the statutory offence of causing death by reckless
                                                . m g/death-.by .reckless .drmng o f a .p o to r,,;
            vehide o n a ro ad is still m aM atJg h fef 'b y .tb e law of-E ng land ” ;is, 'obiter.;;';                                   " G raem e H am ilton Q.C. and C onrad Seagroatt Q.C. for the Crown. The
                                                                                ' \         is still cap ab le o f ;                   C row n w ish es;t o " « e r w . its p jsitio a;'ln "'relatio a 'tq.vtife;,,ca» ,p o stu lated -by,;
                                                                                                           *
                                                                                                                                              appellant,'WhOTfte victim has been killed as the result of the reckless
isti                                                                                                                                    driver having done substantial damage to property.
                                                                                  of negligence, m d that                                    O nce it is e s fa M s iie d .th a t;th e ';o lfa ^                            ;and.....causing
                                                                                                                                        death by rec k less;d riv in g 'are co-existent .(the Jemmngs case'':|;l? 8 3 ] ;i; A .C .; :
                                                                                                                                       624).. it only yremains'tO;’consider whether ..^reckless” ;-has a^dM ereat m ean-,
           specified.,!,             , f ......................        _                                         .,,                              I lie 'tw o ;r f e n « s .i L o rd A tkfti w opld h av e sa id .th a t it.d id n o t: see
           offence was c ta g e d . In the p resen t case the trial judge directed the jury                                    ■ ■ -. ' ■■■"Andrews v. 'M rector'of; Public P rosecutions"fl937J. A-C.;567» ;583.:;,;Tlie.
         ; th a t,i.,th e A iO T g .w liic n .ra 'iisrf^ tn e .a e a tli of the victim w as fe c H « s ,J lie ij ; ^             G ■ w ord “ reckless ” ,ought to have the.'same,meaning where it is a; constituent.
           th e offence was manslaughter. He then instructed the jury in accordance                                            . -.'/;v;of,different offences,onless Parliament states to the co n traiy . A ny other
         ;-,with t h e , ^                                                                                                      .■ ■    c o o s e ■ w ould lead to'difficujties'.for juries.
           o ffence,.'® ! '.not f o r m anslaughter. M anslaug hter b ased ,o a reckless driving                                             The Crown";rely’ on the following statem ent o f .Liirid.,A&in'» " 'A n d r e w s '
         -'inquires an e x tra ing red ien t, fo r e x a m p fe u se o f a v e k c |e ,a s .                                             11337} A.C. 576, 584, Section 11-o f th e Road Traffic Act 1930 imposes
         ..'-which was never a l ^ r t . n ere»|G ri^ ;|fcfiii|tiQ B 'o f.iw H est.;w M ca involves .                                   a penalty fo r driving recklessly or'at i;'s p e e d or in a manner which is
           recognition % the accused of the risk to h is victim.                                                                 U       d an g e ro u s :to th e .public.;,-.There c a a b e .n o d o u b t :that. this'-.section ;cofera ,
                S u ^ o se ..t!m t',tlie ,r^ k l« siie ss. alleg ed ag ain st th e .a cc u sed .d n v er is. *eck-;:/                   d riv in g w ith 'su ch a high degree of negligence, as th a t ’jf ie a th -.were, caused',
           less driying w ithin 'the" pnnciple. o f M e g ,^ ^ L a w r e m e I a th a t th e re .w as a n '                             the offender would, have committed m anslaughter., -B u t th e converse is n o t
                                                                                                                                        tru e, an d it is perfectly possM e th a t ,a p i . p a y . '-drive,; at./a spe^d or '''in '.
                                                                                                                       - X -       ;   ^                                                        '           ...           499.
                                                                                                                        £ A.C. .       W "'            .          SeymaBrCBtL.CE.).).
  498                               Reg. ▼. Seymour (HA.(E.))                ^                      [19831
                                                                                                                              S to n e [ I f 77} Q .B . 354 a n d Pigg [ I ^ 2 ] ;.i .W JLR- 762. T h e category
 a manner dangerous to t i e public an d cause death an d yet n o t b e guilty
                                                                                                                         (2 i) accused in th e ap p ellan t’s , examples...is n o t .within....the .cases,cited b y
 o f manslaughter.” T h e tw o approaches there set o u t Sire exem plified 'a n d •
                                                                                                                       ^ the Grown fo r .there .is not that gross degree of. negligence present th a t is
^.were'approved in R e x v.                                                                                             necessary to co n stitu te th e offence o f m anslaughter. .
 |1966] 1 Q.B. 59, 6 8b -c; Reg. v. L ow e [1973] Q.B.
% - s r f ' . ' f i 9? 7 r ^ . | 354^ 62^
 351, 353. T h e C row n rely e s p e c B ly :® ' ' * ^ ; ,,v ! :^ I ^ # r e « e >'|1 9 8 2 lA .G :f
‘5 1 0 an d'                                                                                                                   ’
                                                                                                               B       '-..-^July.2 1 . Lord. DiPLCXX..:jMy fL o rd s» ,l h a w h ad the. advantage of
                                                                                                                        reading in d ra ft .the..speech of. my .n o b le,an d learned friend , Ij> r3.R w M l..,.
slh:% ier?ifeove cases would entail . M d in f'■that ‘^:*cH ^ ^ ?lias;!# ‘d lfa c n l v
                                                                                                                        1 agree w ith it, a n d fo r the. re a so n s.h e gives .1 . would dism iss ..this.appeal..
 meaning in manslaughter than in the statutory'offence 'lafc&usihg'death' By -i
     less driving Since the decisions of 1h             e      ’Cal dwel l [1982J
                                                                                                                              L ord F r a s e r o f T u lly b e lto n . M y L ord s, I have h ad th e advantage
       * J*— d L a w re n c e [ 1982] A.C. 510, the definitions of■'r«kless“givai ■;
                                                                                                                ;      .'of..;reading 'in ..d ra ft 'the'.'speech o f ^ n o b f e ' m d , | e a ^ . ;i d ^ ^ o r d . -
               ses has been applied to other statutory'"offences. ' The obser-O
                                        »— --—       [ J 9 8 3 ] i A .C . 624, 639»-F» w ere a r t .
                                                                                                               ^         Rpskill, 1 agree th a t, fo r th e reasons stated b y Mm, th e appeal should

                                                                                                                           . B ut 1 wisli,t0,,refer. t 0,,llie                         uol&          w
                                                                                                                        light betw een th e p ractice la th e co u rts of England an d W ales and th at
                                                                                                                         m th e co urts o f S cotland with, reg ard to prosecutions fo r causing d eath
                                                                                              M m k£-               '*:. tw . rA^irlUcs Hrtvtno’ -af mnfnr VftTiinlea in cases w hich a re regarded as

                                                                                       ....
-S^£8
                                                                                                                           ...causing;
                                                                                                                        1 97^ section 1» as m e n d e d b y .
                                                                 estion o f re c k le ss 6 « s? I
                                                                                                                        Scotland the p ractice is to prosecute o
                                                                                                               ■ ■ ;.H-;qr;wtematiyelyJoft<.fhe...statut<)ry. offence,;:.,^ .;. ~0                  ..,v---------------
                                                                                                                      convict) to decide w hether to d o so on th e first o r second alternative.
                                                                 to th e practfee'M'..
                                                                                                                      T h e fact th a t th e re is such a difference between th e procedure in th e tw o
                                     ■ry iw C s'iJW J .v . JJ*].   . ■ ■ ■■ ■. ■ ■  '                          E      jurisdictions is perhaps surprising, as fte r e is no rdevant difference te ^ e e n
            ____ . . . ____ .____ _ reinforced by considering th e question of                                   ■■ . the crim es of m anslaug hter a n d cu lpab le homicide, a n d th e statutory offence
 au trefo is acquit. In relation to the present o ffe n c e s® > a n ’1accnsetf:'% is;                         ■ " -       U .’J           k<> #!<>&             I rs K r t t k
      ... .  _ j ____ - t __________ e i t    i____ u ___*.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                  a s:'it"'is
                                                                                   reason
                                                                                                                        .Scottish practice'should''''continue as it is in Scotland.

   .•   :
                                                                  mm left with t h e :                                                            ™        ___________________                                                   '.and had"b
                                                                                                                       convicted of culpable 'homicide.':':> At"lhat time;;':t h e ;statutorf;offeBce'';was'''
:carelessly, „            ------------------------------------------------------------- -  „   ..........       G that created by the'R oad Traffic::A ct';:im ;sectIofl;«':C l):'P ri¥ k g ::‘‘^ ^
                                                He hom icide. T h e definitive pronouncement
                                                                                                                  ■' '-lessly 'or at a'speed .or in a manner which is dangerous'to the public;”)<•
  o f -the law o n this question is to b e found in th e decision o f this H ouse                               ■        As''the 'degree -of .negligence-'»Mch constitotes;;aangeroiB;JrwBig^.fcss;'
  in J en n in g s [1983] 1 A .C . 624, w hich is right                                       ' ’                      than that which'''constitutes' recHess irM n&';.the:statiitorf;ofeace'in;;|hat
    -                   Q .C . in reply. T h e burden of th e C row n’s argu m en t h as                      .       iform 'was' clearly Jess:. :serious''.than-'the.^commoo{fcw:''criine iof:'.calpble:
. t x x h l i l l i e i n i n g given t o th e w ord “ rec k less” in th e various statutory ;                         homicide, which requires' recklessness. «® ut .'it 'is .plain that 'neither..the.trial.
         . .             -A w hich                     c                l          ‘ '— ' - -             «
                                                                                                              ' .jjs Vjudge (Lord Quest) nor the. Lord lustice-Q eii: {(Lord %<Mnson), ^ h o
 m a o sh u g h te r, recklessness is n o t a n e c m a ifin g re c fie n t'o f''tS e o ffe ric fe ^ ln '''               delivered the paly, reasoned opinion in'.the .'High Court of .Judiciary,abased
■ iiian slau g h te r'% e'’'w a A 'is ''% n c e 'n ie l':':#ith.:w hether th ere m th e d e g r e e ”®! ■        •'•••-■'itije' distinction -.on the use of th e.w o rd ./‘ dangen>us.’*:.^Accordingly...-the'
                          , f3..                                                                                ■' '.'.'f'amendment made..by .the 'Act, of "1?77» which deleted 'dangerous..^driving
i f ’io w :ltM ""'ap^laiii:""':t tstm g ulshes^'case^ ’such a s ' C fuavk^[1966] "T. Q.B.
'*11-III:-              -500         •      '
                                            ■   ''''' •               •'V'                          '            ;
                       . “       ,S £ £ »                 Reg. y. Seymour <HX.(E.))                              11»3]              2   A.C.          |i | i i !       Reg.   y.   Seymour (HJL»(E.))    / .         oJ^ybrfton
  llt*
                       v.fecan’ the statutory offence leaving it consisting only o f .driving recklessly,.                          occurring being introduced into Scottish procedure where at present it d o e s .
                                                                                                                                   "ncC'trise.-/*
                                                                                                                                               .. If i t ,.became. .necessary
                                                                                                                                                                          . . for the
                       '.? M s    'affected t i e p ractice, which*fc»ntinue$:to be mat In cases'w M ch/',                           ..                       .      ..       .    . judge, . in
                                                                                                                                                                                               . . answer
                                                                                                                                                                                                   . . . . . . to "questions"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     j ^ - 'k

                       ''th e /statutory, .offence a re charged ' ■ a J t e n i a t i ^ y . ^ A t least /one case ;h a^
                       / te e n ' prosecuted I n ,.t|a t f p y .since W liiS c e .E M , A dvocate.y., Earmhaw                         ^w fclcli is ..the duty of the judge) an d selecting the offence w hich 'carries a".■
lilt         .. ;V",                                                                                                                                               least adequate to co v er w h at is required in the
it A t                 V'tried a t A y r o n M ay 22, 1981 (re |o rto l" :o o lf :o a to o th e r .point o n a p p e a l,
p i!§■#■                                                                                                                        .Yv.'ciicumstahces o f th e 'c ase (which is the effect of the ju ry ’s decmon bdEwfeM ..
                             .1982 S i X 179).
illit                         T h e 'Scottish practice 'Can,/in 'm y l i e # , b e ju stified on. the ground that, .■         B        culpable .homicide and the statutory offence). I f ,th e choice is betw een/;'
                                                                                                                                       leaving the jury with. a.'poor.'Impression o f th e 'tria l process, o n .th e 'one.'.:-
                                                   ei r                                                                          ■.■ ■ hand, and risking allowing a guilty m o torist t o escape-w holly unpunished^
                                                    ' / i
                         .T hls'-B oase :'d m i^^m ^R e g S :i% iG m e rm r;; 0 f Holloway, P rism ,./
                                                                                                                                       because of som e supposed technical difficulty in bringing altern ativ e "charges- ;
                                                                                                                               - /a g a in s t him ,'.'on the other hand, I would have no hesitation in p referrin g ■
                         Jennings [1983] 1 A.C. 624 th a t t i e crim e o f manslaughter h ad not" b ee n '
                                                                                                                               .    the former.
                                                                                                                                          I w ould only add th a t the number ^of ea se s'iti which,''eith er in.' ScG flaailj/
                                                                                                                                    .or’ in 'E n g la n d ,'It. will be appropriate to prosecute a m o to rist ©a a'dtagfc’v;
                                                                                                                                    of culpable' homicide bif manslaughtermust be v ery small, as it is extrem ely
                                                                                                                                    a r e for co n ¥ ictlo n % B 'iIch ''a% larg e''to ''resM t'» '.i''^ n te n c e in excess of five
                                                                                                                                    years’ Imprisonment. In the instant appeal, and also in the case of
                                                                                                                                    Eorm kow , w h ere-'iie accused w a s ^ ^                                  hom icide, sentences
                                                                                                                                     o f iv e yearsVMpnsomneht w ere im p o sed
                                                                                                                                          With reg ard td :''the'"'cedffied question in this appeal, Mr. Connell’s sut>-


                                                                                                                                    m a o s to u ^ ^ is ^          ^   iny opinion, well founded.        If any modification
                                                                                                                                      of the “ Lawrence direction ’ is appropriate in a case where manslaughter
                                                                                                                                      alone is charged, it would Be :to ;ad{l a warning to the jury that before
                                                                                                                                 > ■■ convicting of .manslaughter' the?'"’m ast b e . satisfied; that 'the..risk 'of ..death
                                                                                               he prosecutor/con-:
                                                                                                                              ®':C""teiBg-Caused Aylhe-maimer "of the accused’s driving was very high. Such
                                                                                                                                      a direction w ill, -of course,:alwiays b e 'necessary where the common law
                                                                                                                              . ■ . ' crime";'and' the ’statutory offence are"charged, alternatively,"tat ;.where, as
                                                                                                                              .■■■' . '-.in this."case, the common law'-trime is charged alone,'''if may "be unnecessary
                                                                                                                                    -''a n d inappropriate/In the present case I think It was oiiiecessafy,
                                                                                                                                             I would dismiss the appeal.

                                                                                                                               ^        Lord R oskill. My Lords, this appeal arises from the dismissal on
                                                                                                                 .s-v-.-v r        ■ January: 12, 1983, by the Court of Appeal..CriminM.Divlaoii' (Watkins L.J.
                                                                                                                                  '-.and Lawson'"and Brown II.),' o f the..appellant’s 'appeal'a g a in s t.M s/Con-
                                                                                                                               •y '/ vlctiofi on January 15, 1982, for m anskuj^ter after;a trial at Northampton;" '■
                                                                                                                                    ..Crown. Court before Bush J. and a jttty.^T he Court of Appeal (Criminal :.'
                        aad;':Mnce.;.Cas                                                                                              Division) granted the appellant a certificate to the trains of wM ch.I wiH. v
                                                                                                                               P.~' later refer.".-'.Leave to appeal was refused by that court, t a t was later given;';
                                                                                                                                   ; by your Lordships’ House. ....
                       SS»£ Slid V.                                                              fodecide w h ic l                  ■ ;/&The Crown’s case which was accepted by the jury 'was'.that the appelant /;
                        offs ic e i f any ) h e h as co m m itted . H a t view h as th e overw helm ing
                        advantage in p rac tic e th a t it avoids th e risk , which existed in the instant                             of an"11 ton lorry. /'The allegation was that on' A pril"30, >1981*;folow tng
                       .appeal, that a person who is accused only o f manslaughter or c a lp a tte .                                   a                     - .                  .   ...... ... . ......... .
                        homicide m ay b e acquitted o f that charge and may then'Tgo'.'bnpfii& M J;''                         / jj"C ahad been living,"'the'appellant m et Mrs. Burrows driving a ViUBdian car in
                                                                                                                                       the opposite direction from that in which he ..was .'driving th e lorry. -.There;
                        been charged as an alternative. Such a result would not, in my view, be                                        w as a s ig h t .collision. -/.Mrs. Burrows got out of the VauxhaH -car-:and ,
                        in the interests of justice and I would be sorry to see th e risk o f its                                     ''approached the lorry. ' He, allegedly Intending only'to push, h e r c a r oat.-
                                                                       -                . - '- p w i /                        2       A.C.           w ''             Meg. v. Seymour (HJL(E.))                    Lord MosUl
  of th e w ay, drove Ms lo rry u p against ,th e ear.!:,; H e '.'did so so.vio len tly that                                  a n d in Reg. v. L m r e m e (Stephen) [ 1982] A .C :510,: to-w hich 1 h av e                                           ?
                                                                                                                     :A \:-'.':;ilreaay referred. T h e 'fo rm er' case arose o u t of th e C rim inal D am age' A ct                                 j
                                                                                                                              197I.f;T he la t t e r was a trag ic' case'-'arising" under" a ctio n k o f th e R o a d                                I
  vehicles. H e r inju ries w ere such th a t in tb e 'fto rd s .of/an., ambulance d riv er                                   T r affic A c t 1972,"as'-amended in 1977, o f causing death b y reckless driving.                                      ■;
  w ho gave evidence a s quoted by th e f a m e d j u d ^ in                                                                       T he' decisions''m '';this H ouse ;'k ''.tlie 'Ig riiie r c a se b y a m ajority , an d in                          ;
                                                                                                                             'th e fetter, 'unaniinoiisly,''-';inade' -It .'.'plaitt'; w M t the j w r d s 'r e c k l e s s ” or
    drivers do, she would have b roken in tw o.” She died ab o u t a week.later.'J                                    y -        recklessly **'. meant in these statutes,'"and 'in th e la tte r case w h at th e p ro p er                           -.
    on May 6,1981.                                                                                                    ~   ■'     direction   to the jury was in a case o f causing d eath by. th e reckless driving                                   •
                                                                                                                      B
      . T h e juiy accepted those facte as established without hesitation f o r they ;                                        of a m otor vehicle^ >#My noble aod learned M ead,-:L oM Diplock, in a                                                  i
.....m m im om w .convicted t i e appellant m . ju s t ow erm xee-qm rters o f a a to u re r                                      -     1.                t    11        tu              fn o n d o th a n tif f in * jiotmvI :'«a«f   ' r        /

    It was an extremely grave case of motor-manslaughter to use the pops^T-j                                                   [1982] ' A .Q 'i5ia'-526r5 2 7 :
   phrase, a view w hich th e learned trial p d g e ..d e a rly ■to o k since, h e passed ;■
                                                                                                                                       “ In m y view, an ap p ro p riate instruction to th e jury on what is
   a sentence of five years’ imprisonment opo ii th e appeD ant a n d j o « r ^ r d ;
                                                                                                                                       meant by driving recklessly would be that they must be satisfied of


                                                                                                                                        manner as to create an obvious and serious risk of causing physical                                  .
                                                                                                                                      ‘in ju ry to some other person who m ight happen to be using the road
                                                                                                                                        or of d o in g S ip ia n S a l damage to property; a n d _                 .‘
                                                                                                                                             “ Seccmd iba.i in 'driving, in th a t m ann er the defendant d id so with-
                                                                                                                                                                         it-.tiW                                      K»m<r anv .




                                                                                                                                      rand,,: m ldeddm gjtius, .they: m ay ?a p p iy me- sranoura -o
                                                                                                                                        prudent motorist as represented by themselves.
                                                                                                                                           “ I f satisfied th a t ''an'"-obvious:a n i ' s e r i o u s ' n s k ' : w a s " — .......
                                                       g. v. G overnor o f H ollow ay P rism ,
                                                                                                                                       m an n er '-'of ihe" d efen d an t’sd riv in g , >the ju ry "are; 'entitled to in fer th a t
                                        ] 1 A .C . 624 an d requires n o fu rth e r repetition.
                                                                                                                                       h e w as1m ::one-^or:'other'" o f ''th e : s ta te s o f m in d 'req u ired to constitute
                                                  o f th e enactm en t o f section 50 o f th e           :
                                                                                                                                        the offence an d w ill p ro fa H y '?'do:;» * ‘:fc it.> i^ a M 'm u st be given to
                                                    ■ revisions o f section 8 of th e A c t of
                                                                                                                                      w any explanation he gives as to his state of mind which may displace
                                                                                                                                      o'&e inference.”
                                                                                                                          p           A s 1 ........ ..............
                                                                                                                          :   ■■ g v in g th e ,jiio6iuw i5...w 1^ i r                                  ._ .
                                                                                                                                 present case, a body o f opinion which thought that the common law offence
                                                                                                                             of manslaughter by the reckless driving of a motor vehicle must betaken
                                                                                                                     :      to':have;.beea..im piofly repealed..tyM cbtm ,50 of the A ct .of ..1977,_ or
                                                                                                                     .      possibly 'earlier:'.?'Thaf view"was'"taken by the Divisional .Court.in Jenm ngs
 ■not .a;i» $ & fi charge'tl'--under;'-fe'>secfidtt:                                                                  .      P982] I'W.L.R,s'$49.';But your'Ij>rdsMpsr House.'in.tfrnt.case.onanimoiisly
                                                                                                                       G ■ ; held .otherwise./;,The'argument founded, offim plied repeal' was'reiecled for
 A ndrew s v. D irector o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A .C . "576, 584, d id                                                the reasons1'©vea;In' my speech {19831 l."A.C,''6?4,639-644 w hich |.w ill not
           moti. . M w   o n . e n c e , /o i , m                                                                   ..          '           ¥           at   6AA 4‘-'.Wn"'-rinnl%|-'''!#fc<»"''nros«*.iif!ri» itftfsofities                  -.

                                                                                                             is*#
     survive th ere w ould be two o f f e n c e s , ; ^                             t t e M liet:
                                                                                                                                      My L m is fje m in g s was''dedded.onjufy'--..2?,-l?82, over a y ear after
                                                                                                                          H       Mrs. B urrow s’s -.death and some six ."months' after, 'the -a p p e la n t5s trial at
                                                                                                                                  Northampton Crown Court. This tm l -a ls o . prewded ;tiie Rearing o f
    T h e m eaning 'of the^w oM s^“ leck fcss *fcand '“ recklessly ” 'cam e beforey:                                              Jennings -i n :'th e 'D ivisional Court. ^ A s already stefed, --the'".appelant p s ; - ; ;
 your lordships’ H ou se in two cases, R e g . v. C aldwell [1982] .;A .C,;.34I,.«                                                d ia ig r f .only:w ith manslaughter, no doubt because o f the view which the-
                                                                                                                                                                                                 .        ■ ■                   .        . -.'505
v 504                                                                                                        -2 A.C.                            j              Reg. t . Seymour (HX.(E.))                           .               t a r t *®ddll
. / t o r i M esM l.                                                                                          : w a s'a p p ro p ria te .when the statutory offence ..was-charged, jnust.be equally
                                                           of the' case.3 Your Lordships                      '-.■appropriate'w hm .th e common law offence'; o f'm a n sla u g h te r 'W a s rc h a rg e d . -
                                                   -*        •
                                                                                                            :;'*The C o u rt of A p ^ a l,;CQ iiniiial D ivision) granted the app ellan t a certificate
V c h a ig e i» # a s 'p ^ fe A . b u t                 'learned counsel fo r th e C row n.;                 . 'in ^th e following term s:
  1 agree with th e view o f th e C o u rt of Appeal th a t this w as 'a n 'entirety"                                        “ Where manslaughter is charged and the circumstances of the offence
V p ro p e r course fo r counsel fo r th e C row n to have''adopted %The ju ry was,                                '        a re that "the "victim was" killed as :a 'result o f tire-'reckless ''"ariviag o f th e
  o f course, u naw are o f this fact, -                                                                                     defen dan t dh a public highway;'''' should the trial judge j^ e.th e; fury
       A lte r th e d o se o f th e evidence, M r. M ichael. C onnell :<3.C,» fo r th e ap p e l-'    B        ■''--■■Vii..; th e direction suggested In R , v . L a w re n c e in its e n tirety ;-o r-sh o u ld
 lant, invited th e f a m e d ju d g e not to give th e ju ry w hat I .irill call fo r brevity ',                            the direction, be-that only a recognition by th e defendant th a t.som e .
 th e “ L a w ren ce direction ” simplidter* aig uin g that th a t direction .,was';                                         risk was 'involved .and" he had nonetheless gone on" to" take it would
 applicable only where th e statutory offence w as charged. H e 'ls ul> m ittrf                                          :i b e sufficient '^ estab lish 'the:commission of the offence? ”
 that where the common law offence of manslaughter was charged the jury
                                                           le r,p rc )v e ;|h a t   a p p d la B t.              In his able submissions on b eh alf of the appellant, Mr. C onnell
                                                                                                              accepted, as he was indeed bound to accept that the common law and
                                                                                                                                                                        h n f fie rfcaifeneed .tfiat.it n ecessarilv.fo lo w e a
                                                                                                              |i a t . :p e sam e
                                                                                                                             ; aggravating., circum stances                                             _ , —
                                                                                                                                  ,selfor the:nspomtatinJennings [1983]



                                                                                                                       i   U it u ,   5« U U , | . € ^ a i U l U 5 U U V l i i ^ v u i v w   w   V *.      ^    -   -------------
                                                                                            5-.«.
                                                                                                                     obiter and should not be followed, especially as th                     ■been'' i» ''?
                                                                                                              ...  :                        --ill'™                n r a c -a    prerequisite
                                                                                                                                                                            a t 'n r*          to con-
                                                                                                              viction for                           sot for the statutory off
                                                                      vv"    'V;                                                                       3. 644 o f the report that “ the offence
                                                                                   oa are not                                                                                      e on a road is still
                                                                                                              ;W ..V « M ‘« U 6       VVttVU. :;'VJT                             ,
                                                                                                              manslaughter by the law of E ngland
                                                                 is not enough. H is con
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1 .am: unable
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            : ••

                                                                                                               to accept an y o f them as valid. On. p . 639 of th e rep o rt *
                                                                                                               four prerequisites to a successful application for th e e x tiM ito |...,|f.>:| | e
                                                                                                                                             <>W                                   M0ornia..w
                                                                                                                                                                e h ite e A in C alif fBia..vaS  as

                                                                                                                                                                                     —               *?■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           t “was
                                                                                                                                                         jns given at


                                                                                                          , :">;had led and is not obiter,                               -
                                                                                                          *        A s ' to-'the'passage . I n' t he- l a s t p a ra g ra p h but._two o f m y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 on ,.-
                                                                                                                                                        frtnrtli nnsrertiiisite'.stated a t D.'.

        of the ordinary reasonable m otorist                You, of course, take into
                                                                                                              -'ittuS; the sam e,8 th ere "was no room fo r Mr. Littman’s argument on
                                                                                                               “**aggravating
                                                                                                                   .            circumstances” This passage was also not olnter but was
                                                                                                               essential
                                                                                                                es        to the reasoning leading to the rejection of Mr. L iftm an s argument
 ap p eal to the C o u rt of Appeal w as dismissed. By th e d ale' o f th e 'a p p e a l,':           H
                                                                                                               i„ c o m m o n with * e f o u « h p ^ u l» it t ._
                                                                                                               in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ^
 Jm m ngs [1983] 1 A.C. 624 had b een decided in y o u r Kkndships*- H ouse,':
 T h e reasons given for the dismissal of his appeal ;Were in'substance, that' .                               given in mianslau^iter cases'and a conviction followed, the trial judge w ftes
:5nce" f o tf ..,L ® s M p 'i:H o ise :.liad h eld' 'th at'.th e'iiuaedients'-'af A c 'c o m m m "             considering                                w ould s o t' know, % h rfie r t f e Jury                                           th a t
  506                                                                         m                                                                                                                                                                             •■■■V         507
  t o r i R oskill                       Reg. v. Seymour (H .L.(E.))          ™                        (1983]                                                                      Reg. v. Seymour                              )                        . L aid JtasH li
                                                    ken a risk o f which h e w as aw are o r not.                                                        m o to r m anslaughter " isth at is w ie ie , as in th e in stan t case, th e
 . 1 « J .; fcfW»   JM44VW;'W
                            k’
                             W ';   V;       <
                                             •         .MV*.             .. %»**.*#**•***       . -«
                                                                                                   • **
                                                                                                      ■«        ....

  I t is b y no m eans unusual fo r a guilty v erd ict to ;f e properly' foun ded fora.;;.:;
  n u m b er o f reasons a n d i t is lo r th e judge, w ho is ;the.perron'best pfewd/-                                              Hamilton’s attention to the 'decision' o f the- High Court o f Justiciary M ',
  to assess th e degree o f tu rp itu d e involved in t i e light o f th e evidence a n d j                                                      H .M . 'A d v o c a te , i9 6 0 J.C. 155,:a '« a s e decided before th e 'c h a n g e ;
  th e ju ry ’s verdict, to pass such sentence as b e thinks rig h t la a ll the}                                             7 7 7 "In'-the .'law m 1977>?It '■& clear from that dedsion'&nd fro m ' o th er jeases '■
 ..............................................    ;is':'of;..;;,cpaKC''•aiways.-:open..;to..'.jeyiew .jf.;                          decided in S cotland'since': 197? that the p ractice in Scotland h as bee® !© .,
                                                                                                                             .jj "^charge both culpable homicide, an offence identical with m anslaughter In
                                                                                                                                     .English law ,’-and the statutory offence "'m i to 'lea v e both charges with the..,,
                                                                                                                                           ju ry fo r tM r'-d e te n n in rtio i1a c c o rd in g 'to ftlie ir: view "of th rg ra v fty "|> f;tM 7
                                                                       eadverb                          a                                  offence p ro v e d .:'# , la v e h ad the 'advantage^ of reading th e ^ s p e e c fi'lfiin y '
                                                                                            "cbm m on.law                  ' ',                  ft Vi.A               «►!«&** #4          flfQ/■*♦«/■*** wht/'ft ftfltC WPVJl   lit SftdfIftfllj.
                                                                                                                                                My I « r d s i'''’fliere% as'';s 0 m e 'd eb ate before your Lordships whether in
                                                                                                                                           England and Wales it should, since the decision in J en n in g s [1983] 1 A.C.
                                                                                                                                       : GZ%.oe pemussioie to jom:m me                                                                      w um au.wgu*£
                                                                                                                                           slaughter and another alleging the statutory offence, it now being clear that
                                                                                                                                      “■                        '****■                                                              '1#lA ri#fr;SsT I R 'T lftlflf; f l f fet,W . '•




                                                                                                                                  D        ■ S e ^ ^ ^ ^ g h 't t e ^ l i B                              g r e d ie a ts                    of th e tw o offences
                                                                                                                                           SI© t h c ssu n c                                    f n m U n ila   'm a u   v a i r v S F T M ffe                   f lf tiS CM SQ



                                                                                                                        •              ainenBM uCgiw» 01 luipiiuuc- yciwccu uuc w<K».fluu' ouuwiwi *»      «*-«**•»%%«>*. ^
                                                                                                                                        relevant to the determination by jury o f a defendant’s guilt or innocence

                                                                                              I Lawrence
                                                                                              A '^ m m                 .               found, guilty of the offence w ith which: he has been charged. Y et a jury
                                                                                                                                        if req u ired ..^ m a k e V ^ o f c e between convicting a defendant o t m ^ o v                                                               ;
                                                                                                                                             manslaughter atjcbmmon |aw ;iu id .c m ^ ( ^ g |^ .;jM.;S e J ^ |^ x e ^ t u u » y . ^
                                                                                                                                             offence, would have to be told what criteria they should apply in deter­
                                                                                                                                             mining o n . :wMrfi\.sl3e "ot.tlie' b o u n d ary lin e between f te . two-, offences
                                                                                                                                             case":anam tt tl»«» "'A^Wn^amf'fnlfe             ':S y v 'c n le rio n ''iia t'" P a ila in e iit has""?--'?


                                            «§»i«
                                                                          mMM




                                                                                                                       ■ ■ :M .:', m m . should they find him guilty o f motor inansfeughter.,.i.H .llie judge w ere j
                                                                                                                                      th e n 'to sentence ’M in 'to' 'five years'" ( a s ' In-"the p resen t case) or less, as w ell
                                                                                                                                      he might, the jury would be le ft w ith a very p o o r im pression o f th e tria l
                                                                                                                                         .-V, :. ^
                                                         *    ,lty fo r the statutory                                   "'■c 'V 'Y -'
                                                                                                                                      process.
                                                 sentence in fact passed b y th e                                                            In England au<! Wales it Is.'for'the prosecution and n o t fo r .th e'co o rt to
                                                 upon his conviction fo r man-                                                        decide what charge "or' charges'; sho uld be" uiade'; ag ainst '¥ ;;p articiilar de-
J.slaughter. T his difference recognises that there a re !degrees^ol 'turpitude.^                                              j j fendahi. '-'The"prosecution Is en titled to 'co n sid er'affl the a rc u n is ta a c e s .o l ,
 w hich w ill v ary according to the grav ity o f the risk created by the m an n er ; 3                                               the case before;.so d e c i d i n g . "".In .tie.'in sta n t'c ase the^pioseCTtum.properly. ■
  of a defendant’s driving, l a these circum stances y our Lordships m ay think                                                       charged m anslaughter an d manslaughter alone. In doing so th e prosecution
  that in future it w ill only be very rarely th a t 'It::.w il .be .ap p ro p ria te to "                                             ...                               ITww,«   l%#ik,K.rAL                                                                              flint
 508
                                                                                                           „2.A .C .

v: c ra n e ;tti6Hgh on- the e v id e o a I t is difficult to see how w y reaso nab le jury
   cou ld have acquitted Mm o f th at o ffe n p e e tp u t h ad M b een acqritted.-he.                ^                                ,   -                 [h o u s e   o f lo rd s]

   would have gone unpunished even though the ju ry 'm ig h t h ave' convicted.
   Mm o f th e sta tu to ry offence h ad that been charged, '                                               TATE & LYLE INDUSTRIES LTD.
                                                                                                                     ^ iU liliC ii/    X r X A J L J * X>; JU *      X

 charges in a single indictm ent          In fatu re'a,M ;:;an y ;M se::iii.E n g Iaa< i:siid                 '      D 1 S T R IB U 1 JO N .L T D .)              and     A n o th e r .                       ■.;4'..'APPELLANTS
                                                                                                                                                                      -AND-'
                                                                                                      ;B                                                                                                        R e s p o n d e n ts '
                                                                                                           ''G R E A T E R ' LONDON' O T U N C IL ''.'A M )''A M T H ia
7 k d M iM t! ! f c e |v w ish ,b>4ptcceed..and not 'tov.aJkw'.'ihe^trial to ' proceed,
  upon b o th counts. TM s m ay result in, a ;dlffereni practice prevailing in                                                                                               L o r d D ip lo c k , L o r d K e ith o f K in k e l,
                                                                                                            1983       Jan. "24, '25»'M 2 7 ,- 3 1 ; .
  E ng lan d an d W ales from th a t which h as prevailed i s Scotland, ( i "part M                                    Feb. 1 , 2 , 3;                                     L o r d R o s k ill, ..Lord Bridge o f H a r w ic h
  th e U nited K ingdom over which n o criminal jurisdibtton i s dcercis®! by                                          M arch 24                                                                    and L o r d T e m p le m a n
  this H ouse. B ut since it is clear th a t th e substantive law k; the; same in .
  b o th countries, d if e r e n c ^ jitt:p ^                     ^                                         River—Riparian owner— Navigation— -P ort o f L o n d o n R .,.- ---
                                                                      *01                                       ow ner constructing jetties in bed of river under licence—Ferry
                                                    _ question as follow s: .“ Where                            terminals erected downstream causing saltation m vicinity o f
                                                            are that the victim was                          . jetties necessitating dredging—Whether riparian owner entitled
                                                                                                                to damages for negligence or nuisance— Whether having right
                                                                                                                to maintenance of particular^ depth of water—l^ n d m C™ *?
                                           m the ju ry the direction
                                                                                                                                                                                                    xxxii), s. 6 '


                                                                                                                       'finery ‘o r 'th e
            'WMMk                                                                                                   R e a c h u p st               the'W oolwich F eiifJ In 1922, under licence
                                                                                                WXM
                                                                                                                    5# a s 'f e s t e d ^ tte y '.had' 'Construct                                 r tf ia e i sugar

                                                                                                                      R C y x la U O D la lllC U a l i c e n c e iiv > £ U u i v a t w u u u v i v u u a u w          .
                                                                                                                   *'*he A c t    o f -1920 l o r "Me' c o n str u c tio n 'itf'.a s e c o n d j e tt y ( “ th e
                                                                                                                   Kraw sugar "jetty'” )? m ^tbe ;river ■ bed -and- fo r-th e "dredging m
                                                                                                                   lith e r iv e r b e d 'o f a c h a n n e l-g iv in g access t o i t fo r large vessels.
                                                                                                                   ^ c a rry in g r a # sugar and; o f a '-b erth a t I t e j h e a d j a x feet b e lo w
                    Wf&i,*

                                                                                                                     them by'the-Uetadan County Council (improvements; a                              c     t . -, -; -
                               PllSflSf                                                                              and with th e ap p ro v al: S q u ire d ;thereahd*H trf th e fcicand ;4---                          *
                                                                                                                     dcfendanC :;c6nstnicted two-'new':'t#inmafc;m';the'..-Ilianies fo r
                                                                                                                     th e Woolwich Ferry. T he 'fcffect'of the.vteriiHnals %as to cause                             : ; :.••-
                                                                                                                     silta tio n o f the" channel. a n d b e r th dredged b y th e 'first; p la in tiffs
                                                                                                                     fo r th e purpose's ,gf the.raw , su g a r,.j e tty , j n d o f th e t e d of t h e .:
                                                                         -   J. i4 ,V « «                            river between the -refined sugar -jetty-,,and- the- m ain .-shipping                                 -,
                                                                                                                     channel of-the river.:.:;.:'As- a.result,;to,.en ab le,th e jetties to be . •
                                                                                                                  -'o p e ra te d , th e ''fir s t'p la in tiffs ^ -m th the..consent o f th e s e c o n d     :
                                                                                                      :G           fdefendants,          -incurred
                                                                                                                     u c ic u u a iiia , .-m v u iiv u .a d d itio n a l dredging-costs b e tw e e n
                                                                                                                                                        uuuimwmw                                     1 96 7 , .
                                                                                                                     a n d 19 74 .totalling £ 5 4 0 ,0 0 0 . ----Thereafter, m a jo r a lte r a tio n s t o - -- -
                                                                                                                   v^uiC MJUppilljg,                   itiauv        .wjv sv_wuw uvivuumuw             m*v
                                                                                                                     siltation. --.-The .plaintiffs .brought 'an Paction' against the, defend-
                                                                                                                     a n ts -for,'.'--inter .---alia,'-.damages fo r ..-negligence and..,'nuisance.'-:"'.; -
                                                                                                                   rF orbes' I ..--held that, th e civil engineers, .who,had designed th e
                                                                                                                     te r m in a ls for,the'first d e fe n d a n ts should have "realised t h a t t h e y ■; v-


                                                                                                               1 L ondon C ounty C ouncil (Im provem ents) A ct 1962, ss. 17, 50 (3) (a): .»                                ; post,
                                                                                                            pp. 538f—539a, e).                                                             7
                                                                                                             - 2 P ort o f L ondon A ct 1968, s. 6 6 (I ) (b): see post, p. 535f.
 1933 the m atter may be approached differently if the victim jj^ n d e r the age of 16                           collided with resultant loss of life. The appellant was the captain of one of the
 years. That cannot be right. Section 1 of that Act is dealin g ^ p h offences created                            vessels and h 4 B c l his first mate and the captain and deck officer of the other
 by that section and not reforming the law relating to other offences.                                             vessel were all charged with manslaughter. At their trial none of the four gave
    In the present case the learned judge seems to have been led into error by the                                 evidence. There was much anecdotal evidence but little direct oral evidence of
 report in Gibson (supra) to which he had been referred when the submissions were                                  the respective relative position of the two hydrofoils and what precisely was
 made. T ie reference (in the passage which has been read of his direction on                                      seen and done as a result of observations made in the minutes and seconds
 manslaughter) to custody and care and to general custody and care goes to the                                     before the collision. The judge withdrew the case against the appellant’s first
 wording of section 1. There was no more justification in the present case for                                     mate, the captain and deck officer of the other vessel were both acquitted and
 inferring the presence of both defendants or active participation by the non-striking                             only the appellant was convicted. He appealed on the ground that the jury had
 parent than there was in Gibson. In our view, the passage which has been quoted                                   been misdirected on the question of manslaughter by negligence, the judge
 from the summing-up was telling the jury that they were entitled to draw inferences                               having directed them that the relevant risk they had to consider was the risk
 which the evidence did not allow, and which clearly they did draw because they                                    “of causing some injury albeit not necessarily serious but not so slight that an
                                                                                                                   ordinarily prudent individual would feel justified in treating it as negligible”
 convicted both defendants.;      si,rij j-*?     f;'<s'
   Accordingly, the convictions on count 1 must be quashed. Since the appeals                                      (adopting a passage in Archbold, 41st ed., para. 20-49, 2nd Supp.)
against conviction on count 2 are not pursued we say no more about them.                                               Held, that the model direction suggested by the House of Lords in L a w r e n c e
 , The result, distressing though it may be, is that a serious crime committed by                                  ( 1 9 81 ) 73 Cr.App.R. 1 applied in the present case—the jury should have been
someone goes unpunished. But we take comfort from the words of Lord Goddard                                        directed to consider whether the appellant’s act of navigation created an
C .J. in A bbott- Although (he s tr ia application of the wording of section 1 of the                              obvious and serious risk of causing physical damage to some other ship and
.Children and Young Persons ;Act.l933 ,to .the ..facts of. this case falls outside this                            thus to other persons who might have been travelling in the area of the
judgment, vwe. suggest’;that, .some consideration might be giyen to increasing the                                 collision at the relevant time. Where such a risk was created, the jury should
maximum penalty which may .be imposed in cases that do,fail within i t . u :                                        have considered whether the appellant had navigated without giving any
   Accordingly, the appeals against the convictions for manslaughter will be allowed,                               thought to the possibility of that risk or whether he had recognised that risk
        received W submission pn behalf of lam es Lane against Ms sentence of two                                ■ existed, but had nevertheless gone on to take it. THw, there had been a
fears’“im prisonment -m count 2. We see no reason to distinguish between the                                        fundamental misdirection and as the case was not one for the operation of the
appellants in respect of sentence on that count, and that appeal against sentence is                                proviso to section 2(1) of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968, the appeal would be
d     i   s    m    i   s   s    e      d     . i     -  .  v ‘••v > * ; ..     > • •                               allowed and the conviction quashed.
                                                                                                                       L a w r e n c e (1981) 73 Cr.App.R. 1; [1982] A.C. 510 as explained by Lord
                                                                    on f ° unt L         Convictions J ° r
                                             -.^m anslaughter quashed.          ,                        ■   :      Diplock in C a l d w e l l (1981) 73 Cr.App.R. 13, 19; [1982] A.C. 341, 354 and
                                                                                                                    dictum of Watkins, L . J . in S e y m o u r (1983) 76 Cr.App.R. 211, 216 applied.
  Solicitors: D irector of Public Prosecutions, for the Crown.                                                          [For gross negligence in homicide, see Archhold, 42nd ed., para. 20-49.]

                                                                                                                      This was an appeal by Kong Cheuk Kwan by special leave granted on June
                                                                                                                   25, 1984, against a judgment of the Court of Appeal of Hong Kong (McMullin,
’ ,:                        a-' J.       [     p ri vy   COUNCIL]    ~          '                                  V - P . , Li and Silke, JJ.A .), who on March 9, 1984, dimissed his appeal against
                                                                                                                   his conviction on March 25, 1982, of manslaughter in the High Court of Justice
                       '   f ”       '         '    BEFORE '    '
                                                                                                                   of Hong Kong (Pennington, J.).
         L O R D F R A S E R o r^ T U U -Y B E L T O N , L O R D ROSKILL, . .                                         The following facts are taken from the judgment of the Board.
- L O R D B R ID G E of H A R W IC H ,.L O R D B R A N D O N of O A K B R O O K                                       The prosecution of Kong and his eventual conviction arose out of a
                             S ir P W E N :JV O O D B O P S E -.;         ■                                        disastrous and seemingly inexcusable collision between two hydrofoil ferries
                                                                                                                   operating between Hong Kong and Macau at about 9.25 hours on July 11,
                                       .r*,:    fes*T f    £     »      i  ■
                              ^ si ^ TT——    —
                                             —        v...        ,.:r.      ,                                     1982. The collision took place at full speed in clear fine sunny weather with
                                                                                                                   visibility wholly unrestricted. Both hydrofoils were carrying passengers. The
           K O N G C H E U K K W A N (A P P E L L A N T ) v. TH E Q U E E N                          .
                                                                                                                   Flying Flamingo was carrying passengers from Hong Kong to Macau. The
   .     - ■    : ..  ,>       ■ (R E SP O N D E N T )    ; v; , ■ .
                                                                                                                   Flying Goldfinch was carrying passengers from Macau to Hong Kong. Kong
                   ,        .    Ju n e 17, 18, July 10, 1985              ..       ..         ‘                   was in command of the Flying Goldfinch and was at her helm. His first mate
                                                                                                                   Ng Yui-kin (“Ng”) was on look-out duty beside Kong. Captain John Coull
                                                                    Following Collision o f Vessek at              (“Coull”) was in command of the Flying Flamingo. The deck officer of the
       Sea—Direction to Jury.                                                                                      Flying Flamingo was Ho Yim Pun (“H o”). He was at her helm. Coull was on
                                                                                                                    look-out duty beside Ho. Two passengers travelling on the Flying Flamingo
       - In perfect weather conditions at about 9.25 a.m. one morning in July two
                                                                                                                   were killed as a result of the collision and others were injured. The Crown
        hydrofoils, said to be travelling at a combined speed of some 64 m.p.h.,
                                                                                                                           .      KO NG C H E U K K W A N (A P P E L L A N T )                     v.   TH E QUEEN (RESPO NDbN I )                                             /i
  20                                     P RIV Y COU N CIL
                                                                                                                     is t o b e b r o u g h t a g l U t t h e h e l m s m a n o r a g a in s t t h e l o o k - o u t o r a g a in s t b o t h a s a
             indicted all four of the men fust mentioned for manslaughter of those two                               r e s u lt o f w h a t e a c h is          alleged   to have       done       or to h ave o m itte d                to do, it is essential
             passengers who were so tragically killed. Kong and Ng were indicted on one                              t h a t t h e c a s e a g a in s t e a c h s h o u l d        be      s p e c if ic a lly a n d s e p a r a t e ly     proved w it h th e
             count in the indictment, Coull and Ho on another. Seventeen witnesses of fact                           required         d e g r e e o f c e r t a i n t y . B u t t h e C r o w n , h a v in g c h a r g e d all fo u r m e n m th is
             were called at the trial by the Crown including seven, passengers from the                              way a n d        th u s m a d e it i m p o s s i b l e     for   any     of   th em to be           called         b y th e   prosecution                 to
             Flying Flamingo, four seamen and two radio officers, but the indictment of all                          g i v e t h e ir    own     a c c o u n t s o f w h a t h a d h a p p e n e d , f o u n d its e lf c o n s t r a i n e d t o s e e k t o
    •        . four men in this manner made it impossible for any of those responsible for                           p r o v e its c a s e b y o t h e r m e a n s . In p a rt th e C r o w n                        relied     o n sta tem en ts m ad e by
             the navigation of the two hydrofoils before and at the time of the collision to                         c e r t a i n o f th e a c c u s e d a f t e r th e c o l l i s i o n . S u c h s t a t e m e n t s w e r e m a n y e v e n t o n l y
             be called as witnesses for the Crown. There was thus much anecdotal evidence                            e v i d e n c e a g a in s t th e .r m a k e r s . U s . n g         those     sta tem en ts,           the   C r o w n th en so u g h t to
             but little direct oral evidence of the respective relative positions of the two                         p r o v e w h a t h a d h a p p e n e d w it h th e a id o f e x p e r t e v . d e n c e s o m e o f w h ic h w a s a
             hydrofoils and of what precisely was seen and done as a result of observations                                                                                                                                                     the fa c t
                                                                                                                     b e s t o f d o u b t f u l a d m is s ib il it y . T h e e v i d e n t i a l p o s i t i o n w a s c o m p l i c a t e d b y
             made in the minutes and seconds before the collision. Ejach of the hydrofoils                            th a t o n e o f K o n g ’s s t a t e m e n t s , a s a r e s u lt o f        which                                        written
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  th e l o g w a s s u b s e q u e n t l y
             was said to have been travelling at a speed equivalent to 32 m.p.h. If that were                         u p , w a s m a n if e s t ly u n t r u e . T h e o t h e r ,           in   a n im p e r f e c t       translation was b u t little
             correct the collision took place in perfect weather conditions at a combined                             m o r e th a n a n a t t e m p t e d r e c o n s t r u c t io n o f w h a t it w a s s u g g e s t e d h a d h a p p e n e d . B u
             speed of some 64 m.p.h. Hydrofoils are no ordinary vessels. Their speed is                               p r o o f o f t h e u n t r u t h s , i f s u c h t h e y w e r e , in t h e s e s t a t e m e n t s          was      not p roof o f w hat
             much greater. They can be brought to a standstill almost instantly by stopping
                                                                                                                      in truth happened.                                              .                      .                                           ,         ,'
    ..       the engines. The main ground qf appeal was that the trial judge had misdirected                               T h e i r L o r d s h ip s f e e l b o u n d t o o b s e r v e th a t t h e y fin d it s tr a n g e th a t t h e d e c i s i o n
%• ■         A e jury.                    '    ' ,            -                                      - '              to       p r o s e c u t e all fo u r m e n s h o u l d h a v e b e e n t a k e n . A m o r e                      obvious        cou rse            if       it
             -.-^The appeal was argued on June 1? and 18,1985. :.                                          . <        w ere th ou gh t           proper to            laun ch     a p r o sec u tio n            fo r m a n s la u g h t e r a t all in t h e s e
'■ ■ ■ ? .            / ' ■   '■'(            S f : ; . 5'   :r   , ; s. ' . » v r , - '‘i ' . t ,          ■■   ^    c i r c u m s t a n c e s , w o u l d h a v e b e e n t o d e c i d e , a ft e r fu ll in v e s t i g a t i o n a n d t a k i n g o f
              David Steel, Q.C- and Michael jAngman for the appellant. •. ..                                          statem en ts,           a g a in s t w h i c h ,    if a n y , o f t h o s e        on        board       w h ic h       h y d r o f o il     such            a
             &Anthony Clarke, Q.C. and Toby Jenkyn-Jones (Senior Crown Counsel,                                       p r o s e c u t i o n w o u l d b e m o s t lik e ly t o s u c c e e d a n d t h e n la u n c h th a t p r o s e c u t i o n o n l y
  ieh- Hong-Kong) for the C r o w n . 'ia n'h ■; r-                                   ’
 t. Vt.-ir-,.-At .the. .conclusion of the argument the Board announced that the appeal                                                    >• p «™» «r » » *                                ‘t o s , h e                      c,own “ ca" “
                                                                                                                       t h o s e a g a in s t w h o m it h a d b e e n d e c i d e d n o t t o p r o c e e d .                                         .
        would be allowed and the conviction quashed, reason being given at a later                                         N o n e o f th e a c c u s e d g a v e e v i d e n c e , u n d e r s t a n d a b ly                     in     th ese     c ir c u m s t a n c e s
      ;.,date.                                                                  . , ■    - ■                           S u b m i s s i o n s w e r e m a d e a t t h e c l o s e o f th e C r o w n c a s e th a t n e i t h e r th e a p p e ll a n t
            July 10. Lord Roskill read the opinion of the B o ard ... : ! :.. ■.                                       n o r th e o t h e r t h r e e a c c u s e d h a d a c a s e t o a n s w e r . T h e le a r n e d j u d g e w it h d r e w th
 ■     1 ■(-!               ri: a , '' . J A i 3 \ T : '■ -Jr-, . . ; v r ....;                                        c a s e a g a in s t N g b u t o v e r r u l e d t h e s u b m i s s i o n s m a d e o n b e h a l f o f                    the. otheir t h r e e
 . July 10. The following judgment of the Board was delivered by Lord Roskill. O n                                     m e n . In th e r e s u lt K o n g a l o n e w a s c o n v i c t e d b y th e ju ry . H o                         was   a c q u it t e d . S o w a s
 March 25, 1983 the appellant Kong Cheuk Kwan (“Kong”) was convicted of
                                                                                                                       C o u l l a l b e i t o n l y by a m a j o r it y .                                                                                                ,         ,
 manslaughter after a three weeks’ trial before Pennington J. and a jury in the High                                     T h e e v i d e n t i a r y d if fic u lt y w h ic h             th u s f a c e d       th e    C row n         w a s o n ly        one         of         h
 Court of Justice of Hong Kong. On March 9, 1984 the Court of Appeal of Hong                                            d if f ic u lt ie s t o w h ic h         th e c a s e   g a v e r ise a t th e tn a L                The        very. « . s t e n c e ^ o               th e
 Kong (McMullin V -P „ and Li and Silke JJ.A .) dismissed Kong’s appeal.                                                e v i d e n t i a r y d iffic u lty m a d e it e v e n m o r e im p o r t a n t t h a n u s u a l th a t th e tria l J                                      g
 Subsequently on lune..25, ! l 98f . Kopg.was granted special leave to appeal to Her                                    s h o u l d g iv e t o th e ju ry a c o m p l e t e , c le a r a n d a c c u r a t e d . r e c t . o n a s t o th e la w w h i c h
 Majesty in, Council. A t the Conclusion of the hearing of the appeal on June 18,                                       t h e y w e r e t o a p p ly t o t h e f a c t s a s t h e y f o u n d t h e m t o b e . T h e .r L o r d s h ip s f e e l
 1985 their Lordships thought ifffigt% ft^Jpfe,. 'since Kong had been on continuous                                     b o u n d r e s p e c t f u lly t o s a y t h a t , w h ils t f e e l i n g m u c h s y m p a t h y f o r th e l e a r n e d ju g ,
 bail following his conviction and had been sentenced by the learned judge to 18                                        ^       d i r e c t i o n w h i c h he' g a v e a s t o t h e r e l e v a n t la w f a il e d t o s a tis fy           hose
 m o n t h s ’ imprisonment, that they .wonli hainpy advise her Majesty t h a t his appeal                              r e q u i r e m e n t s in m o r e w a y s th a n o n e . T h e i r L o r d s h ip s ’ s y m p a t h y f o r t h e e a r n e d
 should be allowed and his conviction quashed,; Their Lordships also then stated that                                   judge        a r is e s b e c a u s e    he   w a s e n c o u r a g e d b y c o u n s e l t o a d o p t a n d d id               adopt a s
 they would give their reasons for so humbly advising at a later date. This they now                                    b a s fs f o r h is d ir e c t io n a lo n g p a s s a g e w h ic h 'f ir s t m a d e its a p p e a r a n c e                    in p a r a g r a p h
 do. [The learned Lord of Appeal stated the facts and continued]                        :■                              20.49 o f t h e S e c o n d S u p p l e m e n t t o Archbold's Criminal Pleadm I                                “ j
     If a charge of manslaughter, in their Lordships’ experience most unusual if not                                    Practice ( 1982) 41st E d . a n d w h ic h p u r p o r t s t o reflect th e d e c i s i o n s o f t h e H o u s e of
 unique following loss of life in a collision at sea, is to succeed, it is essential that                                u T '»             S      owblu          (1 * 1 ) 73 Cr.App.R- 13; | 1 « ] A £ . 341 ,n<
 the Crown should be able to prove clearly and for certain every act whether of                                          m s n          71 C r A d d R             1 - [19821 A . C . 510 . T h e l e a r n e d j u d g e d o e s n o t a p p e a r t o
 commission or omission by those against whom that charge is brought and which is                                        have        b Jen ^ n v U e d "to        consider      'th ose    two     a u t h o r it ie s in d e t a i l      nor whether                  th e    law
 said not only to have caused death but to have been of so grave a character that a                                        a s , h e r e c le a r ly d e c l a r e d b y t h e H o u s e o f L o r d s , w a s c o r r e c tly s u m m a r is e d                         in    th a t
 conviction for manslaughter should follow. In the case of a collision at sea it is                                        paragraph            I M h a t s t e p h a d b e e n t a k e n , t h e ir L o r d s h ip s d o n o t d o u b t th a t t h e
 unlikely, though it is of course possible, that a single person will have been                                            learned        ju d g e w o u ld h a v e a p p re c ia te d th e errors                      in   th e o ffen d in g p assage                   whic
 responsible for the navigation of each of the vessels involved. On the contrary, it is                                    t h e y r e g r e t t o o b s e r v e still a p p e a r in t h e E ig h t h S u p p l e m e n t to th e                  41 st e d i t i o n              n
 far more likely that there will be at least a helmsman and a look-out and often                                           which        t h e y h o p e w ill b e r e v i s e d in t h e n e a r fu tu r e . T h e ir L o r d s h ip s w e r e t o l d b y
 others as well on the bridge of each vessel. If for example a charge of manslaughter
counsel that it was to the Second Supplement that the attenjjcm of the learned                       necessarily serious but not so slight a risk that an ordinary prudent individual would
judge was drawn at the trial.                                            Wp                          feel justified in treflfcg it as negligible”.
   The crucial passage in the learned judge’s direction which, is its text shows, was                    With profound respect this direction cannot be supported. There is (as in the
written out and given to the jury to take with them when they retired, appears at                    paragraph in the Supplements to Archbold) confusion between (1) causing death by
pages 773/4 of the record. A comparison between its text and that of paragraph                       an illegal act of violence, (2) what was said in R. v. C a l d w e l l (supra) (3) what
20.49 in the Second Supplement of the 41st edition of Archbold clearly shows that                    was said in R. v. L a w r e n c e (supra) and (4) what had half a century previously
that latter paragraph, numbered (7) in the supplement, was its source. The learned                   been said by the Court of Criminal Appeal in B a t e m a n (1925) 19 Cr.App.R. 8; 28
judge understandably added a few words by way of oral interposition to the text of                   Cox C.C. 33.
that paragraph so as to adapt it to the facts of the instant case.                                       The Court of Appeal was obviously critical of this passage but in a careful
   Their Lordships find it necessary to set out the text of the direction in full. The               judgment felt in the light of all the authorities able to conclude that other later
relevant part appears as one very long single sentence in the transcript but that                    passages in the summing up, including repeated references to “gross negligence”
very long single sentence requires to be broken down for the; purpose of analysis:                   put the matter sufficiently right. It is to be observed that from beginning to end of
                                                                                                     the summing up neither the word “reckless” nor the word “recklessness” ever
“The direction I give you, which I have had typed because I think this is not a trial
involving test of memories so I am going to give you a copy of this before you                       appears.
                                                                                                         Their Lordships have been gravely concerned that the source of this erroneous
retire, but I will read (it) out, this is the direction on the question of manslaughter
                                                                                                     direction should have appeared in the Second Supplement of the 41st edition,
by negligence. That is that the defendant and, of course, each of them considered
                                                                                                     especially as the paragraph numbered (7) purported to reflect the decisions of the
separately, is guilty of manslaughter if the Crown have proved beyond reasonable
                                                                                                     House of Lords in C a l d w e l l and L a w r e n c e .
doubt, firstly, that at the time he caused the "deceased’s death and, of course, you
                                                                                                         In the 41st edition itself, “involuntary manslaughter” so far as presently relevant
must be satisfied that each Of the accused did cause the deceased’s death, there was
                                                                                                     is dealt with in paragraph 20.48 under paragraphs 1(a) and (b). Sub-paragraph (a)
something in the'&CTmstanbes which wduld hav^ drawn the attention of an
                                                                                                      refers to death resulting from gross negligence. Sub-paragraph (b) refers, inter alia,
ordinary'prudent individual"and in. this case you would consider the ordinary
                                                                                                      to death resulting from an unlawful act “such as an assault which all sober and
prudent deck' officer or helmsman in the position of the defendant, to the possibility                reasonable people would inevitably realise must subject the victim to the risk of
that his' conduct was* capable of causing some injury albeit not necessarily serious to’              some harm resulting therefrom, albeit not serious harm whether the accused
the deceased including injury to health, which does not apply here, and that the
                                                                                                      realised this or not”.
risk’was" not so slight* that ah ordinary prudent individual would feel justified in                     The present case is of course one which falls within sub-paragraph (a) and not
treating'it as'negligible'and that,’ secondly, before the art or omission which caused                within sub-paragraph (b). Their Lordships are not concerned with the latter though
the /deceased’s ’death,** the defendant either failed to give any thought to the                      they see no reason to doubt the correctness of the general proposition just stated.
possibility of there j&eihg any such risk or Having recognised that there was such a                  But cases falling within sub-paragraph (a) are further dealt with in paragraph 20.49
risk he,'nevertheless, went oh'to take the risk, or was guilty of such a high degree                  of the 41st edition in six numbered sub-paragraphs which previously appeared in
of negligence in the means that he adopted to avoid the risk as to go beyond a                        the 40th edition (1979) in paragraph 2533. Though C a l d w e l l and L a w r e n c e are
mere matter of compensation between subjects and showed in your opinion, such                         referred to in the preface to the 41st edition as “extraordinary decisions” (a view
disregard for the life and safety of others as to amount to a crime against the State                 which the editor is of course at liberty to express in his preface if he so wishes)
and conduct deserving punishment.” .            .                  ..  .                    ?         they are understandably not referred to in the original text of paragraph 20.49
   It will be seen that this direction falls into two parts and the second part contains              though there is a passing reference to them in the final sentence of paragraph
alternatives, the acceptaMe4pjyfiJhertpf which when added to the first part would it                  20.49. No doubt it was this omission which necessitated the addition of paragraph
was said justify convictions f o ^ p ^ l f u g h t e r ^ , ,j .,Wv ,                                   (7) in the Second Supplement. But the view, whether correct or not, that the two
   The, first part includes the'phrase ^“tjjere ,,was something in the circumstances                  decisions are “extraordinary” cannot justify complete misrepresentation as to their
which would have drawn the attention of ai* p e n a r y prudent individual . . ... to the             effect in a text book of great authority widely used in England and Wales and
possibility that his conduct was capable o f causing som$ injury, albeit not necessarily               elsewhere as in Hong Kong where the relevant criminal law is the same.
serious to the deceased .        and that the risk was not so slight that an ordinary                     It thus becomes necessary for their Lordships to restate the current position
prudent individual would feel justified in treating it as negligible . .             (all emphasis     though in so doing they are largely repeating what was said in those two decisions
added).                                                   '      ,r-'t    . ■.• • «!.*/i*.- .          which have themselves since been applied in two further decisions in the House of
   The former alternative in the second part speaks of “there being any such risk"                     Lords, G o v e r n m e n t o f U n i t e d S t a t e s v. J e n n i n g s (1982) 75 Cr.App.R. 367; ’*
and then speaks of “such a risk" while the latter alternative in the second part                       [1983] 1 A.C. 624 and S e y m o u r (1983) 77 Cr.App.R. 215; [1983} 2 A.C. 493. In
speaks of “the means that he adopted to avoid the risk". (Again all emphasis                           C a l d w e l l (1981) 73 Cr.App.R. 13; [1982] A.C. 341 the House was concerned with
added). “The risk” in this last part clearly means in the context the risk already                     and only with the meaning of the word “reckless” in the statutory context of
referred to.                      ■                 ;                                                  section 1 of the Criminal Damage Act 1971. Any relationship between “recklessness
   Thus three times in this long sentence the learned judge is telling the jury that                   in arson cases and “recklessness” in cases of causing death by reckless driving or of
                                                                                                       motor manslaughter was not there under consideration. The crucial passage is in
the relevant risk for them to consider is the risk “of causing some injury albeit not
  the speech of Lord Diplock with which the other membersjAkthe majority of the                 T h e i r L o r d s h i M k m p h a s i s e th a t in th is p a s s a g e L o r d D i p l o c k w a s s p e a k in g o f a n
  House agreed and appears at pp. 19 and 354 of the relplftive reports. Their                o b v i o u s a n d s e r i ^ P r isk o f c a u s in g p h y s ic a l in ju r y                  created      b y th e d e f e n d a n t . H e
  Lordships think it right to quote 'this passage in full: “Nevertheless, to decide          w a s n o t t h e r e c o n c e r n e d t o d e a l w it h c a s e s w h e r e t h e c o n d u c t c o m p l a i n e d o f w a s o f
  whether someone has been ‘reckless’ as to whether harmful consequence's of a               a d e f e n d a n t ’s r e a c t i o n o r la c k o f r e a c t i o n t o s u c h a risk c r e a t e d b y a n o t h e r p e r s o n .
  particular kind will result from this act, as distinguished from his actually intending       T h e n ext d e c isio n o f th e H o u s e o f L ord s, to                         which      th e ir L o r d s h ip s o n ly r e f e r fo r
  such harmful consequences to follow, does call for some consideration of how the           t h e s a k e o f c o m p l e t e n e s s , is G o v e r n m e n t o f t h e U n i t e d S t a t e s                      of    A m e ric a         v   .
  mind of the ordinary prudent individual would have reacted to a similar situation.         Je n n in g s,    (supra).        T he H ouse        was       t h e r e c o n c e r n e d in t h e c o n t e x t o f a n e x t r a d it i o n
  If there were nothing in the circumstances that ought to have drawn the attention          t r e a t y w it h t h e U n i t e d       S tates o f         America            w h e t h e r t h e c o m m o n la w o f f e n c e o f
  of an ordinary prudent individual to the possibility of that kind of harmful               m otor       m a n sla u g h te r       had      been          im p l i e d l y     rep ealed            by   th e      crea tio n         of     th e
  consequence, the accused would not be described as ‘reckless’ in the natural               co rr e sp o n d in g statu tory           offence       o f c a u s in g d e a t h b y r e c k le s s               driving,         s in c e b o t h
  meaning of that word for failing to address his mind to the possibility; nor, if the       o f f e n c e s a r o s e in     similar   f a c tu a l c ir c u m s t a n c e s . T h e H o u s e h e ld th a t it h a d n o t .
  risk of the harmful consequences was so slight that the ordinary prudent individual           F i n a lly   in     S ey m o u r       (supra)      th e      H ouse          of    L ords       h e ld    th a t    th e    a p p r o p r ia t e
  upon due consideration of the risk would not be deterred from treating it as               d i r e c t i o n in m o t o r m a n s l a u g h t e r c a s e s w a s t h e s a m e as h a d b e e n s u g g e s t e d in
  negligible, could the accused be described as “reckless” in its ordinary sense if,         L aw rence         (supra)         in c a s e s w h e r e o n l y t h e s t a t u t o r y            offence         had b e e n charged.
  having considered the risk, he decided to ignore it. (In this connection the gravity       T h e i r L o r d s h i p s t h in k it r ig h t t o a d d th a t t h e w o r d a d d e d a t th e e n d o f th e a n s w e r
  of the possible harmful consequences would be an important factor. To endanger             t o t h e c e r t i f ie d q u e s t i o n r e g a r d i n g t h e v e r y h ig h d e g r e e o f th e risk o f d e a t h w e r e
  life must be one of the most grave.) -..-v i In my opinion a person charged with an        a d d e d n o t t o a lt e r t h e p r e - e x i s t i n g l a w a s t o m a n s la u g h t e r b y r e c k l e s s n e s s b u t o n ly
  offence under section 1(1) of the Criminal Damage Act 1971 is “reckless as to              t o p o i n t t o t h o s e c a s e s in w h i c h it still m ig h t b e t h o u g h t a p p r o p r ia t e t o c h a r g e th e
  whether any such property would be destroyed or damaged” if (1) he does an act             c o m m o n la w rather th a n th e sta tu to ry o ffe n c e .                             ...       ,                          ...
ifrfiich in fact creates an obvious risk that property would be destroyed or damaged            It is p la i n t h a t , a s o f t e n          h a p p e n s in E n g lis h c r im in a l a n d c iv il l a w , t h e la w
  and (2) wben he does the act he either has not given any thought to the possibility        a p p l i c a b l e t o i n v o l u n t a r y m a n s l a u g h t e r h a s d e v e l o p e d o n a c a s e b y c a s e b a s is a n d
  of there being any such risk or has recognised that there was some risk involved           i n d e e d h a s d e v e l o p e d r a p id ly in r e c e n t         years       s i n c e th e o f f e n c e o f c a u s in g d e a t h b y
  and has nonetheless gone on to do it. That would be a proper direction to the jury:        r e c k l e s s d r iv in g a p p e a r e d in s e c t i o n    50 o f t h e C r im in a l Law A c t 1977.
.-cases . m ^theijC ourt. of.- A ppeal - .which held otherwise should be regarded as            T h e i r L o r d s h i p s a r e o f t h e v i e w t h a t t h e p r e s e n t s t a t e o f th e r e l e v a n t la w in

  overruled.’',         ,      .      .                                       v;             E n g l a n d a n d W a l e s a n d t h u s in H o n g K o n g is c le a r . T h e m o d e l d ir e c t io n s u g g e s t e d
     Lord Diplcjck-yas in 'th a t passage, thus stating (in part) a negative proposition.    in L a w r e n c e       (supra)       a n d h e l d in S ey m o u r              (supra)        e q u a l l y a p p lic a b le t o c a s e s o f
. H e . was .dealing With the factual situation where there was nothing to alert the         m o t o r m a n s l a u g h t e r r e q u i r e s first, p r o o f t h a t t h e v e h i c l e w a s in fa c t b e i n g d r iv e n in
  ordinary prudent individual to the possibility of harmful consequences or where            s u c h a m a n n e r a s t o c r e a t e a n o b v i o u s a n d s e r i o u s risk o f c a u s in g p h y s ic a l in ju r y t o
  that possibility was so slight that the individual could properly treat the risk as        a n o t h e r a n d s e c o n d , t h a t t h e d e f e n d a n t s o d r o v e e i t h e r w it h o u t h a v in g g iv e n a n y
  negligibly,; Such conduct was not “reckless” within the ordinary meaning of that           t h o u g h t t o t h e p o s s i b i l i t y o f t h e r e b e i n g s u c h a risk         or     h a v in g r e c o g n i s e d th a t       there
  ordinary English word. - . * vhr                    - - ,• .       : ,- ,        ;     <   w a s s u c h a risk n e v e r t h e l e s s t o o k it. O n c e th a t d ir e c t io n is g iv e n , it is fo r th e                            jury
 j Their Lordships how move to L a w r e n c e (1981) 73 Cr.App.R. 1; [1982] A.C.            t o d e c i d e w h e t h e r o r n o t o n t h e ir v i e w o f t h e e v i d e n c e t h e r e l e v a n t c h a r g e h a s b e e n
  510. There ■ the House was dealing with death caused by reckless driving. The              proved.
  House unanimously accepted the view of the majority in R. v. C a l d w e l l (supra)         I n p r in c ip le t h e i r L o r d s h i p s s e e n o r e a s o n w h y a c o m p a r a b le d ir e c t io n                     should      not
  as to the meaning of. “reckless!*...and of “recklessness”. It applied that ruling to the   have      been        g iv e n    in   th e   present          case      as       r e g a r d s t h a t p a rt o f th e c a s e              w h ic h
  statutory'-.’offence \b f causing5Seath ;.by . .reckless driving and suggested a model     c o n c e r n e d th e a lle g e d n a v ig a tio n o f th e          Flying Goldfinch by K o n g a n d in d e e d as
  direction iii such cases        »,             , v          .        . «       • ” ■ .'    r e g a r d s t h e a l l e g e d n a v i g a t i o n o f th e    Flying Flamingo b y th e o t h e r t w o d e f e n d a n t s .
  r. Lord Diplock, on this occasion speaking for-all the noble and learned Lords then        D i d t h e ir r e s p e c t i v e a c t s o f n a v ig a t io n c r e a t e a n o b v i o u s a n d s e r io u s risk o f c a u s in g
  present,’-said,* after quoting from h issp eech in L a w r e n c e , (at p p .ll and 526   p h y s ic a l d a m a g e t o s o m e o t h e r s h ip a n d th u s t o o t h e r p e r s o n s w h o m ig h t h a v e b e e n
  respectively);.,,.<i!                                                  - -.                t r a v e llin g in th e a r e a o f th e c o l l i s i o n a t th e m a t e r ia l t im e ? I f s o d id a n y o f th e
  “In my view, an appropriate instruction to the jury oh what is meant by driving            d e f e n d a n t s b y t h e ir r e s p e c t i v e a c t s o f n a v ig a t io n s o n a v ig a t e e it h e r w i t h o u t h a v in g
  recklessly would be that they must be satisfied of two things: first, that the             g i v e n a n y t h o u g h t t o t h e p o s s i b ilit y o f th a t risk o r , w h ile r e c o g n i s in g th a t th e                        risk
  defendant was in fact driving the vehicle in such a manner as to create an obvious         e x i s t e d , t a k e t h a t risk ?
  and serious risk of causing physical injury to some other person who might happen              U n f o r t u n a t e l y th is d i r e c t i o n w a s n o t g i v e n . T h e d ir e c t io n g iv e n a n d its s o u r c e in
  to be using the road or of doing substantial damage to property; and second, that          Archbold, 41 st             e d . , S e c o n d S u p p l e m e n t , in th e p a s s a g e w h ic h r e a d s “ h is c o n d u c t
  in driving in that manner the defendant did so without having given any thought to         w a s c a p a b l e o f c a u s i n g s o m e in j u r y a lb e it n o t n e c e s s a r il y s e r io u s t o t h e d e c e a s e d
  the possibility of there being any such risk or, having recognised that there was          „ . . a n d th a t t h e r isk w a s n o t s o s lig h t t h a t a n o r d in a r y p r u d e n t in d iv id u a l w o u l d
  some risk involved, had nonetheless gone on to take it. It is for the jury to decide       f e e l j u s t i f ie d in t r e a t i n g it a s n e g l i g i b l e ” h a s b e e n              tak en from           L ord         D i p l o c k ’s
  whether the risk created by the manner in which the vehicle was being driven was           n e g a t i v e p r o p o s i t i o n . T h i s h a s t h e n b e e n t u r n e d r o u n d a n d th e p r o p o s it io n t r e a t e d
  both obvious and serious and, in deciding this, they may apply the standard of the          a s a n a ff ir m a tiv e s t a t e m e n t o f th e r e l e v a n t risk. W it h all r e s p e c t , th a t c a n n o t b e
  ordinary prudent motorist as represented by themselves.”
 26                                   P R IV Y C O U N C IL                                                KOlNU LtltUN IVW                                            'i^ . i**»_.

  justified and in their Lordships’ view vitiates the directjor^ E he first part of the           conviction q u a s f^ ^ T h e Crown must pay Kong’s costs at the trial, in the Court of
  second limb purports to repeat in p art the model direction in Law rence (supra)                Appeal and before the Board.
  but unhappily that direction is vitiated by the reference back to the statement of                                                                            Appeal allowed
  the nature of this risk to which their Lordships have already referred. The second                                                                            Conviction quashed
 part of the second limb appears to be a throwback to B ateman [1925] 19 Cr.App.R.
 8. Though Lord Atkin in his speech in A n drew s v. D irec to r of Public                          Solicitors: Cameron Markly, for the appellant; Macfarlanes, for the Crown.
 P rosecutions (1937) 26 C r.A pp.R . 34; [1937] A.C. 576 did not disapprove of what
 was there said, he clearly thought, (at p. 47 and p. 583), that it was better to use
 the word “reckless” rather than to add to the word “negligence” various possible
 vituperative epithets. Their Lordships respectfully agree. Indeed they further
 respectfully agree with the comment made by Watkins LJ. in delivering the
 judgment of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) iii S eymour (1983) 76                                                                                        BEFORE
 C r.A pp.R. 211, 216: ^                                                 !
 “We have to say that the law as it stands compels us to reject Mr. Connell’s                      L O R D JU S T IC E O ’C O N N O R , M r . JU S T IC E M A R S -JO N E S                                              and      M r.
 persuasive submissions and to hold that the judge’s directions were correct,                                                 JU S T IC E H O D G S O N
 although we are of the view that it is no longer necessary or helpful to make
 reference to com pensation'and ae^igence.'TTieLJ«mENCE'''4rertioii*on recklessness
 Is''comprehensive''and ’o f ginerai application M I f dffencetj. iicludlngrmanslaBglitet
 involving the driving 'o f m otor'’Ve!iicles;faHessIy!‘l i J ’!fei» Id b^’ pven*to’'juries                                                 ROY WILLIAM GARNER
 without* in'1'any way being' 'diluted. W hether' a driver at; th e , material time was                                                  D A V ID FREDERICK BULLEN
 conscious of th e risk he was runningo'r g a v e 'io 'tfe n g lit fo ils existence™is a matter                          .      .       KENNETH CHARLES HOW ARD
 which’ affects punishment for which’ purposes' the judge wifi have to decide, if he
 can, giving the benefit of doubt to the convicted person,In which state of mind that                               .        -•             ■     May 14 , 22, July 3 1 , 1985
 person had dnven at the material time.              ..     ...      . ,      /     - .
                                                                                                  Sentence—Combined Sentences o f Imprisonment, Fine and Bankruptcy Order on
 t Learned co u n sello r the Crown pressed their Lordships to apply the proviso to
                                                                                                       Conviction fo r Fraudulent Evasion o f Value Added Tax—Whether Permissible —
section 2(1) o f the Criminal Appeal A ct 1968 even' though their Lordships felt                       Guidelines to be Followed—Finance A ct 1972 (c.41), s.38(1)—Powers o f
obliged to’, hold that .therj? had been the misdirection already mentioned. Their
                                                                                                       Criminal Courts Act 1973 (c.62), ss.30(l), 35(4A), 39(1).
Lordships find themselves unable to take this course. They regard the misdirection
as so fundamental (especially as it was in writing and given to the jury on                                By      se c tio n       38 ( 1) o f t h e F i n a n c e A c t 1972: “ I f a n y p e r s o n is k n o w i n g l y
retirement) that it is impossible to assert that a properly directed jury must                        c o n c e r n e d in . . . t h e fr a u d u le n t e v a s i o n o f ta x . . . h e s h a ll b e lia b le                ...(b)
inevitably have reached a verdict of guilty against Kong. There was in. connection                    o n c o n v i c t i o n o n in d i c t m e n t , t o a p e n a lt y o f £ 1 , 0 0 0 o r t h r e e t i m e s th e a m o u n t
with this part of the submission on behalf of the Crown much discussion regarding                     of    th e        ta x , w h ic h e v e r     is th e     g r e a t e r , o r t o i m p r i s o n m e n t fo r a te r m          not
the facts, with a view to jhow ing that on a proper direction a conviction was                        ex ce e d in g tw o years, or to b o th .”
inevitable. -Their IJ3rdshipf 'd |d _ jo | .find, it necessary to hear counsel for Kong on                 B y sec tio n            30 ( 1) o f th e P o w e r s o f C r im in a l C o u r t s A c t 1973: “ W h e r e a
this issue and it would l i o t ^ j i g i r t £$£ them to. offer any detailed comments upon           p e r s o n is c o n v i c t e d o n i n d i c t m e n t o f a n y o f f e n c e o t h e r th a n a n o f f e n c e fo r
the facts beyond observing that the supnnjing-up does not .seem to have distinguished                 w h i c h th e s e n t e n c e is fix e d b y l a w , th e c o u r t . . .              m a y i m p o s e a fin e in lie u o f
between an obvious risk created by ,|h o « pavigating .each hydrofoil by their own                    o r in a d d it io n t o            dealing       w ith h im in a n y o t h e r w a y in w h ic h t h e c o u r t h a s
navigation and the response by those on board one hydrofoil to any obvious risk                       p o w e r t o d e a l w it h h im . . . ”
created by the navigation of the other. ,-y                           Is                                   By      se c tio n        35 ( 4 A ) : “ W h e r e the c o u r t c o n s id e r s — (a) th a t it w o u l d b e
    Their Lordships thus do not find it necessary to discuss the evidence afforded by                 a p p r o p r ia t e b o t h t o i m p o s e a fin e a n d t o m a k e a c o m p e n s a t i o n o r d e r ; b u t               (b)
the written statements of those involved or their evidential status. This last matter                 t h a t th e o f f e n d e r h a s in s u f fic ie n t m e a n s t o p a y b o t h a n a p p r o p r ia t e fin e a n d
is now concluded by th e decision of th e Board in Leung K am -K wok v. R. (1985)                     a p p r o p r ia t e c o m p e n s a t i o n ,       th e c o u r t s h a ll g i v e p r e f e r e n c e t o c o m p e n s a t i o n
81 Cr.A pp.R. 83, judgment in which was given after the hearing in the Court of                       ( t h o u g h it m a y i m p o s e a fin e a s w e l l ) . ”
Appeal in the present case.                                         : .                                    B y sec tio n            39 ( 1): “ W h e r e a p e r s o n is c o n v i c t e d o f a n o f f e n c e b e f o r e t h e
    It was for these reasons that their Lordships, in respectful disagreement with the                C r o w n C o u r t a n d it a p p e a r s t o th e c o u r t th a t—             (a)   a s a r es u lt o f th e o f f e n c e , o r
Court of Appeal regarding the misdirection by the learned judge, felt constrained                     o f t h a t o f f e n c e t a k e n t o g e t h e r w i t h a n y o t h e r r e l e v a n t o f f e n c e o r o f f e n c e s , lo s s
humbly to advise her Majesty that this appeal must be allowed and Kong’s                              o r d a m a g e ( n o t a t t r ib u t a b le t o p e r s o n a l in j u r y ) h a s b e e n s u f f e r e d b y o n e o r
                                                                                                      more      person s            whose       id e n t it yis k n o w n t o      th e c o u r t; a n d  (b) th e a m o u n t , o r
                                                                                                      a g g r e g a t e a m o u n t , o f th e           loss o r d a m a g e     exceeds £       15, 000 ; th e c o u r t m a y , in
                                                                                                                                                             83 C r .A pp .R.                  C .A .                             K evin G o o d p e llo w (T h e L o r d C h ie f J u s t ic e )           23

                                 their own safety but to, ensure that the supply of information about criminal
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                KEVIN GOODFELLOW
                                 activities does n ot dry up’: see Marks v. Beyfus (1890) 25 Q.B.D. 494. In
                                 general this should be the approach o f the Courts; but cases may occur
                                 when for good reason the need to protect the liberty of the subject should                                                                                     C ou rt o f A p p eal    (T h e L ord C h ief Justice, M r. Justice B oreham
                                 prevail over the need to protect informers. It will be for the accused to                                                                                                       and M r. Justice T aylor): M arch 1 0 ,1 4 , 1986
                            •'* show that there is good reason.”                                         r, >; • • -;u-~                                ■.;* -                         - .
                        . It is to be observed that the rule is a rule of exclusion subject to a duty to                                                                                       M anslaughter—A rson —Causing Death by Reckless Conduct—Intentional Setting
                         adm it in order to avoid a miscarriage of justice. Lord Esher M.R. emphasised                                                                                         Fire to Own Home to Enable Rehousement—Intention to Rescue Occupants—
                         that the rule is a rule of exclusion by an addendum to his judgment in Marks v.                                                                                       Rapid Spread o f Fire Resulting in Death o f Three Occupants—Unlawful and
                         Beyfus, where he said at p.500: “I desire to say,/so that there shall be no                                                                                           Dangerous Act—Direction to Jury.
                        possibility o f mistake as to my opinion, that evert if the Director of Public
                                                                                                                                                                                                   In a c a se o f m a n sla u g h ter p erp etra ted b y m ean s o f an u n law fu l an d d a n g ero u s
                        Prosecutions had been willing to, answer the questions put to him the judge
                                                                                                                                                                                               act th e ju ry o u g h t t o b e d ir e c te d to th e e ffe c t th at w h ere th e d e fe n d a n t d id an
                        ought not to have allowed him to do so.” Thus even if the prosecution do not
                                                                                                                                                                                               u n la w fu l a ct of su ch a k in d a s a ll so b er and rea so n a b le p e o p le w o u ld in ev ita b ly
                       ■ w o k e the rale, the lodge is aonetljeless obliged to apply It. i d \ I ,             ,
                                                                                                                                                                                               r e co g n ise th a t it w o u ld su b je c t a n o th er h u m an b ein g t o , at le a s t, th e risk o f
                      d*: H ie question is whether the p i e ’protects the identity of the person who has
                                                                                                                                                                                               so m e h arm resu ltin g th e refro m , a lb eit n o t se rio u s h arm , and h e c a u se d d ea th
                       .allowed his premises to be used forsurveillance aiutthe identity o f the premises
                                                                                                                                                                                               th e r e b y , h e w a s g u ilty o f m a n sla u g h ter. It w as n o t n ecessa ry fo r th e d e fe n d a n t’s
                      ;themselves.The only decision i p o n l f c ^ question to which oar attention has
!:'                                                                                                                                                                                            u n la w fu l a ct to b e d ir e c te d at th e v ictim so lo n g a s th e re w a s n o fresh an d
                        te e n drawn is the decision <rf ^’Divisional Court in Webb v.,C a tch lo w (1886) 3
                                                                                                                                                                                               in te r v e n in g c a u se b e t w e e n th e a ct an d th e d ea th .
                                                     » w s f e c t e r j « s e > D enm an--J. *aid at p.160 that in
' tv "              :                        i* p B c e m a h ^ t t ‘m e d                       U "'% M 'made" Ms                                                                                 In t b e        v. iM tiren ee (1 9 8 1 ) 7$ Gr.App.1.. 1; [19821 A .C .’51®, m anslao^itei
      -                                                                                                                                                                                        ty p e o f c a s e th e jury o u g p t t o l i e ’ iirecteci th a t th e y h a d t o b e safisied th at .tie
                        observation, ." H e magistrates had totally msappfehended t t e law*appicaNe to .
                                                                                                                                                                                               defendant w a s acting in ' such a m a n n er as to cfeate ant o b v io u s a iid sc fk m s risk
                                                  not; appear.that the Court either paused to consider the -
                                                                                                                                                                                               o f c a u sin g p h y sica l injury t o some p e r so n a n d , seeowHf» th a t having; le e o ^ is e i
                      Ibaas; o f tMt 'tondmloii or ©xangned 'Attorney General v.B riant(supra). The
                     'Court ifid.into'liavtjpjielp from 'tie’prosecBtor,' in that lierwas not represented.                                                                                     that there was some risk involved, b e h a d n e v e r th e le ss gone, on to take I I .' * * •
                    »We can^deriveassistance £tfcn ihe case. " *■>                                                                                                                                 *Hie a p p ella n t lived in a co u n c il h o u se w ith h is w ife and th r ee c h ild ren . H e
                                                                                                                                                                                               w ish e d t o b e r e h o u se d b e c a u se o f d ifficu lties w ith tw o n eigh b o u rs; b u t b e in g in
 ■ ft;   • '.       'tMJM our judgm entN i^ M w lu d i give rise tothe rule that''itii informeris sot
                                                                                                                                                                                               arrears w ith h is ren t h e w a s u n a b le to ex ch a n g e h is h o u se fo r a n o th er . H e
: . ■           .    - to .be .tentified #pply with equal force to the identification a t the owner or
                                                                                                                                                                                               d e c id e d , th e r e fo r e , t o se t it o n fire in su ch a w ay a s to crea te th e im p ressio n th a t
                    s^ c u p er/o f:; ^ e a w .: w ^ ^ '|n r e e ila iic e 'a n d to the identification. of the
                                                                                                                                                                                               a p e tr o l b o m b h a d b e e n th row n th rou gh th e w in d o w b y o n e o f th e tw o
                    'premises themselves.(file cases Ire iadistingnishable,:and the same rule must
                                                                                                                                                                                               n eig h b o u r s. L a te o n e n ig h t h e carried o u t that p u rp o se w h ile , in a d d itio n , h is
                     i apply to ta d i^ llB t being so the indy question could be as to whether the
                    i learned .judge ’.in the instant case ' k si ’correct in not exercising -the duty                                                                                         girl frien d w a s in th e h o u se . H e in te n d ed th at th e ad u lts in th e h o u se sh o u ld
                                                                                                                                                                                               ta k e th e ch ild ren o u t o f it o n c e th e fire w a s sta rted . H e p o u red petrol o v e r th e
                    . exceptionally to admit in order to avoid a miscarriage of justice. Mr. Offenbach '
                                                                                                                                                                                               sid eb o a rd , ch a ir an d w a lls o f th e liv in g ro o m th e n ig n ited th e p e tr o l. T h e fire
                      for the appellant accepted that if the rule in regard to informers applied, the
                                                                                                                                                                                               sp rea d v ery rap id ly . U s in g a la d d er fro m a n eig h b o u r’s h o u se th e a p p ella n t
                      performance of the duty could not be criticised. We agree. ■" • - 1
                                                                                                                                                                                               r escu ed tw o o f h is ch ild r e n , h a n d ed to h im b y h is w ife from a b ed ro o m w in d o w .
                          For,those reasons, this^appeal is dismissed. ■'                        i ■ ■; .5:       •
                                       -    ’ , - f ti                                                 „ .                                                                            ■'       T h e fire th e n b e c a m e t o o in te n se to sa v e a n y o n e e ls e . T h e ap p ella n t’s w ife a n d
                                   ■       . i                                                           -                                         Appeal dismissed                            tw o -y ea r -o ld so n d ied in h o sp ita l fro m th e ir b u m s an d th e ap p ella n t’s g irl frien d
                                                                                                                                                                                               w a s a sp h y x ia ted . T h e a p p ella n t w a s ch arg ed w ith th r ee c o u n ts o f m a n sla u g h ter
                                                                                                                                                                                               (c o u n ts 1 to 3 ) , o n e o f arso n (c o u n t 4 ) an d o n e o f a rso n b ein g reck less w h e th e r
                                                                                                                                                                                               th e liv e s o f th o s e in th e h o u se w o u ld b e in d an ger (co u n t 5 ). T h e ju d g e d irected
                                       .   '                :                                                       -        . '■                            .                             :
                                                                                                                                                                                               th e Jury o n th e u n la w fu l a ct a sp ec t o f th e o ffe n c e o f m a n sla u g h ter, in clu d in g
                                                                          - V ‘V •>*'-,'%                ,,        ,
                                                                                                                                                                                               d irectio n s m o re ap p ro p ria te to th e Lawrence (supra) ty p e o f c a s e , w h ich w e r e
                    K                                                       I_____ *.~r                  »                                                        ■.> ;.
                                                                                                                                                                                               m o re fa v o u r a b le to th e a p p ella n t th an i f th e y h ad b e e n o m itted . T h e a p p ella n t
                            :                                             .       ' --                                  *                                                          ■ ' .••     w a s c o n v ic te d o n all c o u n ts. O n'appeai again st th e co n v ictio n s fo r m a n sla u g h ter
                        !                                       .a's'.v ■’,'u v -ir<               c-t                  .,rr ■■ y-'VHsit."
                                                                                                                                                                                               an d arso n b e in g re c k le ss a s to w h eth er th e liv es o f th o se in th e h o u se w o u ld b e
                                                        ' •'                      m il    K-1 K'                            :*■              r>i:\               H r . -. ’.-:--
                                               :                            ;   ■ ,< ”V   ; , i '■«,   . • •.                         :f   :;A;   !*i
                                                                                                                                                                                               in danger                           ,                 ,                                      , .
                                                   '■                       >I                                  , :               j        ., 1=;.^,*...rc-af                              .   H e ld , th a t, fo r th e a b o v e re a so n s, th e c a se w a s o n e capable o f fa llin g w ith in
                                    ' -                 ■           -v > .. - -v                                    =                                                              ■. , -. .   eith e r o r b o th ty p e s of m an sla u g h ter. O n th e Lawrence a sp e c t, th e ju ry m ig h t
                    ’           ■ ' : ’                                :1                   ; ; .:r:             .■ ,       •. ;                        ,,   f:;;                              w e ll h a v e b e e n sa tisfied that th e a p p ella n t was'-ietiftg^ia suck, a n w a a e r .a s t o
                                                                                                                                                                                               c r e a te an obvious and se r io u s risk o f causing p h y sica l injury to 'S o m e .p erso n , a n d
                                                                                                                                                                                               se c o n d ly th a t h e , h a v in g r eco g n ised th a t th e r e h a d b e e n so m e risk , h a d
      nevertheless gone on to take it. The present casflfeas equally one for the                             bomb thrown thflfefch the window by one of the men. This story waswhat he
        unlawful and dangerous act” direction as set out a ® . The judge’s directions                        initially told the pllSce when they started to make inquiries.
      were correct and the convictions on counts 1 to 3 for manslaughter were neither                           In fact he had obtained the petrol from the motorbike of a friend of his called
      S f o n * '? n ^      , ? 0ly: furt,le r’ 88 to CO™* 5, the direction was adequate in                  Dalzell. Part of it, according to him, he used as an experiment in the garden,
      relation to the recklessness of the appellant as to w hether the lives of the
                                                                                                             when the flames simply ignited in one place. The remainder he used as already
      p e r n * ujwtairs were in danger. Accordingly, the appeal would be dismissed.
                                                                                                             described.      ,           :
      n fP u M r P      V- 7? f Qr m (1985> 82 Cr.A pp.R. 18 considered. D irector                              According to Dalzell, he, Dalzell, told the appellant it was a stupid idea, and
      M E R Z T T m in , \               J m a (1976) 62 C r A P P R - 291; [1976] 2                         Jillian, who was present at the time, disapproved of the plan saying that she was
                                                                                                             not going to risk her life and the lives of the bairns for him (the appellant). The
     !^ a » 1 f 7 ? Q S p 7 R(» 5^                          App'R! »     119661 1 QB- 55                     appellant however told the Jury that the fire was M ilan's own idea and that she
        {For manslaughter, see Archbold, 42nd ed., paras. 20-47 to 51.]
                                                                                                             talked him into carrying it into effect. Jillian had (wisely) arranged for her three
     ^ Appeal against conviction.                     ■                  !                                   children to sleep elsewhere.                   ... •
                                                                                                                The appellant’s three children remained in the house because,as he said, it
      B e ^ L o n rt th2’ 198n f the Crown Court at *4wcastle-upon-Tyne ’(Judge
      Beaumont) the appellant was convicted on three counts of manslaughter (counts                          would have been suspicious if they had not been there. The idea was that once
      /rinW « f                ^C0™ t 4) , and one of arson with intent to endanger life                     the ir e started the adults would take the children from the house and all would
      (corat 5) and was sentenced to six years’ imprisonment concurrent.       ■                             therefore escape. However the fire spread very rapidly. The appellant fetched a
     , inetacts appear m the judgment. 1              "-'-i- . » c-               ■> ,r                      ladder from a neighbour’s house, put it against a bedroom window and took to
     K T h e main ground o f appeal was that the trid ju d « did not dirert the iurv on                      safety two of his children handed out to' him by his wife. H e ir e by then was
                                                          Caldwell (1981) 73 Cr.App.R. 237; p982]            too intense for anyone else to be saved. Jillian was asphyxiated inside the house.
                                                                                                             Sarah and D arren died in hospital from their bum s. ., . ••' ;• ■ ’      W-;.'-. ■ ■
                                                           ^       1; l1982J A C - 510. Counsel                 The grounds of appeal are that the judge failed adequately to direct the jury
                v ^ 7       ^               ¥’ *** Q ueen <1985) 82 Cr.A pp.R . 18.""«?¥• ^ ^
 ia S S ®                       | “» " d on March 10,1986.         t                                         on the law of manslaughter in relation to the facts of the case, and in particular
                                                                                                             directed them on the basis of a passage in 'Archbold, 41st ed ., which was the
                                                                                                             subject of adverse criticism by their Lordships in the Privy Council in Kong
                                                                                                             C heuk Kwan v. The Queen (1985) 82 C r.A pp.R . 18. A report of that decision
                                                                                                             had appeared in The Tim es newspaper shortly before the learned judge came to
                                                                                                             sum up the case to the jury. His attention was very properly drawn to the report
                                                S                                 Cur. adv. vult.
                                                                                                             by counsel. ■       '-im :  :*:■■■■■ '?                 .                          ■ .
         '.*■           ' *•                                                       v:,ijy. ■
                                                                                                                This is the way in which the judge directed the jury on this aspect of the case:
                                CHIEF_JUSTICE read the judgm ent of the Court. On
 £       5 ’ |? 8 5 in die, Grown Court at Newcastle the appellant was convicted on                              “First, the prosecution must prove that Goodfellow committed an act which
                                           f e t fcee       char«ed manslaughter, in                             caused the three deaths. No doubt about that, ladies and gentlemen, he set
                        " W^ i . Was Sentenced t0 “ years’ imprisonment. Count 4                                 lire to the house . as a result of which all three died. Secondly, the
"‘chareed S         ith         w*WaS Se”*enced t0 four years’ imprisonment. Count 5                             prosecution must prove that the act was unlawful. Again, no doubt about it,
                                   8 " I ? 16* “ 10 whether * e Kves of those m the                              it is plainly unlawful to bum down your council house in the hope that the
               #    in ;danger, and on .that he was sentenced to six years’                                      council will rehouse you. Thirdly, the prosecution must prove that the act,
’P Pnsoa™ 6®1-.:ABjsc ie n c e s y ere o rd e re d to ran concurrently.                                          and this is the crux of the case ladies and gentlemen, was a dangerous act,
'ma n f l a n S u       y       S   ^   ,   "   ^     single iud8c against .the convictions' for                 and in law an act is dangerous if it is such that all reasonable people would
                                                    count5. continued: ^      -   .•                             recognise that it would subject another human being to the risk of some
                                                                              W e t o t 's r t " i i f a t       harm ; not necessarily serious harm , but some harm. This is nothing to do
                                                      % qpssoc^.Terrace, Pallion. He poured                      with the defendant’s state of mind. H ie test is would the reasonable person
■'§2 ? i f f L b  ***% »$*                     M the downstairs living r o o ^ and                               recognise the danger of some, not necessarily serious, harm. Now I must
'     Z       l      i    Jw       igniting the petrol. ,la the ensiling Naze three                              expand a little of this third point which is the general law in relation to
  S kh whom^ih w^ e„Sa^ a* fd 22, another young woman named Jillian Stuart                                       manslaughter, and I must apply it to Jhe facte of this case. What the Crown
                                           Kaison> who was ™ * e house that night,                               must prove to your satisfaction are two further things beyond the three
  and the appellant s two year old son D arren.                 ■     .  ;                                       things which 1 have just mentioned. First, that at the moment Goodfellow
  , 1?ie 5 ^ kgf° und .*? these events was as follows. The appellant had 'been                                   set fire to Number 24, the prevailing circumstances were such that the
, ^ “ 8 difficulties with two men in the locality. One of them had been fined for                                ordinary, prudent, sober individual, and please consider yourselves as
h a ^ n f”!     f Bt f?°r ° f N? ‘ 24’ Hcnce ^ appellant wanted to move. He                                      having been in Goodfellow’s position at that time for this purpose, the
        •         exchanging his council house for another because he was some                                   ordinary, prudent, sober individual would have recognised that the act of
 £300 in arrears with his ren t.” H e therefore conceived the idea of setting No                                 setting fire to the house could cause some injury, not necessarily serious
24 on fee and making it look as though the fire had been caused by a petrol                                      injury, to the other five persons in the house, and that the risk of causing
                          ±2______ ._______ ______                                                 J |||( 1 9 8 6 ) 83 C r.A pp.R            C .A .          J ||      Kevin G oodfellow (The Lord Chief Justice)             27

                                 injury w a s not so sig h t that the o rd in ary, prudent in d ivid u a l would have                        the death of that other person by that act, then he is guilty of manslaughter.”
                                 felt justified in treating the risk as negligible. And please note, ladies and                              Their Lordships in that case (Newbury) expressly disapproved of a passage in
                               ' gentlem en, that the defendant told you in evidence that he thought he had                                  the judgment of Lord Denning M .R. in the civil case of Gray v. Barr [1971] 2
                                 elim in a te d all risks when he started the fire. But the test on th is point is not                       All E .R . 949, 956, in which he asserted that the unlawful act must be done by
                             ' w " a t h e thought, but what the reasonable man would have r e co g n ised . Now                             the defendant with the intention of frightening or harming someone or with the
                                 the se c o n d farther th in g the Crown m ust p r o v e is th is, that at th e m o m en t                  realisation that it is likely to frighten or harm someone. That decision of the
                            : . G o o d fe llo w s e t fire t o t h e h o u s e h e e ith e r g a v e n o th o u g h t to th e risk o f      House of Lords is, of course, binding upon us.
                                in ju ry t o th e in m a te s in circu m sta n ces w h en h e -o b v io u sly o u g h t to h a v e               It is submitted by Mr. Stewart on behalf of the appellant that this was not a
                                d o n e s o , o r h e r e c o g n is e d th a t th e re w a s a risk o f in ju ry b u t n o n e th e le ss   case of “unlawful act” manslaughter, because the actions of the appellant were
                               went o n t o ta k e th a t risk . N o w th is la tter p o in t is th e m ore relev a n t y o u                not directed at the victim. The authority for that proposition is said to be Dalby
                               may th in k , b e c a u se it is o b v io u s , isn ’t it , th a t G o o d fe llo w d id a p p recia te       (1982) 74 Cr.A pp.R. 348.         .■   ■              —
                               “ >a t            w a s s o ® e r isk . T h is e m e r g e s fro m ! w h a t h e to ld th e p o lic e             In that case the appellant, a drug addict, supplied a class A drug which he had
                          ■    d o e sn ’t it , a n d b y h is d isp a tc h o f J illia n ’s ch ild ren t o th e g ra n d m oth er so m e    lawfully obtained to a friend, also an addict. Each injected himself intravenously.
                           , tone before and by the test fire in the garden                                  .                               After the appellant had left, the friend administered to himself two further
                                                                                                                                             injections, the nature of which was unknown. When the appellant returned he
                          t T h e r e i s n o d o u b t th a t th is j fir e S io B w a s b a sed in p a rt u p o n th e o ffe n d in g      was unable to wake up his friend..When medical help eventually arrived, the
                         p a s w g e ia. A k M oU,^ which m » 4»ppeais a t p arag rap h 2 0 - 4 9 (7 ) o f th e 4 2 n d                      friend was found to be dead. The appellant was convicted of manslaughter
                           edition although the learned .‘judge omitted parts of it and particularly the final                               either on the unlawful and dangerous act basis, or alternatively on the basis that
   : '■ -    '                     ^                               ^ apparently based on Bateman (1925) 19                                   he was grossly negligent in not calling an ambulance at an earlier stage.         ' .
  r:              ■ ' • ■■                        9 :*?'                              f i M i . 'f i : : : m   -                                 It was held that since the act of supplying the scheduled drug was not an act
  ■ •.      .        .                     fm -m n a x d by their to d s h lp .a s confusing f l) causing death                              which caused direct harm and since the unlawful act of supply of the dangerous
  d: ■i .         '      ^ m ^ g ^ | a ^ o l e n o B , (2) what was said in R .y.O d d w d l (1981) 73                                        drug by Dalby per se did not constitute the actus reus of the offence of
          .     .      1                   [19821 A .C .,341> (3) what was said in R .y . Lawrence (1981) 73                                  manslaughter, the conviction had to be quashed. Waller L.J., at page 352, said:
iC\! ■- '            - 1 Cr.App.E.i{||; ||98 2] AjtC^SlO, aad (4) what was said in Bateman (supra). Lord                                      " . . . where the charge of manslaughter is based on an unlawful and dangerous
              '          R oskiiipiinted out in "kong'CfraftJKwm ?. ,H e Queem (supra) (which was a                                           act, it must be an act directed at the victim and likely to cause immediate injury,
    :’ *                 case .where ‘death resulted from i»"head-on collision in bright sunshine between                                     however slight.”          ,
                          two .hydrofoils
                               1          plying between Hong Kong and Macao), that the auestion for the                                         However we do not think that he was suggesting that there must be an
.-Ik                          ■ was whether or not the defendants had been guilty of recklessness (or gross                                   intention on the part of the defendant to harm or frighten or a realisation that
                                                                                                                                              his acts were likely to harm or frighten. Indeed it would have been contrary to
                                                                                                                                              the dicta of Lord Salmon in D.P.P. v. Newbury (supra) if he was. What he was,
                      f‘-;We ir e t o l d th a t th ere; w a s some ^discussion betw een' counsel and the judge                               we believe, intending to say was that there must be no fresh intervening cause
                     during the ’'course o f th e tria l as to w h eth er th e jury sh o u ld b e directed o n th e                           between the act and the death. Indeed at p.351 he said this: “ . . . the supply of
                     mL a m e t the'^unlaw ful a c t” b a sis, and th a t th e fu d g e ap p eared to fa v o u r                              drugs would itself have caused no harm unless the deceased had subsequently
                     the_ fornier?;W he|her th a t is' sd 'or h o t, we have to decid e whether the direction                                 used the drugs in a form and quantity which was dangerous.
                     h e in fact g a v e was correct.           1                           •                  ,< ,.    -                         If we may say so respectfully, we doubt the assertion in Smith and Hogan,
                                    P « ^          ttas 'was a o s e which "was ’ca p a b le of falling w ith in either                       Criminal Law, 5th ed., p.315, that because the Appellate Committee refused the
                     o r both types o f nanslaiigli|cr O n th e Lawrence a sp e c t, th e jury m ig h t w e ll                                [prosecutor] leave to appeal, Dalby (supra) must then be taken to represent the
                                                                           acting in su ch a m a n n er as to create                          law.
                     an obw oM '-Ind                                    ■jA ysical tn fw y 'to ’ m e person'; and                                 Mr. Bethel for the Crown drew our attention to two further cases, namely,
                     ^     ! f y, —                                                                         ‘' ri sk in v o lv e d , h ad     Pagett (1983) 76 Cr.A pp.R. 279 and Mitchell (1983) 76 Cr.App.R. 293, both of
                     nevertheless gone on to take it.                  *¥*«***'%*                                              ,■             which seem to support our interpretation of Dalby (supra).
                      ""H is w « f e q u a lly , i n ’X Jf view ,'a c a s e for the " u n law fu l a n d ^ d an gerou s a ct”                     The questions which the jury have to decide on the charge of manslaughter of
                     d irectio n . ;W h er? th e defendant'does 'in u n la w fu l a ct o f su ch a kind as all sober                          this nature are: (1) Was the act intentional? (2) Was it unlawful? (3) Was it an
                     and re a so n a b le p e o p le w o u ld in e v ita b ly 'r e c o g n is e m iist'su b jec t'’a n o th er p erso n       act which any reasonable person 'would realise was bound to subject some other
                     to, at le a s t, th e risk o f so m e h a rm resu ltin g th e refro m ,1 a lb eit n o t se rio u s harm                  human being to the risk of physical harm, albeit not necessarily serious harm?
                     an d ca u se s d e a th th e r e b y , h e is g u ilty o f m an slau gh ter:            Church      (1 9 6 5 ) 4 9        (4) Was that act the cause of death?                                      .
                     Cr.A pp.R , 2 0 6 , {1966) 1 Q .B . 5 9 .     * ’ - v . ; •. ,                                           <? - .              Whatever indications the judge may have given earlier as to his intentions, he
                       L o rd S a lm o n in Director o f Public Prosecutions v . Newbury (1 9 7 6 ) 62                                        did in fact direct the jury on this type of manslaughter in the passage which we
                    C r .A p p .R . 2 9 1 ; [19 76] 2 A ll E .R . 3 6 5 a p p ro v ed a d ictu m o f H u m p h rey s I . in                    have already quoted. It is true that he went further and added observations
                    Larkin [1943] 1 A ll E .R . 2 1 7 , 2 1 9 : “W h ere th e a ct w h ich a p erso n is en g a g ed in                        which were more appropriate to the Lawrence type of manslaughter. If anything,
                    p erfo rm in g is u n la w fu l, th e n i f a t th e sa m e tim e it is a d a n gerou s a c t, th a t is, an               those passages resulted in a direction which was more favourable to the appellant
                    act w h ich is lik e ly t o in ju re a n o th e r p e r so n , and q u ite in a d v erten tly h e c a u se s               than if they had been omitted.


       s>,
       ®e
       We do not consider that the jury may have beedhpnfused as Mr. Stewart                                They were ch a ig d ljj|ith the murders of E and P (count 2) and of conspiracy to
    contends. The convictions on counts 1 to 3 were neithSRnsafe nor unsatisfactory.                        murder R ( c o u n tr y A t their trial they maintained throughout that they had
    . finally, as to count 5, Mr. Stewart submits that the judge failed to direct the                       acted under duress from one M. The trial judge directed the jury that the
    jury specifically that they must be satisfied that the appellant was reckless as to                     defence of duress was not available to a principal in the first degree to the cause
    whether the lives o f the people upstairs were in danger. ■'«- '* v             ,                       of death on count 2 and that as to counts 1 and 3 the test as to whether Howe
   _ W hat he said on this point was as follows: “A nd recklessness, please" note as I                      and Bannister were acting under duress was both objective and subjective. They
   have already told you, in fact appMes equally to the fifth count in the indictment.                      were convicted on all counts. Burke shot dead a man, using a sawn off shotgun.
   Indeed it is the only issue' in the fifth count in the indictment.! So I repeat in                       His defence was that he had shot the victim because of fear that if he did not do
   relation to count 5 the recklessness, that Goodfellow would have acted recklessly                        so he would be killed by Clarkson; but that the gun had gone off accidentally so
   rf the prosecution have proved either that first, when he set fire to the house he                       that the killing amounted to no more than manslaughter. A t their trial for
   gave no thought at all to the possibility that the inmates might be injured in                           murder the jury were directed that the defence of duress was not available to a
   circumstances where, if he had given any thought to the matter, it would have                            principal in the first degree to m urder; farther, that the culpability of a
   been obvious that there was some risk. O r secondly,,that he appreciated the risk                        secondary party could be no higher than that of a principal party. Both Burke
  of injury but nonetiusless went on to take it.” ,**#                                                      and Clarkson were convicted of m urder.          ; , .,      • ■     ■ .■
   - We consider that in the circumstances of this case if there was risk of injury at                        On appeals against conviction that the respective judges had misdirected the
  all to. the people upstairs then it must follow that there was risk of death. Even                        juries on the defence of duress on a charge of murder; further, in respect of
  nad that not been the case we would have applied the proviso. If the judge                                Burke, the judge had been wrong in directing the jury that if Burke was guilty
  instead of using the words' “might be injured” had used the words “might be                               of m anslaughter then Clarkson could be found guilty a t the worst of
  M W , _the result would inevitably have been the same. Accordingly this appeal                            manslaughter; and in the case of Howe and Bannister the judge was wrong in
  a dismissed        ; , .       -• - , ^
                                                                                                            directing the jury that there was an “objective” element in the defence of
  , p                  ■ ’/* t *                                        ;                                   duress. ' •                 ■■■■        ' v-. ■                   •,   -      ;
  **’ * ; >         *' > * '*                        - •-■fJasteI ,          Appeal dismissed.
      Solicitors: D irector of Public Prosecutions, for the Grown.                                          Held, that (1) threats of the immediate infliction of death or even of grievous
        ' ’           '      - ’ ' >         -    \         ‘ • . ,                                         bodily harm will not excuse m urder; thus, duress is not a defence to a principal
                                                                                                            in the f a t degree to murder, i.e. the actual killer. However, such a defence is
               ^ A ts         lie * *            ■. :*                           , *,                   ■   available to a person charged with aiding and abetting a murder whether he was
          -‘    l   ■•           ■ ...                                       ,                              present at the killing or not. The directions of the judges in the instant cases
      ■ 1                                                                                           e       were, therefore, correct.            .
      * '' '    * -*                                     ,                                                    Director o f Public Prosecutions fo r Northern Ireland v. Lynch (1975) 61
      - 'V -                            -r...        .                                                      Cr.App.R. 6; [1975] A .C . 653 and dicta of Lord Coleridge C.J. in Dudley and
                                                                                                            Stephens (1884) ’14 Q .B .D ., 273, 281, 286 applied. Abbott v. R. (1976) 63
                            M IC H A E L A N T H O N Y H O W E                                              Cr.App.R. 241; [1977] A.C. 755 considered.
                                                                                                               (2) the judge had correctly directed the jury that the culpability of a secondary
  -       ‘             * J O H N D E R R IC K B A N N IS T E R                  , - ! ■••••■■■•■
                                                                                                            party (Burke) could be no higher than that of the principal party (Clarkson). .
                            C O R N E L I U S 'I A M B S B U R K E                                            Richards (1974) 58 Cr.A pp.R. 60, [1974] Q.B. 776 applied but doubted.
                                                                                                              (3) the test whether a person charged with murder was acting under duress
                                                 G EO R G E CLARKSON                                        was an objective one, i.e. whether the threat was of such gravity that it might
                        •                       -i                                                          well have caused a reasonable man placed in the same situation as the defendant
                                                                                                            to act as he did. Again, the direction of the trial judge was correct. Thus, on all
   C o o tp                                                     lusticerM r. Justice Russell                grounds the appeals would be dismissed. Graham (1982) 74 Cr.App.R. 235.
*3 ana                                                            * H. 1* 5, , a ^ #                        [1982] 1 W .L.R. 294 applied.        ...                            s .
tsi
                                                                                                              Per curiam: (I) If duress is to be permitted as a defence to murder at all, it
                              'ess—Principal fn R rsthegree-^-W hetker Defence to D uress                   should, by analogy with provocation, only reduce the offence to manslaughter
Available               *      **        >.             my -                                                and not result in an outright acquittal. That would mean that the effect and
                                                                                                            gravity of the duress in a particular case could fairly be reflected in the sentence
M urder—D uress—D ef:nce— W hether Test S u b je c tiv e o f O b je c tiv e '               ■
                                                                                                            imposed.           "                                                      .
M urder— A c c o m p lic e-In c itin g o r Procuring A n o th er by ’’D u ress‘'to " K ill o r be             (2) In cases such as the present where an accessory before the fact has
D uress K,llmg~~~Wkefkf r Gm% o f M urder if n o t O ther A cquitted % Reason o f                           prevailed upon another to commit a criminal act, a more satisfactory rule would
                                                                                                            be to allow each to be convicted of the offence appropriate to his intention,
                                                                                                            whether or not that would involve the accessory being convicted of a more
  Howe and Bannister aided and ab e tte d 'th e killing of a youth E, were                                  serious offence than the principal.
principals in the first degree in the killings of one P. and conspired to kill R.                           [For duress as a defence to murder, see Archbold, 42nd ed., 17-54 to 56.]
                  354                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           - 3J.>
                  .Shaw L J .                   , Federal Commerce n Tradax Export ( C .£ k                                                       . f 1977]            I ’Q.B.      ■                  |j j ! .            Keg- V. Stone (C.A.)
                  rjciv I .agree that the owaers*.appeal should be allowed and that judgm ent.                                                                    ivr. /own .doctor for her .was unsuccessful, b at the appellants did
                  ■jbe' 'entered against the cfcarteieis, .for a sum calculated and expressed                                                                   A        r no more ..to enlist outside professional help although aware                 ,                           . i.: ^
                                                                                                                                                                  ~ ;,of the poor condition of her health. .They did not mention                                                    , -
                   for the reasons given by Lord Denning M.R. in UJS. dollars on the basis '                                                                        ' !ii anything to the social w orker who used to' visit the son.
                  Jbat the M araiha E nvoy became an “ arrived ship ” and duly gave notice                                                                                 Some three weeks after 'th e-attem pt to wash th e'sister she • --
                  j®treadinessoaD ecem ber 12, !970.ate;?i;u'r:=i-'#'^    \.r, , . .  :.v.,'u‘.h j                                                                .v.'i-.vdied from toxem ia .spreading from infected bed scores, pro- •.:                                          - ---
                 i ' f v - . o f                  lit !>•                                                               ‘i'-' ■ v                  >"■ !Vi->'      ; j.'i- longed immobilisation and lack of fo o d .. I f she had received
                                      ;'jt':bm;i^^a&k:MppeoI allowed with costs.--■ '..rv.u-,:.                                                                   i , medical o r e in the intervening period she would probably
                                                                                                                                                                         " have survived. '                                                                .
                 ssU .w r -:vi-. sti’-M i -i^nf *i; ilsHWet costs in court below ,. "            .,v\ %<};■*                                                    B      - '      T he appellants were charged with her manslaughter. The
                 vi-v-i:.; ■ -'«• to--jfj'rJd !*:   'sM Judgm ent in,\U ,S.:■.dollars. Interest -a                                                                        > jury were directed to consider the 'circumstances in relation to ' *
                 -;u- !o vj-MHAsh *s5 j.ni«;su»K                  -,iesi agreed ..between parties if<ai'c                                                                  each of the appellants according to their individual knowledge .                 •:                      .
                                             . - 4 .. -i u , *'possible. othermde to be mentioned.                                                                 * ’' ,p f the sister’s condition and their appreciation of the need to act , i.                                  ,.. .;
                                                                                                                                                                          • and the consequences o f inaction in view of procurable facilities, j
                 i-'.-fi' -i;'J .            ^'-^ktjsJfi^Leave to appeal,              up . vr-;                                                                     '-i;'"and to determine w hether the prosecution had established a                                               ;
                                 i                          ei;f»oiias^yicp>#
                                                                         .  .
                                                                              ipl
                                                                               .
                                                                                  J .3Ci#|» .:u:i                               _                      ,              •'     gross neglect of d u ty 'o f rare am ounting to reckless disregard                                      •
                       b .Solicitors?\Holman, fermick:&,:W ittm; Richards, Butler .<4 Co. -■ %:                                                                       . y o f the sister’s health'.and well-being., -.The Appellants were                                            ■, •/
                           : ~ - - C :• V . j L *■'                 4 «;& •<           4 .           '' ,               .       . acj                           C          convicted,ite m '                          y t» U : " tf
                     ,« V
                  v* ,* v -. .ay
                              •*'                **-» - *-»•-> *-                  1                        ,                       A . H.                                      .On appeal against conviction:'—..;:                                  ui-.l
                                                                                                                                                                   Ms<**•,«'-‘‘jjg M dismissing th e:appeal, (I) that on. the ja c ts the
                                                                                  J «-/*     -L   J , r -       • :t                     ,,                                        entitled ■W *find “th a t the appeflants had assumed a duty •
                                                                                 «*V* ** -                                                    "                            -t®'i^are'.€o^',,tl* '!’®sferrilh a''^ 'fcte obliged to w n m o n help o r -
                             <•* ^                                                    -                                                                                            for'-,tHe sister -themselves ifwhen she : became helplessly •
                                          * 1 J » ^ » ‘r :C                                                                                                            ..n «nfirm (p«3St,'p. 36lE -H )jy ty                 V- d--K-'r:;f (?:
                                                                                                                                                                              ; C2) ,T h a t,,g ln c e th e , appelaa*
                                                              *   :i>V r-' ^>'1' />.'        \V      , ■            ’                J                                                                               « A a ’w a s ' l
                                                                                                                                                                D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ;"-'baii
                 .ftM                              j* *,ft*.fco,UI!2' P?,<*P2 JALI,                 ,           ,           •                      .
                                                                                                                                                                           ^ fI S e i ^ l ^ a i ' o b v i o S b & J inimy'to^ealtii                       .actually•;;;i:
                 i* j             tas.^ u U s c.vj ^REGINA v. »STONE .                                                                                                  1 f o r e s e e i n g ..the .risk :|m d ..determining nevertheless to ran it;
                                                                                                                                                                       - ^                       '''fiiadverteoce':w a s !InstiffiGKBt: .and w at, slice m e                    .      •ii.
                 i.,^ 1                  ,4err R E G IN A '1# T O B 1 N S O N -’     '»*?*•»    » «                                                                                                                                                                                   i
      ,;-X            '   * «- - ' i ;.•>                            i - •     • ,                                                                                             cable, the appeal failed (post,’p. 363f - h ).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ~,a
                 ‘i ’976 - Dec! 5; 21            r ' >'*        ‘        - - -Geoffrey L ane i J V                                                                          /.v :- -Dicta of Lord A tkin in A ndrew s v . D irector o f Public
                                                                                                                                                                               P rosecutions [1937] A.C. 576, 583, H.L.(E.) applied.." .   -
                                                                                                        and Crodm-Iohnson JJ.                                                  ■ R eg v. Low e [1973] Q.B. 702, C A . considered. , :
                                - ’ \* > > !
                       j , , .. . C rk m -r-M o m ifid e ^ -^ a m la u g h fe r—-Infirm .person—.S o m e attem p ts                                                      .T h e following cases are referred t o in th e ju d g m e n t: , . . . , . -.
                                                             fr^/or;her—N o professional help obtained—Death
If:                                                          ~jfflK<&hef*duiy 'of ^care— Reckless "disregard ..of:                                               ‘ i,:) AA n d rew s        .D irector o f P ublic P rosecutions ‘{1937] A.C. 576; 11937] 2
                                                                     and Welfare— Whether 'inadvertence 'sufficient^                                                      i. *.i-Aii p r J552                         ' • ’'.   —              -
                 .\3                                              '** ftetem uy 'b f indifference to obvious risk ' *                                           F ^ y ^ R e g 'y v '. 'L o w i' |19731- 'Q.B. *702; ’[1973] 2 W .L.R. 481; [1973] 1 All E R -
gv'-'-^a                                                                      deferm in0ion,jo* run risk                                                                         g05,'C.A.alilA ‘?': 55t*                                               . •
v";;xvr-                                                                          ‘                                         ‘ ' 5;y>                             : U,          's'.:.        ' 1“■ - i              ■     ' - '      '
 r,                                                                                                                                                               ■'Vf.t;i<The following additional cases were cited in argument: - [ / \
                                            H e » ^ B H i » f f t p « M ¥ T 8 « f 5aiia'!aIino5r 61liMl m
             ku                      ?J^-?SiwagcSlntelUgeBce « n d -no ja p p re ? ia b le ;tw « o f , smell,                                                              ^   :R eg . V. E dw ards (1838) 8 C. & P. 611.       'V' ''' '
                               t i « itf n i.M f                                             .f n a d e w t^ ' Itved                                                   '        R es. v." Instan [18931 1 Q.B. 450*, 17 Cox C .C. 602.
             ,                  r.k'j,.-:i.toaether^n.!Eii? h o u se , w l |,f t i ? .i n e i i t a l f ,j m b n o r m a l so n .                  The
                                                                                                                                                                                Reg. v. L am b [1967] 2 Q.B. 981; [1967] 3 W.L.R. 888; [1967]
                                                  Without v^tH atioii^lotlet^'or' wasMog:factlM es except a                                                     G                      E.R. 1282, C.A. -                                     ' . ' "                        -     ■
             id-iiivi                M iip o ly th e n e ;b iu re t t S h e -was m orbidly anxiona...not,to' p u t on                                                       v 'Meg. v. M arriott (1838) 8 C. & P. 425.                                                          . <
                        ii< 'i:..;i:jiT:?iWpight, f# n ie d herself propef^m ealsj s ^ n t days a t                                                                    ■' ■i-S 'R eg . v.! N ich o lls (1874) 13 Cox C.C. 75.    • V" ' ‘ X ' V . .                         \ -■ ,
             t- f,,.;.-,                 th e l o o m a n d w ith in ttir<» y e a n .b e c a m e h e lp le ss ly l i f t ............
                                                                                                                                                                       :\ h i ^ R e g . y j S m i t h " i m i ) 8 C & P. 173.' - ' ’                                          / , /-
                '                        'th a t'sh end id n o t leave ker'oed»;but s h e did h o t to n ip la iii.
             at                      }\ li:m mtre$sJ h'who •' took / th e''sister s u c h f o o d a s s h e ‘ it q                                                     “ .- ■ Reg. V. Sm ith (1865) 10 Cox C.C. 82, C .C .A                ■
                                     ^ a t t e m p t e d -to w a d i heir - ^ it it t h e aid of a n e ig h b o u r , w h o                                              ‘ td l R ex'V . Bonnym an (1942) 28 Gr.App.R. 131, C .C .A
                                      ^ a d v i s e d t h e m is tr e s s to go to .the social services. -The licensee                                           J J              '01   l i f s .:   v{H*-i i   e-                      * ■'      .   .
                                         : o f a p u b lic house which the appellants u se d to v is it advised the                                                           A ppea ls against conviction and sentence.              - ‘
                                     . ■ ; mistress t o o b ta in a d o c to r.. T he sister had refused to give the                                                   ^ lfi?,;On' Ju n e IS, 1976, a t Sheffield Crow n C o u rt (Boreham I.) th e app ellan ts,
                                           a p p e lla n ts the name of her doctor, whom they had U n su ccess­
                                           fu lly tried to find. A n attem pt by the m an 'to obtain his
                                                                                                                                                                        Jo h n E d w ard Stone an d G w endoline D obinson, were convicted on ai»
  ov
                                                                                                      iJ        i   M.B.
           Indictment charging both of them with manslaughter,jj&ithat, they between                          serious injury a r g jp s s ib le , m ust then a c t recklessly in relation to those
          July 31, 1975, and August 3, j1975, unlawfully killeflPanny Stone. The                            A consequences. F lU ie r , th e te st is subjective so fa r as concerns the om ission
           victim died resident m a lioiide occupied by her brother, the appellant                            to' a c t T h e authorities a re : R eg . v . N icholls, 13 C ox C.C. 75; R eg. v.
          Stone, and his housekeeper and mistress, the appellant Dobinson. They                               M a rrio tt, 8 C. & P. 425; A n d re w s V. D irecto r o f P u b lic P ro secu tio n s [19371
          each applied /o r leave .to iappeal .against conviction, on the following                           A .C . 576; R eg. V. L a m b [1967] 2 Q .B. 981 and R eg. V. L o w e [1973] Q.B.
          grounds: (1) the appellant was tinder no legal duty to care for the victim                          702. : -        ;                                          ’        : ■         •■■' ■    •
         o r to obtain medical assistanbe^or her, (2 ) there was no or insufficient                            , G eoffrey R iv lin fo r th e C row n. .There w as a legal du ty on the
          f ™ ! ”® that A c appellanttoC gssum ed such a duty; (3) the Judge failed                         B appellants to care fo r th e deceased, w hich they accepted. G iven th a t they
          to direct the jury..adequately        ..all as to,tfieCircum stances”in which                       h ad taken on them selves th e task o f providing o r assisting in th e provision
         such a duty arose in law; (4) t i e fudge was wrong in' law in directing tie                         o f h e r basic needs an d th a t she occupied a roo m in th e house, once help­
         JUIJ J r f                                    any'grow n-up person chose to"                         lessness supervened an d in th e absence o f any s t e p to divest them selves of
         undertake t K c t a g e of m o ^    human being who" hy reason of infirmity.                         h er .charge by placing h e r in th e care o f others, it was im plicit th a t th ey'
         mental or p iysiral illnessjy m ^ g e w m incapable; ^ looking after herself;.                       h ad m ade th e choice to accept .the legal d u ty .1 A s she was in effect “ a
         (5) tie judge M e d to.direct, toe juiy at what moment and in what circum-'                          p riso n e r” in th eir hom e, ft is unrealistic to contend otherwise. O n two
         stances a person assumed such a duty in respect of another when that'                              C separate occasions the judge gave a p ro p er direction on th e assum ption o f
         other had been and continnrf. to be"'K siaent'm 'a.teseloM 'and to whom'                             th e legal duty.       .• . ‘       ;.■ -■  *
     ■                                                                               w as ^fessential         K tfT h e au tho rities cited by 'the ap p ellan ts a p p e ar to reveal a distinction
         death                                                                          ^                     betw een m anslaughter <resulting fro m acts o f com m ission and omission.
'        a                        ( # aKernatively„>there .wasMo joeinsiiflicient evidence*                   T o found a conviction th e re has to b e a w icked an d reckless disregard of
      . that the a    j   f   e     l   a   n     t    a   "    d u tfM n lf ( W m ^iudee m iS                the duty, w hich w ould inevitably involve * foresight (as distinct fro m
    .‘.■directed                                                                         j
                                                                                                            D intention) o f death o r som e serious harm , o f w hich there is am ple evidence
                                                        .i6             i9§mj> m cU of if was*;               in the present case. T h e appellants seek to p u t to o high a burden on the
                                                        ’reckless .disregard for.Ae]weKai«' o fj              Crow n. - T h e judge’s direction th a t, if th e , appellants d id n o t appreciate
                                                                                                              th a t th eir neglect “ w ould lead to any d ire results ’’.'they should b e acquitted,
    ;was                                                                                                      cannot b e criticised. ...The judge also gave a full an d p ro p er direction th a t
    • ■                                                          Jo f tf S q p ||f je g ie c f w M c tf '     th e ju ry should consider th e case b y subjective standards.
                                                                                                            E   I'^ri Coles,         .replied. h 9 !4 A » h iid i. h M 'i t d i i t m s usi.-        ‘        ‘ ■■ •
                                                                                                                tsth          ?'■':•'■                          f . f >- j * " ?              Cur. adv. vult.
                                  I in the judgmei                                                              i.M 'sif-'»Q '? 'v c 'i -;iM feoc: J f ’i ;.-i      /'}};«,fh: ii>'«
                                                                                                                u%'D e c e m b e r'2 1.’'" G e o f f r e y L a n e L .j. rea d th e follow ing judgm ent of
          ,,Gfmld£plt                       iertS Smith for the appdlam s’' ; lh e unique                       th e c o u rt.' O n June' 1 8; 1976, atS h e ffie ld C row n C o u rt before B oreham I .
     fe a tu re                                                                                                 an d a ju ry th e tw<> appellants'" w ere' convicted, o f m anslaughter. T he
                                          a ffi»3ing that a d u t|' o f « f e arises'after the
                                                           .there mosi Be’iioi only a, very                 F   app ellan t Stone w as sentenced to th ree years’ im prisonm ent an d the
    ;t i k i s '                                                                                                app ellan t D obinson to 18, m onths’ im prisonm ent suspended fo r tw o years;
                                        Basing but also on me specific circumstances in
    w hich such a duty a& e                                                                                     she w as also m ad e th e subject o f a supervision order. By leave o f . t h e
     c .^ T o e t a M iA a ^ ^                  ughterj>y negligence, the prosecution must                      single judge, th e a p p e U ^ t S tone now, app eals against conviction an d
■     pro ve th a t a d u ty o f ca rij m                                                                       sentence an d th e ap p e lla n t D o b in so n ag ain st conviction. ;        v .\       '.
                                                      “f | | i ^ j            Mjse tfiere must
    b e a m a tte r o f ch o ice «                                                                                        1972,                   a t 7 5 , >B roadw ater, ,B olton-on-D eam e in Y orkshire, there
                                                                                        a 'p e rso rT *         lived th ree people. r T h e. appeU ant Stone, a n ex-m iner .now aged 67,
                                                                                                            G   w idow ed fo r 10 years, w ho is partially deaf, alm ost totally blind an d has
                                                                                                                n o appreciable sense of sm ell; th e ap p e lla n t D obinson, now aged 43, who
    E dworas
    tM  w i l |1838)
              m m i8 C.c I& fP. «611;
                                   i V R» e g . Sm ith ( 1865) ■ l f t O m ' G G 'R8 e2g' .^ Pv. -              h ad been his housekeeper an d m istress -for som e eight years, and the
    V. D M      (1874) 13 Cox C.C. 15; J u l i a n U m H a B                            Si)and t                app ellan t Stone’s so n , C yril, aged 34. w ho is m entally subnorm al. . T he
                                                                                                                app ellan t Stone is o f low average intelligence; th e app ellan t D obinson is
    In ^regard to -mandaughter .bylflegJigence. a ’carefu l reading o f t                                       described as ineffectual and somewhat inadequate. t sv>v                               v''t   f> ;
authorities reveals th a t, *to'establish a b reach o f duty, if duty th ere be M4                          U   fes/There w as an -addition to 'th a t household' in' 1972. .T he a p p e la n t Stone
             *? f      *        W       A       means foresight o f the possibility                             h a d a younger sister called F an n y , ab o u t 61 a t th e date o f h er death. She
o6 *»% < w »:at f l ^ ^ e i i p u s mjury ctoJhealthJ?The degree o f criminal                                   h a d been living w ith an o th er sister called Rosy. F o r som e reason, probably
culpability » « % ;M ying,lhat.lhe .accused, having realised that death o r 5                                   because R osy could n o t tolerate h er an y longer, she h a d decided to leave.
         ;                                                                                                                                       i Kjja.
                                          She cam e to live a t no, 75, w here she occupied a sm a ll fro nt room.h.She                        no food, washingkr toilet facilities in the room. T here was excrem ent
                                          “     ™ receipt of a pension of £11-60 a w eek a n d f P e h e r brother £1-50                     A on the t e d and^wor. It was a scene o f dreadful degradation.
                                          tow ards the r e n t > She was eccentric in m an y ways. >She was m orbid                            larT he pathologist, Dr. Usher, gave evidence th at the deceased was naked,
                                        ■ an d unnecessarily anxious1,about putting on w eight an d so denied I c m                            em aciated, weighing fiv e'sto n e and i v e pounds, h er to d y ingrained w ith
                                          p r o ^ r ,meals. « She w ould stake: to h er room fo r days.’ She w o n H oM                        d irt, lying id » pool o f e x c rem e n t O n the t e d on w hich she was lying
                                          stay m h er room all d ay until the tw o appellants w ent to the puMIc*                              were various filthy and crum pled bed-clothes, some of which were soaked
                                          house in the evening, w hen ‘sh e (would creep .down an d m ake herself^'                            in urine. '-There w as excrem ent on the i o o r and w rapped in new spapers
                                         met                                                                                                 B alongside the bed. T here w as a tidem ark of excreta corresponding with
                                            I n early Spring .1975 th e ,p o lice called a t th e house.              F an n y h ad sbew f     the -position in w hich h e r body was lying / A t the m ortuary D r. U sher
                                        fo r n d wandering ato u t in. the street by herself w ithout apparently k n o w n #                   found the deceased’s to d y to be ulcerated over the right hip joint 'and o n
                                                                    “ f ^ ^ a P P     6^   48 - t o tiy.lo-find F a n n y ’s .docto '          the underside of the left knee; in each case th e ulceration w ent dow n to .
                                      A fe             f^ -          ^ 0 U1?     f 0sy* but ha¥in® walkcd a very conside                       the bone. -There w ere maggots in the ulcers. H e found pressure sores
                                    ' to th ^ 2 !?™                       " ? ey « lcd' Jt t^ansPired A a t.lh e y h ad wal & :                over the back of the right shoulder, the outside of the left kneecap to the
                                      S h T a Z ^ u lf                           Clf refused to teU * cm                doctor’s m M           underside of the left k nee, over the right h ip joint, to the inner aspect o f
                                           L rT   8   f^                       a ^ a y j ’ if she did, N othing m ore was i                  C the left shin an d o n th e le ft instep w h ere'th e body had been lying. Such
                                                                                                                                               ulcers could not have t e n produced in le ss than two to three weeks. ?;The
                                    S
                                           ^' LR si?
                                                  W
                                                     r/ *? 81^ aid--stibsequently'thgre'can.-be
                                                           ■ ' #
                                                                    *                            ■
                                                                                                no doob ff                                     ulcers'w ere due td the general p o o r condition' o f the skin and the protruding
                 y..;v
                 r>>                                                                         : w « b | a n d / ; m o n l 1B J m a s l 6 i      b o n e s -which:-would h a v e - l a d a 1 greaterj effect u pon h er than-.-aiinonnal
                                    *                                 £ ^ T '? 9 7 5              i t ^Dfcmsj nnaW e o r J m i S l             person, --She w as soaked in,'urine an d excreta,. H er.sto m ach contained n o
                                                                                                                                               food products b u t a lot o f M e stained fluid. She had n o t eaten recently.
                                                                                                                                             P H e found no n a tu ra l.-disease, >.T he disinclination to eat was a conation o f
                                                                                                                                               anorexia nervosa which w is n o t a* physical condition b u t a condition o f
                                                                                                                                               the b rain o r mind. >; She had been .requiring urgent medical attention fo r
                                                                                                                                               sbfee d a y s’o r C T en% w isI JHe_saId:^‘
                                                                                                                                                       ‘f If two weeks prior to m y'seeing the body she h a d gone into hospital
                                                                                                                                                      th ere is ' a distinct' 'possibility' that th e y ’m ay ..have saved her; an d three
                                                                                                                                             F        weeks' earlier the chances ''would have been good. If her condition on
                                                           ' M m W t f W ^ & o u g b m d messed. 'A n d so M %                                 if:'? ilu ly 1 9 -.was" no. w orse th a n th at described by M rs. W ilson, then her
                                                           i S B tf f ni f°S a bO“ t .two hours an d M rs. Dobinson helpwt?                    '.sti.""'.survival w ould have-.„been.probable .”            ■ .i-; i              ’'~ ri
                                                                                                     a n d dow n .below , b etw eef"
                                                       K i S f c t o M i e P P e a r e d , Id m e 'to      upset''because T a m f
                                                                                                                                                 He said that the cause of death was (l) toxem ia spreading from the infected
             "     - ■■
      I X ' ' *■ ‘                                                                                                                               pressure areas (this .could have been alleviated by keeping her clean); an d
      5‘ ^         "                                                                   .PM* * ’ ’! , « e d       Mrs!*D o b tiffi1* '
                                                                                                                                               ’ (2) p r o l o n g e d 'immobilisation.'; .There was no physical reason for her being
                           '■

      ; ' X :',                                                                                                                              -p immobile/ ' Death was due to ’immobilisation, w hich caused the pressure
                                                                                                                                                 sores, an d lack of fo o d .' "Depression m ight have' caused the lack of mobility,
                                                                                                                                                 t h e ' s o r a b n 't h e left .knee he thought did not develop in two weeks. L ack
                                                                                                                                                 p t ventilation would have aggravated the other m atters. W ith regard to
                  \\                7 p.m. :. l l ^ a | w l a n f D o bm son ^ % o M e d - a n r f f | d H E m ily W e s t ‘t f a f              |he '"condition ,'of the "'.mattress, he though t it would take weeks to ^get into
                                •          w       ~      " ■fV *                  O T ^ t o r d r i n k . A i l result E m ily                 th a t'" 'c o n d itio n .7'.'*' ,' k ' V '                   -. ,    ■■             ,
                                    West 'immediately^ advised Doblnson to '                         t^ 'aiid ^w h e n told i                     : T h e prosecution alleged th a t in' the circumstances 'the appellants h ad
      /T l:            :
                 : .                                                                                                                         <3 undertaken the duty of caring for F anny Who was incapable of looking after
                                                                                                                                                herself, th a t they h a d , w ith gross negligence, failed in th at duty, th at such
                                  t o w Who v o l m r n i m i to d o A c telephoning (the a p p d h n t r b e iii g incapaW                     failure caused her d eath an d that they were guilty of manslaughter. -
                                  o f m anaging th e instrument them selves) was tm sa c a ssfa l.                          '                   fey T h e a p p e la n t Dobinson was seen by D etective Inspector . Ashton on
                                ■ h 'On A n g n stait-1 9 7 5 , F a n n y W f o u n d by Dobfos<k to i S ' i f c S # !                          A ugust 2, 1975. - She said, in answer to questions, th at the deceased h ad
                                 bed. TOe police were c a lle d fQ n tanval th ey foufad there'Wias n d ’^ S B                                  been Eying in th e state she was found for m onths now , b u t that she had
                                 lion m ^ th ej^ room . the window h a d Mo W ham m ered open an d 'tM T fi                                  H never complained. S h e s a i d th a t the deceased provided h er ow n meals b u t
                                                   * * * * ' * * “ ! » » « * to get thedbta'fully o p en .^ A to n e&                           1 she w anted anything from th e shops the deceased told her. T h e deceased
                                 of th e bed o a a c t a ^ « t a i ' em p ty m ineral bottterand on the o th er ch air ...                      would only have biscuits an d pop. She w ould not eat m uch else because
                                 c u p , . U nder, th e b e d # a s a n em pty polythene bucket >iOtherwise there m i l                         she said it made her fat. M rs. W ilson actually did the shopping an d she,
ill
             " P
                                                                                                                                                                                         jo t
                                                                                                        1 Q B.       '       #     .    R e g . V.   Stone (C A .)
                                      Meg, v. Stone (QA.)                                    iw n
                                                                                                        ,  There is no dispute, broadly speaking, as to the matters on which th^
 the appellant Dobinson, signed the deceased’s pension b ook because the
                                                                                                       inrv m ust be satisfied before they can convict of manslaughter m circum
 deceased did n o t seem 'as though .she could be bothered w ith any thing. T h e .
                                                                                                       " b     S             present ■••T hey are (1) th a t the defendant m d e rto o k
 Appellant said she k e p t telling T ed (the other appellant), b u t th at he would
                                                                                                       the care o f a person who by reason of age or infirmity was unable* to ew e
 n o t do anything.',<He just, told her,.“ Leave.it while tomorrow.”; She .was
                                                                                                       for himself- (2) that the defendant was grossly negligent m regard to h
 asked w hy she did not get .help an d sh e,rep lied, f , l asked Mm to get ;a"
                                                                                                       du tv of care- (3) that by reason of such negligence the person died. It is                      -
 doctor, t. He said he had tried to, but because the deceased was not on his
                                                                                                       submitted on behalf of the a p p ella n ts that the judge’s direction to the jury
 panel the doctor w puldn’t^come.” -sWhen asked why she did not speak to
                                                                                                       with regard to the first two ite m s w as incorrect. _ -     - •              ..
 the lady next door or to Mrs. W ilson’s daughter, who was a nurse, she is                           B     A t the close of the prosecution case submissions were made to the
 ■said to have replied, >JRI xiaren’t - H e is boss dow n there. I daren’t do
                                                                                                           judgl t S s £     . a s n o , ™ no sufficient evidence that the . p l a n t s , or
  anything unless he ie U sifl^ ^ S h e is:riot m yisister;>so 1 left it- to him,?-:
                                                                                                           either o f them had chosen to undertake the care of Fanny, j - ,      _
 ■When asked, ?4.y o u ardawdinainand you'go into her bedroom, ; Your own ;                                                          advanced b , Mr. Coles before t o court as h «
  com m on sense Would t e l you'; th a t :s le needed attention? .’I - S h e is said to :
                                                                                                         first w o u n d o f appeal. H e amplified the ground somewhat by submitting
  have irqpiied,?■ She .n e w t " iM p la in e d . so 1* didn't bother.” -*When asked,                   th a t the evidence which the judge had suggested to the jury m ight support
 ItD id-you c t o n g e ; . l « ^ ^ '5 p f |w e ^ s l e w as washed?^ she replied, “ -About;
                                                                                                         £ ? £ £ £ ? « a duty by the a p p e lta ts does
■■.fliree'Wfeks ago*me and Mrs.«WMsdn:'g a ¥ e :'ie f-il'» is!i dow n a n d tried, to;'
                                                                                                         succeed in doing so. H e suggests.that the s tm tto n h e r e » m » e W
 clean .her. up.” >s;Wbefi 85ked,< “ What d id y o u th in k of .her a t th a t tim e?,^
                                                                                                         rcnortfd "case Fanny cam e to this house .as a lodger. ,                                 ,
                                                                                                         entirely dnL "t o '’h e r ' 'own 'eccentricity'"and' failure' to look after herself: o t
                                                                                                         feed herself p ro w rly .‘'fae 'lx c a m e ;,m c w a siH g ly infirm a n d         T j
':-ierl^ p iif® M deii^ §i^^ l^l'those!paitS ''df'.her Statement .which incrimi^                         e v e n tu a lly unable to look after hewelf.; Vis i t to be said, asks        .
                                     d ilu te d that-sheisaid, S.She* dare not dtfj                       rhetorically ‘that by'tM e mere fact; of becoming infirm and helpless in
^ ^ a u ^ w it h o u t T « t         just would not bother to do anything &nd‘>                        1 these’ circu m stan ces"she 'casts a duty o n her brother an
 l e would tay leave It w W e tomorrow,”# She also denied that she said:                                  D obinson to take steps to have her looked after o r tak ^                            '
          1 Inow i i e sev er p r o m o f bed to,go to the toilet because she 1                           T h e suggestion is that, heartless though'it may seem , this is one of those
        too                       'Ihe^waiitea'iii'tlie^tei’^Xnyway I kept telling'.                      S a S S               the appellants were entitled to do e o I ta g , w here « » d u ^
                                                                           %     wcmjM    Vay '           was cast upon them to help, any more than it e cast upon a m an to rescue
                                          .lo t t t f a 'finger t o le lp ' her.”                         a stranger from drowning, however easy such a rescue <n«ht
                                                                                                       I - This court rejects that proposition. Whether Fanny was a lodger or
With regard to the words she was reported to have used. “ I realised for                                   n o t she was a blood relation of the appellant Stone; she was occupying
the past two’w «ks:.ttat she'was’not.''going to live, and I could see that she                                       in his house; the appellant Dobinson had u n d em ten
» s ' / ' ........................................-
                                        r_ 4 she did not say that and added, “ I-                          trv in e to wash her, o f taking such food to her as she required, i here was
                                   '-^^rionW v w '       fM'-SA %><*..■'■<.::}'h                           S t                         each appellant w as ^            of th e ^ r —         she
li                                             • *' j       .                     „         «
                                           ;j^ w e d ,-s u b s e q u e n tly ..;, He. was ask:             w as in by mid-July. . It was not disputed that no effort was mao
                                                ‘"4t t bad 'w ay? ' He: replied,' “ Y                  F rnmmon an ambulance or the social services or the police desp * ■.
                                                                                                       F entreaties of M? WUson and M j . W est ^ » c ^ w t o u s e d j o ^ , .
                                                                                          jo ji             rv ril     N o word w as spoken to him. . A ll tnese were                           ,
geti.peaical ,apistait«|l                                                                ;to ;;« r                  were entitled to take in to ' account when con sid em g w hether                ^
but h e'^ oiid uio lT ^ j u . .,      ......                                    was b u t I cd'             S e s s a r y assumption o f a duty to care for Fanny had
not"” ' ' He'was'*aske^!*‘S W Jif'£ l3 you n o t 'g e f S T ’SmlluM:!’’114>td'take'her'                      ,* This w as not a situation analogous -to the drowning stranger.                      J
hospital? ’ H e r e i n did not think, "He said                             ,       ,                       did mfke          to care. They uied to g e t, doctor f c y
              re m e m te r'G w e i'a M d Mrs. W ilso u 'g b ip g 'n p 'to see her. sThey said         G    the p r e v io u s doctor. T h e appellant D obinson helped
         she'! w as in a baddish 'way.>■■■ I said, ‘-*We m ust d o 'something.’ e l do                      the provision of food. A ll these m a tte re w e rc p        M titled to find that
 ' = - ■ h o i rerriember-whether -there • w as •an y ’'attempt to get a doctor s '                         w hich w e find it im possible to fau t          e 1JJJ7   to conclude that once
     t th a tAI did not think she was' dying.«Previously she h a d gone to'"                                the duty had been assumed^ They were entittea                                llants
 bi.A- fo r long periods’o f tim e,'a n d she h a d then got up again and h ad bed)
 U :p all r i g h t : I would ask h er if she w as getting o p b u t she always said;                                                                                     M p ' o r e,“ “   ■”
 s,:i  ‘ When I am 'ready/ « J !could not see her in the room and I could •                            H                                 submission presents greater difficult,. * » « * •
 b>. ...n o t- te ll'w h e th e r’sh e -was looking all r ig h t ;• 1 w ent u p three o r fo u r'
  ■ - days before she died, s I asked her, ‘ A re you all right, Fanny ’ arid she                            ju d g rt S r e S io n on the n ,n,re of the negligence “
                                                                                                             was wrongly stated. This is how the m atte, was left to the lury.
                                                     Reg. v. Stone (CA.)                                                                      I   q jj,                   ’     Reg. ▼ . Stone (C.A.)
                                                                                                                            [19771 '
                                                                                                                                                       f N ow in th e A e n t case the jury negatived recklessness.      H ow then
  '•:;j “ H av e the Crown proved th a t eith er o r both of i f t e defendants.w as}
                                                                                                                                         A    3 ,;., can m ere neglect, albeit wilful, am ount to m anslaughter? T his court
  -jut. guilty of gross neglect o f F an n y am ounting to ’ a reckless d isreg a rd !
                                                                                                                                                  r .f e e ls ’th at there is something inherently unattractive in a theory o
        -'for the health and wellbeing of th a t woman. ’ D o n o t place _
                                                                                                                                                   O'constructive m anslaughter.. It seems strange th a t an omission which
  -ss:. judgm ent 'o n . t i e - question of-recklessness as to w hether she died
                                                                                                                                                    ■ fa wilful solely in the sense th a t it is n o t inadvertent, the consequences
  - ' n o tii.W h a t-h a s to be proved Is n o t th at, b u t th a t there was a rccfcle
                                                                                                                                                     of w hich are n o t .foreseen by th e person w ho is neglectful should, if
       ^'disregard forjh eir duty o f care.iiltm ay well be that that w ill involvi';
                                                                                                                                                     death results, autom atically give rise to an indeterminate sentence . . .
         a consideration o f what fhey thought would be the consequences
         their reckless disregard, Sfydu found there was 'one. '*For e x am p le/fill                                                    B      Mr.’ Coles subm its th a t th at passage is sup port for Ms argum ent th a t
  ■ s' 1 w ere in charge o f a :peraoff*and 1 w as guilty of som e m ajo r neglect,?                                                       there m ust be an appreciation by the defendant of the risk of death o r
   -=■ .-but 1 ;genuinely 'did not^appretiate th a t it w ould lead t o 'a n y :                '                                          serious injury before a conviction for m anslaughter m these circumstances
      ; results, you w ould'p ro b a b ly ; sfy;:/»That person w not very b rig h t,' 6 i f J                                              can r e s u lt We d isa g re e .. T h e court is saying simply th a t A cre m ust be
         I am n o t sure h e Is^uilty'bf recklessness! • !’» ‘Htfk ■a o lta o iw v j. la d 'W '                                            proved the accessary high degree of negligence, an d a direction which fails
                                                                                                                                           to emphasise th a t requirement will be defective. It is to A n d re w s v.
 T h en , a r a ^ e ^ s t a g e j t t ^                                                                                 tiitl
                                                                                                                                         C D irecto r o f P u b lic P ro sec u tio n s [1937] A.C. 576, th a t one m u s y u r n to
  I*' I 1 *                                                           '’S efciidanS f!n ’ira v e !Eeg!6 ct; of t | f f                     discover the definition of th e .requisite d eg B e o f n e ^ n a ^ L o r d A t a ,
                                                                                                                                            a t p/\58?»i.citcs w ith approval .the w ords of L o rd H ew art C J. m R e x v.
                                                                                                                                            B a tf ff lm (1915) 19 Cr.App.R. J , - a n d goes o n to .s a y , a t p. 583.       ..
< m 4 m m § b 8 , t , M ' " A“ m                                                                                    -
1 b i» :                                                                                                                                          ‘‘"Simple" lack of care ’Wcb ’as' w ai constitute civil liability is not
                                                                                                                                                 - enough; for purposesblf ^          'criminal law .there are degrees of negli-
                                                                                                                                         D   '■ . gence: an d a very high degree of n e g l i g e n t is required to b e proved
 i     itnimSlivkl* a%
                     *&*nrklAk                           j                 1L__ >.        Jl _ _
                                                                                                                                            '^T jeiore! A e!felony is 'established. Probably of all the epithets f t a t can
                                                                                                                                             ;     1* applied ‘ rec k less’ m ost nearly co v ers.th e case. I t is difficult to
                                         .danger to Fanny’s M e and of the situation I did                                                     ' -''visualise a case of death caused by reckless driving in th e connotation
                                        ™1  bonditions la which m y sister w as lying.* If th?*                                                    of th a t term in ordinary speech w hich w ould n o t justify a conviction
                                                                acquit M m ^ If yoil i r e sfif                                                    for m anslaughter: b u t it is probably n o t all-em bracing for reckless
                                                                                                                                                 ' suggests an indifference to risk w hereas the accused m ay have appre-
 %>. .1                   l i l j a w ; - i # s ■^fll% Y ou;do hot judge <him on w hatj                                                   E         elated the risk an d intended toc avoid it an d yet have shown such a
                                                                                                                                                    high degree of negligence in the m eans ad op ted to avoid the risk as
 ^ J^ yW ^ p irtd ^ ^ .^ k rtiS ^ y d tti^ elves;'b iit you take' the man a s y o ii ’i n # ;
 V;' <><Min.                             1g poblhsoe %' ioncetried ;*?y'did s ic ”do 'Keif I                                                        w ould justify a conviction.” ’ 4' !
 Mm tnCf1i n ^ | e W ^ ^ i f | ^ r f a i r i l y 1jf-she "did th a t/th en you'w oold' a c q u if■                                                   I t is clear from th at passage th a t indifference to an obvious risk and
 wfe ;l e i ; % p                                                            i    ,    *     „
                                                                                                                                                appreciation of such risk, coupled w ith a determ ination neyertheless_ o
 & - f3 PiUf                              h 3.-* -       ».-?■»            >i .       r ,</ *
.a(f|Tlie appeUa£fc£ j^ te n tia a Js that the prosecutionin bnier to succeed                                                                u r a n if,, are b o th exam ples of recklessness.        .    _                          fo r
                                                                                                                                                  t! f r b e '* t y : w hich a defendant h as und ertaken is a d u t y - o f - « i n g for
m u st 'Sh'dw;:,'^                                     ^ ^ l ^ ^ e n d a n t '^ ^ i S r k k l e s r a e s s t ^ f ''
                                                                                                                                                 the' h e a t h m i w elfare of the infirm person.' W h a t the prosecution have
this i t o a t e x t i m e a n s ^ K e s ^ ^ p ^ A ? J ftc h h o o d o r possibility.vof.tdeath'^ff
                                                                                                                                               ’ to Drove          a breach o f th a t duty in such circum stances th a t .the p r y feel
serio us I | h ^ ^                                                                i o ' p e p is t i n /the;. omissioif*
to p ro v id e care»<* We!wranejnsferred“to alnumber o f 19ith centuiy decisions *                                                               cjboVinted f c t ;m t ' * f e i i a a a ’f;;;cokd^^^
                                                                                                                                                                      is ' to W y              d i s r ^ ^ , ^ ^             h ealth and
w h ic h ;       | | s ^ r i 0 j ^ j q l e ^ ' j n g J' ^ f c S ^ f f l a l i i p r a f i c i l 'a s s i s l a i i c e l r r i M r : ,
C o les.,ieH e4 ,.p rin |i|^ ly :;>pj|lfc[;dT O j,s # i i | } f :- |I i s ’'wiiflolB*.sJR£g. A : L o w e ‘                                         w e lfa r e /.# d ie i r f m .                               ob v iou s risk o f
                                                                                                                                             G     defendant m u st be proved to -h a v e been inditterent to m o o
{1973J;,Q.lt 7Q2.&I& |l i a t i c a s e ; i t e r e ; ^ r e ; : l w f i;coa® ts,'pne(!»llcging p a r i l ,
                                                                                                                                                   fajm , to health, or actuaUy to have foreseen the nsk ta t to ha»e deter-
slaughter ;o f , a icM d/iea ,the Tground$ 3thafyfhe; defen4 ant$*i«ruelty/'alleged
uodet- the-secoiidiC O O B l/caped-jts d eath , 1 and.the -seconddouhttchatging i                                                                  mined .nevertheless to run i t : ,c;.:ro                         ' «<™rA with those
cruelty..:Jo J child) by* •Wilfully . neglecting" i t .t o , * s .;«fp h o .u M LninecessarjO                                                      9 rm n ie> directio n given by the judge' -was         toHy ■:^ ac“ r d J !
                                                                                                                                                   «r!nrio!es •" If anv criticism is to be m ade i t w ould be th a t tne direction
suffering a rjb jiliy to h e a lth Under, election, 1,( 1} of, tie,,C hildren an d Y oungl
                                                                                                                                                   E ^ S l y favourable to            defence. T he, appeals, against c o t t o n
P ersons -Act -J93||^i|The judge had directed th e ju ry .that .if they found th e ”;
appellant guilty on the second count they m ust find him-.guilty under, th^ ;
                                                                                                                                             H              to ^ n ten ce; it is submitted on behalf o f 'the appellant Stone th at
first count of m a n slaugh ter, even though they acquitted Mm o f recklessness/’!
                                                                                                                                                   9        of three v k r s w as, in all the circum stances, excessive and th a t
T h a t was h eld to he »vmisdirection.',:;Phillimore ,L.J.; delivering the judg­
                                                                                                                                                   the difference in ^ lp a b ility between the tw o appellants was n o t accurately
ment of the/court, w ent on. to say, at p. 709: t r ^ i r                                                   -r              mv?/;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          JUJ
                                                  Keg. v. Stone (CA.)                           ,                   [1977]            1    QJB.                             Meg. v. Daniel (C.A.J
    reflected in th e w ide variatio n betw een th eir sentences, 'I t is         clear th a t a                                                  by the def e n l f l It and would be instructing counsel. Due to an
                                                                                                                             A                    administrative error, that inform ation was not included in the
    sentence o f im m ediate im prisonm ent w as unavoidable, if fo r nothing else                                                                defendant’s'file and neither solid tore nor counsel were told of
    a t least to m a rk th e public disapproval o f such behaviour. >W e think,                                                        " the date fixed for the hearing of the applications. As a result,
    how ever, th a t w e are now able to extend som e mercy to this               m a n w ho is                                            ■' on June 14, 1976, the full court considered the applications in
    greatly handicapped. tr M e therefore propose to substitute a sentence of                                                          .         the absence of counsel and, after granting an extension of time,
    1 2 . m on th s’-im prisonm ent' fo r th e .three .years o rdered by th e judge, ^-.g
                                                                                                                                         ' ’ refused leave to appeal against sentence. On the following
                                                                                                                                                  day, the registrar of the court sent out notices of determination
                                                                                                                                           = of the applications, as required by rule 15 of the Criminal
    ■ . ;        ■'                           .    Appeals against conviction dismissed.  ]t>                                B        :.            Appeal Rules 1968,* T he court’s order was then recorded by .                 1
    ii:;u                        'Y'h              'Appeal by the appellant Stone against                                                     . the proper officer of the court of trial. O n the solicitors’                   .
  -!0                          3 '(i/m ^> ‘i0 s e n te n c e "allow ed. ■''•Sentence 'va rie d . ■ ’> k ,-                                    /requesting a fresh hearing, the court ordered the application                   . .
                                                                                                                                             - to he relisted. On September 14, when counsel appeared for
                                  W i3 0 : iJ e r tI fk o & "under se c tio n 33 (2 ) ro f th e :f § k                                      - the defendant, the court held that it was functus officio and
                   ' ■ 5 '■{.        ~      \ C r im in a l'A p p e a l A i t 1968 th a t p a in t                                      - :' dismissed the application for leave to appeal against sentence. ' }
    .uisl la o.v asijoo'!;!.* .s t:if: -M/tm’f f f J a w '- o f ^g en era l p u b lic ''im p o r ta n c e                                      „On September 17, on a reference by the Secretary of State, • .,
                  ;,i«j35U » i n v o l v e d m th e d e c is io n ,'n a m e ly ,                                                                   the court heard counsel for -the defendant and, allowing the                     .• . .
        iriifl 'Mam    !                     - " whether in a case of ‘m a n sla u g h ter                                   C        '           ’application for leave, dismissed the appeal against sentence on (;
                                                                                                                                       '          its                                      >-■'            f” .'   ''                 " 1 '.'.'
                                                                                                                                       v'tiiii-j 'On the issue 'of relisting appeals a n d applications in cases ■* J° ;r
                                                                                                                                       ;i of administrative e r r o r - f t M l ' ,                              1 .'y * ■ :>1r^:-;
                                                                                                                                           , , -Meld, that the inherent Jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal , .
                                                     b o d ily ..harm .
                                                                                                                                                , (C rim inal,Division) ’ tp relisf . for ' hearing "applications and            -
,;% C                                                                                                                                           ‘ appeals’could be exercisrf, w e n after #ie court’s judgment or
                                                                                                                                               ’ brder' bad been finally recorded by the proper officer of the               -
                                                                                                                             D            . n "court o f., tria l,. where' there .was' a ’nullity or where, pursuant - -
. a'E ,Solicitors:                                       ;m i A p p e a ls ; D irector , o f Public Prosecu-                           ?j ; ,t o .;th e ,:.court’s general power to prevent a miscarriage of
J            ^                                                                                                                                 '.justice under the Criminal Appeal A ct 1969 and the rules
                                                                                                                                       "'tajm ade •thereunder,’ the court’s failure to follow the rules o r r                            ;
                                  r V              ' i               ,                 . . . . . .. . ,* L
                                                                                                         ,. N   W,                               %ei-established practice led to the likelihood of an injustice
                                                                                                        fid } t o                       r-t^. .being done j o the ; defendant; r.that, accordingly, since the
                                                                                                                       M§t                     ' defendant had informed the registrar of the court in writing                         .- .
                                                   .F-?S«»f.p t A ' m ' x ,               i?-'f fsi V j'- rif e i- '                               of Ms intention to appear by counsel and as he had, by an
                                                                                                                             E            ■ ■ administrative error, te e n deprived of the common law right
 »" rfatfj-’a.                                                                                                                                     of every citizen to be represented before the courts, the court
 » .e                                                                     ; :v                                                    l      . - ■ had had jurisdiction to relist the application and had acted
                                             [COURT OF APPEAL]                                                                    1                per incuriam in holding itself .to be functus officio at the
 .5     .;        ,                                                               ■■                                                          ' rehearing."''             ■ ' ■'    ~
 i- <• * - , v *o' *’*• m >R E G IN A                        v. D A N IE L                                                                        .. Reg. v. Cross (Patrick) [1973] Q.B. 937, C.A. distinguished.
                                                                                                                                                      Reg. v. Grantham [1969] 2 Q.B. 574, Ct-M .A .C. and Reg.
     /             -»rj; UU't^ * -                                   =      v%       io                ;                                         . v. Majewski [ 1977] A.C. 443, H.L.(E.) considered.
 1976 .-.'June 14; : -                                        i - - , - • . •Law ton L J . and Ackner '
                                                                                                                             F            .                  y f ’} ' ' .     ;,                        ■
                                                                                           .Lawson JJ.
                                                                                                                                                . The following cases are referred to in the judgment:
 • i--                                                                                      filia l
                                                                                 r\i >■» t                                              ''u ,iReg v. 'Cross (Patrick) [1973] Q.B. 937; [1973] 2 W.L.R. 1049; [19731
                                             fs p p e a       ... .. jicpam ^Jlpplifotiom jo r^ . leave to                                          2 AU E.R. 920, C.A.
                                    _ st a e n tO K e ^ p ^ e m a ^ a ^ y i^ ia appear by em m -'                                           - R e g: V■.■'Grantham [1969] 2 Q.B. 574; [1969] 2 W.L.R. 1083; [1969] 2 AIT
                       .         M im im m M ve‘-'arek'‘k®i}mg to ''iism iss o i o f application                                                 .••.E.R. 545, C t- M A .C -     :'      r         ■
                 ■ 'S ^ ^ h f r a b a a t c e - ' o f !' c m m e l-iR e K stm g 'K a fte r liW tie f . •recorded— '           i         ■ . Reg. v. Majewski [1977] A.C. 443; [1975] 3 W.L.R. 401; [1975] 3 A ll
                 a - ,'^ W h e t h e r , c o u rt functua* officio -rC rim tn o l A p p e a l R u lea 1968
                                                                                                                                        - -         E.R. 296, C.A.; [1976] 2 W.L.R. 623; [1976] 2 All E.R. 142,
                                                            ?d
                                                                                                                                       . ; . . .. H.L.(E.).
                           *..% /T h e defendant was sentenced ’to 18 months’*Imprisonment
                 :// h iz lo r burglary.- . H is applications for leave to appeal o u t o f itime                                          ..;      '.-ft f;.» :        .■      I, ■:   r :        ~'
                          j.a n d f o r le a v e to appeal against sentence.were refused by the :                                         .... N o cases were cited in argum ent                  , . - ..
                   , -, , : Mnglejiidge. H e then applied to have his applications renewed '
                      ’ ' before ‘ the ' full c o u rt .'A 'f i n h o f solicitora informed the                                          i! C riiinai Appeal Rules' 1968, r. 15; “ (1) The registrar shall, as soon as praotic-
                            registrar o f the court in writing that they had -been' retained •                               II          able serve notice of any determination by the court . . . on any appral or applica-
                      i,                 il'k i iird::';    hV'-> ■■'.■■■: :■  /.a-'J-'n ,; ei  . .5                                    tion by an appellant on—(a) the appellant; (b) the Secretary of State; (c) any person-
                                                                                                                                      • having custody of the appellant; . » . (2) The registrar shall, as soon as practicabler
                                                          , ... . ., . . . :.V             >V-                                          serve notice on the proper officer of the court of trial ^©f the order of tee court:
                 [Reported by M is s H enrietta Steinberg, Barrister-at-Law]                   v ;j ,                                   disposing of an ap p a l or application for leave to appeal.”
                                                                                                                                              467
                   [1988]                1 q .b .                            Reg. v. Pinfold (C.A.)

the n e e d to m a k e       a               F o r those reasons, despite the able argum ents o f M r. M ansfield, w e
m eans o n e ap p eal                    have com e to the conclusion that w e have no jurisdiction to e n t e r ta in
•ugh s e c tio n 1 1 ( 2 )               this a p p lic a tio n and accordingly the application must be refused.
ttions, w e d o n o t
d m e re ly b e c a u s e                                                                                       A pplication r e fu s e d .

                                              Solicitors: B in d m a n & P a rtn e rs.
cretary o f S la t e ’s      B   B
7 o f th e C rim in a l                                                                                                        L. N . W.


it 1968] envisages
; conviction, the
3ecMjygs obscure,
  a lv ^ p approach
the Secretary of


iition. H e subm its
ch is sought to b e
 not know that it
 the m ercy o f th e         D   D
                                                                        [ q u e e n ’s   b e n c h d iv is io n ]
ising b e tw e e n the
  the Secretary o f
                                                            R E G IN A v. W EST L O N D O N C O R O N E R ,
 that, he subm its,
                                                                     E x parte G R A Y a n d O th ers
nent so far as the                                           R E G IN A v. W EST L O N D O N C O R O N E R ,
.$ to be found in                                                   E x parte D U N C A N a n d O thers
 J. said, at p. 580:                                                                                                W atkins L .I. and R och J.
                                          1986      D ec. 15, 16; 19
   H e refers us to
 can receive fresh                        Coroner—Inquest— Verdict—Death follow ing detention in police
it is provided that                           custody—Jury returning verdict o f unlaw ful killing Standard of
' r e c e iv e it if the                      proof—Jury forem an adding rider—W hether to be included in
                                              verdict—Jury supplied with coroner’s notes—Rule against jury
 ngly, he contends
                                              determining civil liability—-Whether rule ultra vires Insufficiency
;sh ctfk en ce o f an                         o f evidence—Jurisdiction o f High Court to quash verdict
 ion to hear the                               Coroners A c t 1887 (50 & 51 Viet. c. 71), ss. 4(3), 6— Coroners
th the mandatory                              Rules 1984 (S.I. 1984 No. 552), r. 42
vever, section 28                         Judicial Review— Coroner’s inquest—A pplication to quash verdict
 r application, and                           Jurisdiction o f High Court to quash verdict on ground of
                                               insufficiency o f evidence
                             G                       A coroner’s inquest was convened to inquire into the cause
lat before section                               of death of the deceased w ho, shortly after his arrest and
e r a t i o n at all, the                        detention in a police station , was taken to hospital, where he
minal A ppeal A ct                               died. A fter the coroner had sum m ed up to the jury and they
                                                 had retired, the coroner, in the absence of counsel and at the
                                                 request of the jury, handed to th e jury the notes h e had used to
574, although it is
                                                 direct them on the law relating to unlawful killing which
and not upon the                                 included directions on the offence of m anslaughter by neglect.
 binding upon us.            H       H
                                                 T he jury returned a verdict of unlawful killing but in announcing
 be o f such great                               th e verdict the jury forem an added the words “as a result of the
 judgm ent o f this                              degree of care given to him after he was overpow ered. ^ The
                                                 additional words were not recorded on the face of the inquisition.
                      Keg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (B.C.)              [1988]               | q .b .            Beg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (D.C.)

                   T he applicants, who w ere police officers r e ^ ^ s i b l e for the ^      a             Reg    v.        iy Coroner, E x parte Campbell [1982] Q .B . 661; [1982] 2
                   deceased’s welfare during the period of his arrest and detention,                               W . L I T 626; [1982] 2 All E .R . 545, D .C .
                   sought to challenge the verdict and the inquisition on the
                   grounds that the coroner’s direction to the jury on the law of                            The following additional cases were cited in argument:
                   m anslaughter was wrong; that the jury’s verdict contravened
                                                                                                             A ndrew s v. Director o f Public Prosecutions [1937] A .C . 576; [1937] 2 All
                   rule 42 of the C oroners Rules 19841 in that it appeared to
                   determ ine a question of civil liability; that rule 42 itself was                              E .R . 552, H .L .(E .)
                   ultra vires and inconsistent with section 4(3) of the Coroners                            Calvi, deed., In re, The Times, 2 April 1983, D .C .
                   A ct 1887 2 ; that the co ron er’s act in passing his notes to the jury B   B             Davis, deed., In re [1968] 1 Q .B . 72; [1967] 2 W .L .R . 1089; [1967] 1 All
                   after they had retired was a materiai irregularity affecting the                               E .R . 6 8 8 , C .A .
                   course of the inquest, a n d that the verdict was against the                             D ellow’s Will Trusts, In re [1964] 1 W .L .R . 451; [1964] 1 All E .R . 771
                   weight of the evidence.                                                                   H ornal v. Neuberger Products Ltd. [1957] 1 Q .B . 247;.[1956] 3 W .L .R .
                       O n the applicants’ application for judicial review and an                                 1034; [1956] 3 All E .R . 970, C.A .
                   order of certiorari to quash th e verdict and inquisition:—                               Rapier, deed., In re [1986] 3 W .L .R . 830; [1986] 3 All E .R . 726, D .C .
                       Held, allowing the application and quashing the verdict and                           Reg. v. Cardiff City Coroner, E x parte Thomas [1970] 1 W .L .R . 1475;
                   inquisition, ( 1 ) that the coroner had misdirected the jury in that p      C                  [1970] 3 All E .R . 469, D .C .
                   he had failed to direct that in order to find a verdict of unlawful                       Reg. v. Directors o f the Great Western Railway Co. (1888) 20 Q .B .D . 410,
                   killing they had to be satisfied that the act o r omission of a                                D .C .
                   single police officer with responsibility for the welfare of the                          Reg. v. H ampshire County Council, Ex parte Ellerton [1985] 1 W .L .R . 749;
                   deceased am ounted to unlawful conduct which was a substantial                                  [1985] 1 All E .R . 599, C.A .
                   cause of d eath , th at such conduct was reckless and that m ere                           Reg. v. H .M . Coroner fo r the County o f Central Cleveland, E x parte D ent
                   neglect would not suffice; that, the coroner had failed to direct                               (1986) 150 J.P .R . 251
                   the jury as to the correct standard of proof which, in relation to          j-y            Reg. v. H .M . Coroner fo r the County o f D evon, E x parte Glover (1985) 149
                   a verdict of unlawful killing, as in any case where death was D
                                                                                                                   J P R 208
                   alleged to have resulted from the commission of a criminal
                                                                                                              Reg. v. Lawrence (Stephen) [1982] A .C . 510; [1981] 2 W .L .R . 524; [1981] 1
                   offence, was that of proof beyond reasonable doubt; and that
                   the coroner’s act in handing his notes to the jury was, in the                                  All E .R . 974, H .L .(E .)
                   circumstances, a m aterial irregularity affecting the inquisition                          Reg. v. Secretary o f State fo r the H om e Department, E x parte Khawaja
                   (post, pp. 476f— 477b, g- h , 478c-d, 480c-d).                                                  [1984] A .C . 74; [1983] 2 W .L .R . 321; [1983] 1 All E .R . 765, H .L .(E .)
                       (2)       T hat the words “as a result of the degree of care given                     Reg. v. Seym our (Edward) [1983] 2 A .C . 493; [1983] 3 W .L .R . 349; [1983]
                   to ” the deceased “after he was overpow ered” added by the jury         „   c                   2 All E .R . 1058, H .L .(E .)
                   forem an in announcing the verdict of unlawful killing showed           ^   b              Reg. v. Stone [1977] Q .B . 354; [1977] 2 W .L .R . 169; [1977] 2 All E .R . 341,
                   that the jury were attributing the deceased’s death to neglect                                   C .A .
                   after his arrest and as such formed an essential part of their                             Reg. v. W althamstow Coroner, E x parte Rubenstein [1982] C rim .L .R . 509
                   verdict and ought to have been recorded on the face of the                                 Reg. v. West Yorkshire Coroner, Ex parte Sm ith [1983] Q .B . 335; [1982] 3
                   inquisition; but that since neither the veidict as framed nor as                                 W .L .R . 920; [1982] 3 All E .R . 1098, C .A .
                   recorded gave the appearance of identifying by nam e or                                    Rex v. Bateman (1925) 19 C r.A p p .R . 8 , C .A .
                   otherwise a person as blameworthy for the cause of death, there                            Southall v. Cheshire County News Co. Ltd. (1912) 5 B .W .C .C . 251, C .A .
                   had been no breach of rule 42 of the Coroners Rules 1984 p                      F
                   (post, pp. 478h— 479 d ).
                       Per curiam, (i) Instances may arise where ..-observing the                             A pplications for judicial review .
                   statutory duty may carry the risk of a clash between section 4 of                          T h e a p p lic a n ts in the first application, G lyn R o g er G ray, D e a n
                   the Coroners A ct 1887 and rule 42 of the Coroners Rules 1984.                        M orris T h o m p so n and M ich ael B ernard H ow a rd , all p o lic e officers in
                   B ut careful framing of the verdict consistent with the jury ’s                       the M etrop olitan P o lic e, and th e applicants in the se co n d application,
                   conclusion should avoid that. Rule 22 was intra vires (post,                          T h o m a s D u n c a n , C harles M orris, R og er K en t, R a ym on d C atling and
                   p. 479c).                                                                       G    John K y n asto n , lik ew ise p o lice officers in the M etrop olitan P o lice,
                       (ii) T he developm ent of judicial review cannot possibly allow 'J
                                                                                                         ap plied fo r judicial review and sou ght an order o f certiorari to bring up
                   verdicts by juries at inquests to stand which are based on no or
                   wholly insufficient evidence (post, pp. 479 h— 480a).                                 and quash the verdict a n d inquisition returned at the W est L on d o n
                                                                                                         C o ro n er’s Court by John D a v id K eith B u rton , H er M a jesty ’s C oron er
      T he following cases are referred to in the judgm ent of W atkins L .I.:                           for the W estern D istrict o f G reater L o n d o n , and a jury on 27 M arch
      Reg. v. City o f L ondon Coroner, E x parte Barber [1975] 1 W .L .R . 1310;                        1986, in respect o f the death o f John W illiam M ik k e ls e n . T h e grounds
          {1975] 3 All E .R . 538, D .C .                                                                fo r the ap plications, w hich w e re heard to g eth er, w ere that th e verdict o f
ox    Reg. i\ S o u th L ondon Coroner, E x parte Thompson, The Times, 9 July              H       ^    the jury w as fram ed in such a w ay as to appear to d eterm in e a q u estion
          1982, D .C .                                                                                    o f civil liability in con travention o f rule 42 o f th e C oron ers R u le s 1984;
                                                                                                          that the co ro n er’s direction to th e jury on the m ea n in g o f “unlaw ful
     1 Coroners Rules 1984, r. 42: see post, p. 475b.
     2 Coroners Act 1887, s. 4(3): see post, p. 474b.                                                     killing” w as w ron g in law , in adequ ate and confusing; that the direction
                        Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. t o y (D.C.)                            IWSSJ
as to th e s ta n d a r d o f p r o o f n e c e s sa ry to r e tu r n a verdjat o f u n la w fu l           th e ir car. T h jy s p n s ta b le s ’ su spicion s w ere in fact u n fou n d ed but gen u in ely
k illin g w as w ro n g in la w ; th a t th e finding o f th e ju ry V P a g a in st th e                   held at th e ( P i e . T h e tw o cars stop p ed in th e nearby B e d fo n t C lo se
w e ig h t o f th e e v id e n c e ; a n d th a t th e a c t o f th e c o r o n e r in supplying to         w h ere the paren ts o f Krafft lived . Krafft w as arrested. A n attem p t w as
t h e ju r y a t th e ir r e q u e s t a f te r th e ir r e tir e m e n t a n d in th e a b s e n c e o f   m a d e to take him to th e p o lic e car. It w as resisted and a very v io len t
c o u n s e l his ty p e d n o te s h e a d e d “ C o n c lu sio n s as to ty p e o f d e a t h ” w h ich   sc e n e en su ed , in th e course o f w hich P o lice C o n stab le P eaco ck drew his
h a d f o rm e d t h e b asis o f h is d ire c tio n to th e m o n th e law re la tin g to                  tru ncheon and struck b oth M ik k elsen and Krafft o n c e on the h ead
m a n s la u g h te r w as a m a te r ia l irre g u la rity in th e c o u rs e o f th e in q u isitio n .   w ith it.                                                     .   , „     ,
      T h e fa c ts a r e s ta te d in th e jud gm ent o f W a tk in s L J .                                     R ein fo rc em en ts w ere ca lled for. T h ey arrived. M ik k elsen w as
                                                                                                            o v erp o w ered . H e b eca m e u n co n sciou s or lap sed in to a drunken stupor.
     R . A l i m J o n e s f o r th e a p p lic a n ts in th e first a p p lic a tio n .                    A p olice district support unit cam e to th e sc en e con taining a num ber o f
     E d m u n d L a w s o n f o r th e a p p lic a n ts in th e s e c o n d a p p lic a tio n .            o th e r officers. M ik k elsen and oth ers, in clud ing Krafft s fath er, w ere put
     Kieran Coonan for the coroner.                                                                         in this and taken to H o u n slo w P olice S tation. T h e van arrived th e r e at
     Michael B e lo ff Q. C. and Oscar del Fabbro for the n ext o f kin o f the                             12 10 a m . M ik k elsen w as put u pon the floor o f the charge room w h ere
d ece a se d .                                                                                              h e rem ain ed until taken to h ospital. A p o o l o f clear vom it w a s se e n near
                                                                                                            his m ou th on th e flo o r at o n e stage. A t 12.19 a d o ctor w as called for
                                                                                                            a n d 10 m in u tes later an a m bu lance. A t 12.37 the am bu lance arrived.
                                                                                  Cur. adv. v u lt.
                                                                                                            T h e am bu lance attend ant fo u n d M ik k elsen to h ave a g o o d pulse and to
                                                                                                            b e breathing. H is p u lse had previously b een ch ec k e d in th e charge room
      19 D e c e m b e r . W atk in s L .J. read the fo llo w in g jud gm en t. O n
                                                                                                             by o n e or m ore p o lic e officers. T h e com p aratively short journey to th e
16 July 1985 at th e W e s t M id d le se x H osp ital John W illiam M ik k elsen
                                                                                                             hospital from th e p o lice station w as n o t regarded as an em e r g e n c y , so
d ied . H e w as 34 years o f age. H e w as a large colou red man k n ow n to
                                                                                                             the blue light w as n ot u sed . O n arrival at th e hospital a nurse fe lt
use six o th e r n a m es at different tim es. H e w as a dispatch rider by
                                                                                                             M ik k elsen ’s p ulse. It w as p resen t althou gh w ea k , and h e w as th ou gh t to
occu p a tio n . Im m ed iately b efo re his d eath h e w as a resident o f W est
                                                                                                             appear q uite norm al. H o w e v e r , w h en a short tim e la te r h e w as rolled o n
L o n d o n and a m em b er o f the so-called H e ll’s A n g e ls. H is d eath w as
                                                                                                             to a hospital trolley b ed it w as se en that h e w as n ot breathing. H e had
g iv e n w id e publicity in th e p ress, by broadcast a n d by telev isio n .
                                                                                                             no p ulse. R esu scitation o f him w as im m ed ia tely a ttem p ted . It w as
A lle g a tio n s b egan to b e m a d e o f a m ost seriou s nature against a large
                                                                                                             unsuccessful and at 1.20 a.m . h e w as p ro n ou n ced dead .
n um ber o f p o lice o fficers o f th e use o f v io len ce against M ik k elsen , o f
                                                                                                                   E xam in ation o f him later on re v ea led , am on g m any other things,
m ish and lin g h im , o f failing to bring m ed ical attention to h im and o f
                                                                                                             th a t at the tim e o f the fight in B e d fo n t C lo se h e had a b lo o d alco h o l
n eglectin g in p rop er tim e to o b tain an am bu lance so that h e cou ld b e
                                                                                                             reading o f 190 to 195 m illigram m es o f a lco h o l p er 100 m illilitres o f
ta k en to h osp ital and th ere receive, suitable m ed ical attention and
                                                                                                              b lo o d , calcu lated from a reading ta k en u p on exam in ation o f 172
treatm en t.
                                                                                                              m illigram m es. H is b lo o d also con ta in ed traces o f cannabis and
      O n the night o f M ik k elsen ’s d eath a form al p olice in vestigation in to
                                                                                                              am ph etam ines. T h is recital o f even ts is deliberately b rief and shorn o f
the circum stances o f it b ega n . A num ber o f p o lice officers w ere served
                                                                                                              m u c h detail and o f allegation and cou n ter-allegation . S u b seq u en tly,
w ith a n o tice u nd er regulation 7 o f the P olice D iscip lin e R egu lation s
                                                                                                              various p erson s w ere charged w ith o ffe n c es against the arresting p o lic e
1985. D isc ip lin a ry p rocedu res a re still in co n tem p lation by the
                                                                                                              con stab le. T h ey ap peared at a m agistrates’ court w h ere the ch arges
C o m m issio n er o f th e M etrop olitan P o lice. A cco rd in g ly, although the
                                                                                                              against th em w er e dism issed.
D irecto r o f P ub lic P rosecu tion s has n ow in dicated that no p o lice officer
                                                                                                                   M ea n w h ile, an in qu est o p e n e d by D r. B u rton , th e coron er for the
w ill be p rosecu ted for a crim inal o ffe n c e , a substantial num ber o f p olice
                                                                                                              W e s te rn D istrict o f G reater L o n d o n on 23 July 1985, lay adjourned. It
o ffic ers, from th e rank o f ch ie f in spector d ow nw ards, have b e e n and
                                                                                                              w as resu m ed w ith a jury on 17 M arch 1986 and con clu d ed , after a nine-
rem ain su sp en d ed from duty sin ce the inquest to w hich I shall so o n b e
                                                                                                              day h earing, on 27 M arch 1986. A cco rd in g to the in q u isition , th e cause
referring. W h eth er su sp en sion o f a n y o n e , w hich as se em s in evitab le will
                                                                                                              o f d eath w as cerebral an oxia d ue to in halation o f stom ach con ten ts. T h e
g o o n for a con sid erab le tim e y et, w as ever justified, on ly tim e will tell.
                                                                                                              tim e, place and circum stances at or in w hich th e injury w a s su stained are
      T h e ev e n ts w hich b rou ght th e se officers to their unhappy situation
                                                                                                              s ta te d to b e that M ik k elsen w as arrested o n 15 July 1985 and tak en to
and M ik k elsen to his d eath b egan in the late even in g o f 15 July 1985.
C o n stab les P ea c o ck and R en to n w ere on duty near a public h ou se                                  H ou n slow P olice S tation. H e w as transferred to th e W est M id d lesex
in B e d fo n t, M id d le sex , w h e n th ey saw M ik k elsen an d tw o other                               H osp ital and th ere certified d ead . T h e con clu sion o f the jury as to d eath
m em b ers o f th e H e ll’s A n g e ls, n am ed A la n Krafft and G riffen, b eh a vin g                     is stated to b e that h e w as unlaw fully k illed. T h o se w ord s did n ot
in a rather unruly m anner. A ll th ree o f th em got in to a m otor car. T h e                               represen t everyth in g the forem an o f the jury said w hen an nou ncing th e
officers s u s p e c te d that it b elo n g ed to n o n e o f them and d ecid ed to arrest                    verdict. T hat is c o m m o n ground b etw e en cou n sel w h o h ave ap peared
the driver and his p assen gers for unlaw fully taking or b ein g carried in                                   b efore us fo r friend s o f M ik k elsen , so m e o f th e p olice officers and th e
the car. It w as driven aw ay at a fast sp ee d fo llo w ed by the con sta b les in                            coroner. A lth o u g h recollection s as to w hat w as actually said differ
Watkins L.J.              Keg. v. West L o llS i to ro aer, E i p. Cray (D.C.;               /            [1988T                                 Keg. v. West CbnSoii tir«a?F,TS'TfriS^^                             "'‘WatHnsXlJ."
slig h tly , t h e w o rd s “u n la w fu lly killed a ttr ib u te d to th a jji e g r e e o f c a r e                a   a n d co n fu sirtflk h a t h e fa iled to le av e to th e m a t le a st o n e o th e r v e rd ic t
a f te r h e w as o v e r p o w e r e d ,” r e p r e s e n t w h a t th e fo r e m S F w a s h e a r d to                w hich w as o f lln to th e m u p o n th e e v id e n c e , a n d th a t th e r e w as a
say b y all p r e s e n t, as n e a r as m a y b e.                                                                      m a te ria l irre g u la rity in tro d u c e d a f te r th e ju r y ’s r e tir e m e n t, in th a t in th e
      T h e c o r o n e r ’s v e rs io n o f it, as a p p e a r s fro m his first affid av it, is:                       ab sen c e o f c o u n s e l fo r th e in te r e s te d p a r tie s th e c o r o n e r su p p lie d to th e
      “ T h e tr a n s c r ip t w h e n a v a ila b le w ill n o d o u b t d e m o n s tr a te th e p o in t             jury a t th e ir r e q u e s t a co p y o f his ty p e d n o te s e n title d “ C o n c lu sio n s as
      w ith g r e a te r c larity b u t th e v e rd ic t w h ich w as r e c o rd e d b y m e in                          to th e ty p e o f d e a t h ” w h ich h a d fo rm e d th e b asis o f h is d ire c tio n s as to
      w ritin g w as q u ite sim p ly ‘u n la w fu lly k ille d .’ T h e fo re m a n after                           g   th e law . In an y e v e n t, it is sa id th a t su c h n o te s w e re a p t to c o n fu se .
      d e liv e rin g th e s e tw o w o rd s th e n s p o n ta n e o u s ly a p p e a r e d to a d d                          W e h e a r d first th e su b m issio n s o f M r. A lu n J o n e s . T h e y w e re
      ( a n d I p a r a p h r a s e ) t h a t th is v e rd ic t w as in te n d e d (by th e ju r y ) to                  in te r ru p te d e a rly o n by M r. B e lo ff, c o u n s e l fo r th e frie n d s o f M ik k e ls e n ,
      c o v e r th e c irc u m s ta n c e s o f m a n s la u g h te r by n e g le c t fro m th e tim e                   w h o to ld us th a t h e w o u ld n o t b e se e k in g to o p p o s e th e a p p lic a tio n s to
      th e d e c e a s e d w as o v e r p o w e r e d . T h is m a y h a v e b e e n a d d e d by th e                   q u a sh th e v e rd ic t a n d in q u isitio n a n d fo r a fre sh in q u e s t. T h is , h e sa id ,
      ju ry in o r d e r to d isp e l a n y s u g g e stio n th a t th e v e rd ic t o f ‘u n la w fu l                  w as b e c a u s e h e re g a rd s th e c o r o n e r ’s d ir e c tio n s u p o n th e law o f
      k illin g ’ c o u ld re fle c t a n a c c e p ta n c e b y th e m th a t th e d e c e a s e d h a d                m a n s la u g h te r as critically d e fe c tiv e . M r. C o o n a n , c o u n s e l f o r th e
      been m u rd ered . . . . ”                                                                                     C   c o ro n e r, w h o h a s a d o p te d a w h o lly p r o p e r , n e u tra l a n d h e lp fu l ro le in
                                                                                                                         this h e a rin g , d o e s n o t d iss e n t fro m th a t view .
H e w e n t o n to a d d :                                                                                                     I th in k it rig h t to p re f a c e c o n s id e r a tio n o f th e e x c e lle n t su b m issio n s
       “ I f o r m y p a r t d id n o t u n d e r s ta n d th e ju r y f o r e m a n ’s e n tir e w o rd s               w hich w e h a v e lis te n e d to by re c itin g th e w o rd s u s e d by L o r d L a n e C .J.
       to c o n s titu te th e fo rm a l v e rd ic t b u t su ch w o rd s a re im p o ssib le to                         in R e g , v. South L o n d o n C o r o n e r , E x p a r te T h o m p s o n , T h e T im e s , 9
       ig n o r e w h e n fa c e d w ith w h a t o th e rw is e m ig h t h a v e a p p e a r e d to                      July 1982 in giving th e ju d g m e n t o f th e c o u r t o f w h ich I w as a m e m b e r
       h a v e b e e n a n o n -sp ec ific v e rd ic t w h ich w ith o u t m o r e m ig h t h a v e                  p   on 8 July 1982. H e sa id :                                                                           i
       b e e n d a m a g in g to th e a p p lic a n ts by its v ery a m b ig u ity .”                                          “T h e c o r o n e r ’s ta s k in a ca se su c h as th is is a f o rm id a b le o n e , a n d
                                                                                                                               n o o n e w o u ld d is p u te th a t; th a t is q u ite a p a r t fro m th e d ifficu lties
      T o th e s e o b s e rv a tio n s o f th e c o r o n e r I sh a ll b e r e tu r n in g in d u e                          w hich in e v ita b ly arise w h e n fee lin g s a r e r u n n in g h ig h a n d th e
c o u rse .                                                                                                                    s p e c ta to rs a r e e m o tio n a lly in v o lv e d a n d v o ca l. O n c e a g a in it sh o u ld
      C o n s ta b le s G r a y , T h o m p s o n a n d H o w a r d h a v e le a v e to m o v e fo r                           n o t b e f o rg o tte n th a t a n in q u e s t is a fa c t fin d in g e x e rc is e a n d n o t a
ju d ic ia l re v ie w o f th e c o r o n e r ’s in q u e s t. T h e y a r e r e p r e s e n te d b y M r.                     m e th o d o f a p p o r tio n in g g u ilt. T h e p r o c e d u r e a n d ru le s o f e v id e n c e
A lu n J o n e s . T h e y s e e k o r d e r s o f c e r tio r a r i to q u a s h th e v e r d ic t a n d            E         w hich a re s u ita b le fo r o n e a re u n s u ita b le f o r th e o th e r . In a n
in q u is itio n , m a n d a m u s o r d e r in g a n e w in q u e s t a n d a d e c la ra tio n as to                         in q u e st it sh o u ld n e v e r b e f o rg o tte n th a t th e r e a re n o p a r tie s , th e r e
th e s ta n d a r d o f p r o o f r e q u ir e d f o r th e r e tu r n o f a v e rd ic t o f u n la w fu l                     is n o in d ic tm e n t, th e r e is n o p r o s e c u tio n , th e r e is n o d e fe n c e , th e r e
k iltin g . T h e s e o fficers w e r e in v o lv e d in th e d e te n tio n a n d th e r e m o v a l to                       is n o tria l, sim p ly a n a tte m p t to e s ta b lis h facts. It is a n in q u is ito ria l
c u s to d y o f M ik k e ls e n a f te r M s a r r e s t. T h e y w e re re c o g n is e d b y th e                           p ro c e ss, a p ro c e ss o f in v e stig a tio n q u ite u n lik e a c rim in a l tr ia l
c o r o n e r a s in te r e s te d p e r s o n s . T h e y all g a v e e v id e n c e a t th e in q u e s t, as                w h e re th e p r o s e c u to r ac cu ses a n d th e a c c u s e d d e fe n d s , th e ju d g e
d id th e a r r e s tin g officers.                                                                                  „         h o ld in g th e b a la n c e o r th e rin g , w h ic h e v e r m e ta p h o r o n e c h o o s e s to
      T h e g r o u n d s o n w h ic h th e y rely f o r th e r e lie f th e y s e e k a re : (1) th e                         u s e .”
v e r d ic t o f th e ju r y w as f r a m e d ie su c h a w ay as to a p p e a r to d eterm in e a
q u e s tio n o f civil liab ility in c o n tra v e n tio n o f ru le 42 o f th e C o r o n e r s                             T h e r e is n o s u g g e stio n th a t a t th is in q u e s t th e s p e c ta to rs w e re v o c a l.
R u le s 1984 (S .I. 1984 N o . 5 5 2 ); (2) th e c o r o n e r ’s d ire c tio n s to th e ju ry                         T h a t a p a r t, e v e ry th in g th e r e sa id is a p p lic a b le to it. I w o u ld a d d th a t it
o n th e m ea n in g o f “unlaw ful k illin g ” w e r e w ro n g in la w , in a d e q u a te a n d                       is th e c o r o n e r w h o calls th e w itn e sse s a n d q u e s tio n s th e m . T h e ro le o f a
c o n fu sin g ; (3) th e d ir e c tio n s o n th e s ta n d a r d o f p r o o f n e c e s sa ry to r e tu r n           w itn e ss’s r e p r e s e n ta tiv e is c o n fin e d to a s k in g q u e s tio n s a f te r th e c o r o n e r
a v e rd ic t o f u n la w fu l k illin g w e re w ro n g ; a n d (4) th e fin d in g o f u n la w fu l              G   has fin ish ed w ith th e w itn e ss. H e is n o t a llo w e d to a d d re s s th e ju r y as to
k illin g w as n o t s u p p o r te d b y th e e v id e n c e .                                                          th e e v id e n c e . A d v o c a c y h as th e r e f o r e a lm o st n o in flu e n c e , n o p a r t in th e
      C h ie f I n s p e c to r D u n c a n , I n s p e c to r M o rris , S e rg e a n t K e n t, I n s p e c to r       p ro c e e d in g s. T h is is in m a r k e d c o n tr a s t to th e c rim in a l tria l. T h e
C a tlin g a n d S e r g e a n t K yn aston also h a v e le a v e to m o v e fo r ju d ic ia l                           o rd in a ry ru les o f e v id e n c e d o n o t ap p ly . T h is e n la rg e s th e sc o p e o f th e
re v ie w o f th e c o r o n e r ’s in q u e s t. T h e r e lie f th e y s e e k is sim ila r to th a t                  in q u iry b u t m ay w ell, a m o n g th e o th e r m a tte rs I h a v e r e f e r r e d to ,
s o u g h t by th e o fficers a lre a d y m e n tio n e d . T h e y w e re c o n c e r n e d in o n e                    d e tra c t fro m th e v a lu e o f th e v e rd ic t w h ich c a n n o t b e r e g a r d e d as
w ay o r a n o t h e r a n d a t v a rio u s tim e s w ith e v e n ts a f te r a r r e s t and. u p to                   co n c lu siv e, a t an y r a te if it is to th e e ffec t th a t a crim e h a s b e e n
t h e r e m o v a l o f M ik k e ls e n to h o sp ita l. T h e y a re r e p r e s e n te d by M r.                       c o m m itte d . T h e c o r o n e r h as th e c e n tr a l a n d d o m in a n t ro le . H e has
L a w s o n . T h e g r o u n d s w h ich th e y s e e k to rely u p o n a r e , b r o a d ly                            p o w e rs a t c o m m o n law a n d h e is b o u n d b y s ta tu te s a n d ru le s, th e
s p e a k in g , sim ila r to th o s e a lre a d y m e n tio n e d . T h e y also c o n te n d th a t th e               p ro v isio n s o f w h ic h h e m u st o b s e rv e sc ru p u lo u s ly in c o n d u c tin g th e
d ir e c tio n s g iv e n to th e ju r y b y th e c o r o n e r as to th e law w e re d e fe c tiv e                     hearing.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             Q.B. 1988—-22
474                                                                                                                          I Q.B.               Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (D.C.)      W atkins L.J.
Watkins L.J.            Reg. v. West London Coroner, E i p. Gray (D.C.)                                  (1988)
                                                                                                                     ^           Pow er l l l l given by Parliam ent for the m aking o f rules. T h e relevant
      T h e m a in p ro v isio n s w h ich it is n e c e s sa ry h e r e t J I I S f e r to a re th e                        rules are o i l e d the C oron ers R u les 1984. R u le 22(1) provides: “ N o
fo llo w in g . I tu r n first to th e g o v e rn in g A c t, th e C o r o n e r s A c t 1887. B y                           w itness at an in qu est shall b e ob liged to answ er an y question ten din g to
s e c tio n 4 , so f a r as is m a te r ia l, it is p ro v id e d :                                                          incrim inate h im self.” R u le 36, dealing w ith m atters to b e ascertained at
      “ (1) T h e c o r o n e r a n d ju r y sh a ll, a t th e first sittin g o f th e in q u e s t                          an inquest, provides:
      . . . e x a m in e o n o a th to u c h in g th e d e a th all p e r s o n s w h o te n d e r                                “(1) T h e p ro ceed in gs and ev id e n c e at an inquest shall b e d irected
      th e ir e v id e n c e r e s p e c tin g th e fac ts a n d all p e rs o n s h a v in g k n o w le d g e        o            solely to ascertaining th e follow in g m atters, n a m e ly -(a ) w h o the
      o f th e fac ts w h o m h e th in k s it e x p e d ie n t to e x a m in e . . . (3) A f t e r                               d ecea sed w as; (b ) h o w , w h en and w h ere the d ecea sed cam e by his
            . h e a r in g th e e v id e n c e th e ju ry shall give th e ir v e r d ic t, a n d                                  death . . . (2) N eith er the coroner nor th e jury shall e x p re ss any
      c e rtify it by a n in q u isitio n in w ritin g , s e ttin g f o rth , so f a r as su ch                                   op inion on any other m a tters.”
      p a r tic u la rs h a v e b e e n p r o v e d to th e m , w h o th e d e c e a s e d w a s, a n d
      h o w , w h e n , a n d w h e r e th e d e c e a s e d c a m e by his d e a th . .                                     Out o f the w in d o w w en t the rider. R u le 40 provides: “N o p erson shall
                                                                                                                             be allow ed to address the coron er or the jury as to the fa cts.” R u le 41
     B y se c tio n 6 (1 ) it is p ro v id e d :                                                                     £       provides:
      “ W h e r e H e r M a je s ty ’s H ig h C o u r t . . . u p o n a p p lic a tio n m a d e                                   “W h ere the coroner sits w ith a jury, h e shall sum up th e ev id e n c e
      by o r u n d e r th e a u th o r ity o f th e A tto r n e y - G e n e r a l, is sa tisfie d . . .                           to the jury and direct them as to the law . . . and shall draw their
      ( 6 ) w h e re a n in q u e s t h a s b e e n h e ld b y a c o r o n e r th a t by re a s o n o f                           a tte n tio n to . . . rule 4 2 .”
      f ra u d , r e je c tio n o f e v id e n c e , irre g u la rity o f p r o c e e d in g s , in su fficien cy
      o f in q u iry , o r o th e rw is e , it is n e c e s sa ry o r d e s ira b le , in th e in te r e s ts                R ule 42 is im portant. Its p rovisions are these:
      o f ju s tic e , th a t a n o t h e r in q u e s t sh o u ld b e h e ld . . . [he] m a y q u a s h             _                “N o verdict shall b e fram ed in such a w ay as to appear to d eterm in e
      th e in q u is itio n o n th a t in q u e s t.”                                                                                 any q uestion o f— (a) crim inal liability o n the part o f a nam ed
                                                                                                                                      person , or (b ) civil liab ility.”
     S e c tio n 13 o f th e C o r o n e r s ( A m e n d m e n t) A c t 1926, as a m e n d e d by
se c tio n 62 o f th e A d m in is tr a tio n o f Ju s tic e A c t 1982, p ro v id e s:                                          A ttach ed to th ese rules is a p reced en t for an inquisition. T h ere are
       “ (1 ) S u b je c t to th e p ro v isio n s o f th is s e c tio n , a c o r o n e r w ith in                          notes to the p reced en t. In th ose n o tes o n e finds a recital o f the kinds of
       w h o se ju ris d ic tio n th e d e a d b o d y o f a p e r s o n is ly ing , m a y , in lie u                        verdict which a c o ro n er’s jury is en titled to return. T h ey include
       o f s u m m o n in g a ju r y in th e m a n n e r r e q u ir e d by se c tio n 3 o f th e                     £       death from natural cau ses, su icide, self-in du ced ab ortion , accid en t,
       C o r o n e r s A c t 1887 fo r th e p u r p o s e o f in q u irin g in to th e d e a th o f                          m isadventure, unlaw ful killing, m urder, infanticide and an o p en verdict.
       th a t p e r s o n , h o ld a n in q u e s t . . . w ith o u t a ju ry . (2) I f it a p p e a r s to                      W ith that syn opsis o f the co ro n er’s p o w ers in m ind, I p u n to
       th e c o r o n e r e ith e r b e f o r e h e p r o c e e d s to h o ld a n in q u e s t o r in th e                   exam ine the issues raised, the m ain o f w hich m ust cause u s, it is argued,
       c o u r s e o f a n in q u e s t b e g u n w ith o u t a ju r y , th a t th e r e is r e a s o n to                   to quash the verdict and inquisition— our p o w er to do that is b eyo n d
       s u sp e c t . . . ( f ) th a t th e d e a th o c c u r re d w h ile th e d e c e a s e d w as in                     doubt— and to ord er, as w e m ay, a fresh inquisition b efo re another
       p o lice c u s to d y , o r r e s u lte d fro m a n in ju ry c a u se d by a p o lic e officer                        coroner and b efore an oth er jury.
       in th e p u r p o r te d e x e c u tio n o f h is d u ty ; h e sh all p r o c e e d to su m m o n             F           I ch o o se as the first issue to co m m en t u pon the co ro n er’s directions
       a ju r y in th e m a n n e r r e q u ir e d by th e C o ro n e rs A c t 1887 . . . ”                                  upon the law o f unlaw ful killing. 1 begin w ith three short extracts from
                                                                                                                             the eight or nine p a ges o f n otes the coroner m ade to assist him in
     T h is p ro v isio n is o b v io u sly m a n d a to r y , d e p e n d e n t fo r e ffe c t u p o n                      sum m ing up. T h e first extract reads:
in ju ry c a u sin g d e a th . W h e th e r th e c a u se o f d e a th in th e p r e s e n t c a se                                  “ U n la w fu lly killed. C overs b oth m urder and m anslaughter. M urder
c o m e s w ith in th e d e fin itio n o f in ju ry , h o w e v e r lo o se ly r e g a r d e d , d e p e n d s                        requires a d eliberate attem pt to kill or cause grievou s bodily harm .
p a rtly u p o n d e fin itio n a n d p a rtly u p o n th e e v id e n c e .                                         G                M any techn icalities, b u t n ot relevant w h en the sam e verdict covers
      S e c tio n 56(1) o f th e C rim in a l L aw A c t 1977 p ro v id e s:                                                          m anslaughter as w ell. M anslaughter com p rises tw o types o f h om icid e
       “ A t a c o r o n e r ’s in q u e s t to u c h in g th e d e a th o f a p e r s o n w h o ca m e                               in this case. Firstly, the force u sed in arresting M ikk elsen at B ed fo n t
       by h is d e a th by m u r d e r , m a n s la u g h te r o r in fa n tic id e , th e p u r p o s e o f                          C lose— if that w as the cau se o f his d eath. S econ d ly, the d egree o f
       th e p ro c e e d in g s sh a ll n o t in c lu d e th e fin d in g o f an y p e r s o n g u ilty o f                           care given to him after h e w as o v e r p o w e r e d .”
       th e m u r d e r , m a n s la u g h te r o r in fa n tic id e ; a n d a c c o rd in g ly a c o r o n e r ’s
       in q u isitio n sh a ll in n o c a se c h a rg e a p e rs o n w ith an y o f th o s e                                  T he secon d p assage appears from p age 3 o f the notes:
       o f fe n c e s .”                                                                                                 H            “A fter M ik k elsen w as cu ffed and had sto p p ed struggling, cou ld
                                                                                                                                      there be m anslaughter by n eglect? T h e n eg ligen ce m ust g o b eyon d
 P r io r to th is e n a c tm e n t a c o r o n e r ’s ju ry c o u ld , a n d s o m e tim e s d id ,                                  the m ere m atter o f co m p en sation b etw e en su b jects and m ust sh ow
 c h a rg e a n d c o m m it a p e r s o n fo r tria l o n c h a rg e s so s e rio u s as m u r d e r                                 such disregard for the life and safety o f oth ers as to am ount to a
 a n d m a n s la u g h te r.
Watkins L.J.            Reg, v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (B.C.)                              [1988]      fQ .B ,                 Keg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (B.C.)                     Watkins L.J.

      c rim e a g a in st th e       s ta te a n d c o n d u c t d e se rv in g g ^ is h m e n t . T h is       M ikkelsen j f c e a t h . (4 ) T h a t in failin g to a c t f o r t h e b e n e fit o f M ik k e ls e n ’s ’
      v e rd ic t d o e s h a v e    to u se th e w o rd ‘c r im e ’— b e c J l l : th a t is w h a t           h e a lth an d^ relfare he acted reck lessly. It sh ou ld b e ex p la in ed that to act
      m a k e s it unlaw ful         killin g. A n y th in g less th a n th a t is a m a tte r o f              recklessly m ea n s that th ere w as an ob v io u s and seriou s risk to th e h e a lth
      d a m a g e s a n d is n o t   a c o r o n e r ’s v e r d ic t.”                                          and w elfare o f M ik k elsen to w hich th at p o lic e o ffic er, h aving regard to
                                                                                                                his duty, w as indifferent or, recogn ising that risk t o b e p resen t, he
F in ally , o n th e la st p a g e o f th e n o te s , th e c o r o n e r tu r n e d to th e ty p e s o f
                                                                                                                deliberately ch o se to run th e risk by d oin g n oth ing about it. It sh ou ld be
v e rd ic t. H e said :                                                                                         em p hasised , h o w e v er , that a failure to appreciate that th ere w as such a
        “ O p e n v e rd ic t. M is a d v e n tu re (w ith r e c o m m e n d a tio n s ). L a c k o f c a re    risk w ould n ot b y itse lf b e sufficient to am oun t to reck lessness.
        a g g r a v a te d by la c k o f c a re — p ro b le m s — ask . A b u s e o f d ru g s—                       Further, th e jury sh o u ld h ave b een d irected that th e y cou ld return a
        a lc o h o l— n o t s u p p o r te d by d o c to rs. H o m ic id e by a n u n la w fu l ac t o r        verdict o f unlaw ful killing on ly if they cou ld attribute th o se ingredientsj
        by n e g le c t. N e e d s h ea v y b u r d e n o f p r o o f a n d y ou h a v e to b e c e r ta in     to a single p o lic e officer, w h o m they sh o u ld on n o account n am e ©it
        th a t th e r e c o u ld n o t h a v e b e e n se lf-d e fe n c e an d y o u h a v e to                 otherw ise id en tify. In this c o n tex t, th e jury sh ould con sid er th e p ositio n !
        r e m e m b e r th e rig h t to use r e a s o n a b le fo rc e in m a k in g a law fu l                 o f each officer in turn, follo w in g M ik k elsen ’s arrest, as to his duty, if
        a r r e s t .”                                                                                          any, to care for M ik k elsen ’s h ealth and w elfare and the op portu nity
                                                                                                                given to h im , having regard to the length o f tim e h e w as w ith M ik k elsen
       T h e in te r e s tin g fe a tu re o f th e first e x tra c t is th a t th e ju r y , in w h a t
                                                                                                                and other relevant circum stances, to discharge it.
c o u n s e l fo r th e p o lice o fficers say w as p a r t o f its v e rd ic t, fo llo w e d w o rd s
                                                                                                                      I turn now to the standard o f p roof. W e heard m uch argum ent ab out
w h ich a p p e a r in th is p a r t o f th e c o r o n e r ’s n o te s. T h e y w e re e n a b le d to
                                                                                                                this. T h ere is a lack o f direct authority on th e p oint. W e w ere referred
d o th a t b e c a u s e a t th e ir r e q u e s t th e c o r o n e r se n t th e n o te s in to th e ju ry
                                                                                                                 to cases on suicide goin g back in to the last centu ry, all o f w hich
a f te r th e y h a d r e tire d . T h a t is a m a tte r w h ich I will d e a l w ith la te r o n .
                                                                                                                 em phasise the p resum ption against su icid e, and the requ irem en t o f
W h a t is o f m o r e sig nificance is th a t n o w h e r e in th e su m m in g u p is th e r e
to b e fo u n d th e d e fin itio n o f m a n s la u g h te r ; u n la w fu l k illing , th a t is. A t          rebutting that p resum ption . Suicide w as then a crim e. It n o lon ger is.
n o p o in t d id th e c o r o n e r d ire c t th e ju ry th a t to find a v e rd ic t o f                       But it is still a drastic action which o fte n lea v es in its w ak e seriou s
m a n s la u g h te r th e y h a d to b e satisfied th a t th e ac t o r o m issio n o f a sin g le              social, ec o n o m ic and other co n seq u en ces.
p e r s o n m u st a m o u n t to u n la w fu l c o n d u c t w hich w as a s u b s ta n tia l c a u se                Lord W idgery C .J. in Reg, v. City o f L ondon Coroner, E x parte
o f d e a th . T h e ju ry w e re left w ith th e im p re ssio n th a t th e y m ig h t b e                      Barber [1975] 1 W .L .R . 1310, 1313, said:
satisfie d th a t th e r e w as m a te r ia l u n la w fu l c o n d u c t, act o r n e g le c t, by                       “ If that is a fair statem en t o f the coron er’s approach, and I sin cerely
a g g re g a tin g th e c o n d u c t o f tw o o r m o r e o f th e officers. O n e c a n n o t                           h op e it is b ecau se I h ave n o desire to b e unfair to him , it se em s to
a v o id th e fe e lin g , I th in k , th a t th is is p ro b a b ly w h a t h as h a p p e n e d .                       m e to fail to reco gn ise w hat is perhaps o n e o f the m ost im portant
T h u s , sa id M r. A lu n J o n e s , w ith ju stific a tio n in m y v iew , th e v e rd ic t h a s                     rules that coroners should bear in m ind in cases o f this class,
h a d a b lu n d e rb u s s e ffe c t, m e a n in g th a t sh o t w e n t o ff i(| all d ire c tio n s ,                  n am ely, that suicide m ust n ever be p resum ed . If a person d ies a
strik in g p o lic e officers in v o lv e d in d isc rim in a te ly .                  F                                  v iolen t d eath , the possibility o f suicide m ay b e th ere for all to s e e ,
        I h a v e m u c h sy m p a th y w ith th e c o r o n e r , f o r h e w as d e a lin g w ith a                     but it m ust not b e p r e s u m e d m erely b ecau se it seem s on th e face o f
 k in d o f m a n s la u g h te r , n a m e ly u n la w fu l killing by n e g le c t, w h ich is                          it to be a likely exp lan ation . Suicide m ust b e proved by e v id e n c e,
 s e ld o m m e t w ith . M o r e o v e r, save in th e h a n d s o f a n e x p e r ie n c e d ju d g e ,                 and if it is not p roved by e v id e n c e, it is th e duty o f the coron er n ot
 it is not a sim p le m a tte r to d ire c t a ju r y u p o n . It is n o t su rp ris in g                                to find su icid e, but to find an o p e n verdict. I approach this case,
 th e r e f o r e to find th a t th e c o r o n e r is criticised also fo r his less th a n                               applying a stringent test, and asking m y se lf w h eth er o n the e v id e n c e
 c o r r e c t a n d h e lp fu l r e f e r e n c e s a t v a rio u s tim e s to n e g le c t, giving th e                 w hich w as given in this case any reason able coroner cou ld have
 im p re ssio n h e r e a n d th e r e th a t ju s t p la in n eglect w o u ld do .                                       reached the con clu sion that the proper answ er w as su icid e .”
        O th e r criticism s h a v e also b e e n v o ic ed as to th is all im p o r ta n t
 d ire c tio n b u t I h a v e , I th in k , said e n o u g h to in d ic a te th a t th e ju r y w e re              It will be n o te d that Lord W idgery C .J. alluded to the stringent test,
 g rav e ly m is d ire c te d a n d c a n n o t h a v e b e e n o th e rw is e th a n c o n fu s e d by          but w ithout referen ce to w hat m ay b e called the co n v en tion a l standards
 w h a t th e y w e re to ld a b o u t th is b r a n c h o f th e law a n d , o f c o u r s e , by               o f proof. I can n ot b e lie v e , h o w e v er , that h e w as regarding p ro o f o f
 w h a t th e y h a d r e a d fro m th e n o te s w h ich w ere h a n d e d in to th e m . T h is                suicide as other than b ey o n d a reason able d o u b t. I so h o ld that that w as
 by itself m u s t, it s e e m s to m e , in e v ita b ly c a u se th e ju r y ’s v e rd ic t to b e             and rem ains the standard. It is u n thin kab le, in m y estim a tio n , that
  -               W h a t th e ju r y sh o u ld h a v e b e e n to ld w a s th a t w h e n c o n s id e rin g    anything less will d o. So it is in respect o f a crim inal o ffe n c e . I regard as
 m a n s la u g h te r b y n e g le c t, th e y w o u ld h a v e to b e satisfied u p o n th e                   equally unthin kab le, if n o t m ore so , that a jury sh ould find th e
 e v id e n c e o f th e s e fo u r in g re d ie n ts o f th e o ffe n c e : ( I ) a p o lice o ffic er b a d    com m ission , althou gh not id e n tify in g th e o ffe n d er , o f a crim in a l o ffe n c e
  t h e d u ty o f r e g a rd in g th e h e a lth a n d w e lfa re o f M ik k e lse n , (2) H e fa iled          without b ein g satisfied b eyo n d a reason able d oub t.
  to d o w h a t in t h e c irc u m s ta n c e s h e ou ght to h a v e d o n e fo r th e h e a lth                   A s for the o th er verdicts o p en to a jury, the b alance o f probabilities
  and w elfare o f M ik k e ls e n . (3 ) T h a t his fa ilu re w as a su b s ta n tia l c a u s e o f           test is su re ly appropriate sa v e in resp ect, o f co u rse, o f the o p e n verdict.
Watkins L . J . I i i 7 T r W e 5 T S » i G r ^                                                    [1988]         1 Q.B.              Beg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (B.C.)           Watkins L.J.
T h is s ta n d a r d sh o u ld b e le ft to th e ju ry w ith o u t any jd L th e re fin ed                   a   from all o f l | j | | n that th e jury found n eglect at no tim e b efo re M ik k elsen
q ualifications p la c e d u p o n it by so m e ju d g e s w h o h a v e | R t e n to so m e                      w as o v e r p o W r e d . B y that tim e, the fight involving th e use o f the
su c h e ffe c t a s, th e m o r e se rio u s th e a lle g a tio n th e h ig h e r th e d e g r e e o f           truncheon during arrest w as over and the arrest effectiv e. It is eq u ally
p r o b a b ility r e q u ir e d . T h e s e r e fin e m e n ts w o u ld o n ly serve to c o n fu se              clear that the jury w ere attributing unlaw ful killing to n o o th er cau se
ju r ie s a n d , in th e c o n te x t o f a ju r y ’s ro le a r e , I say w ith g r e a t r e s p e c t to       than n eglect. It is the jury’s fun ction to find th e cau se o f d eath whilst
th o s e w h o h a v e g iven e x p re s s io n to th e m , I th in k , m e a n in g le ss. S u ch                avoiding placing crim inal resp onsibility or civil liab ility u pon an y o n e.
m a tte r as th a t le d th e c o r o n e r a s tra y in th is ca se , by p ro v id in g th e ju r y              H e re , the cau se fo u n d , as I h ave previously in dicated , in clud ed the
w ith n o p la in s ta n d a r d o f p r o o f to b e g u id e d by. H e c a n n o t b e b la m e d           ®   additional w ords sp ok en by the fo rem an , w hich w e r e , in m y o p in io n , an
f o r th a t, b u t it is a n o t h e r fa c to r w h ich m u st c a u se th is v e rd ic t to b e                essential part o f a clearly ex p ressed verdict and ought to h ave b een
quashed.                                                                                                          re c o rd e d on th e inquisition. T h e im p lic a tio n p la ced u p on th em by the
      I sa id th a t I w o u ld d e a l w ith th e c o m p l a i n t , 'f o r th a t is w h a t it                coroner, as exp ressed in his affidavit is, I think, m isguided.
a m o u n ts to , th a t th e c o r o n e r ’s n o te s , his a id e m em o ire , w e re h a n d e d to                Mr. A lu n Jon es su bm itted strenuously that the verdict as recorded
th e ju ry . T h is to o k p la c e d u rin g th e a b s e n c e o f c o u n s e l w h o w e re o u t             o ffen d ed against rule 42 for it was fram ed, h e says, so as to place civil
o f th e b u ild in g w h e r e th e in q u e s t w as h e ld a t lu n c h . W h e n c o u n s e l            £   liability u pon th e C o m m ission er o f the M etrop olitan P o lic e, or to give
returned th e c o r o n e r to ld t h e m w h a t h e h a d d o n e . N o o n e su g g e sts h e                  the appearance o f d oin g so. I disagree. N eith er the verdict as recorded,
a c c e d e d to th e ju r y ’s r e q u e s t w ith an y m o tiv e sa v e a d e s ire to b e as                   or as sh ould h ave b een recorded o n the in qu isition , is, in m y v ie w , so
h e lp fu l as h e c o u ld to th e m , b u t I a m d r iv e n by th e c o n s id e ra b le b u lk o f            fram ed. In terested parties m ay lo o k at the circum stances o f the case and
th e n o te s , th e la c k o f cla rity in m a n y p la c e s, th e m isd ire c tio n s a t o th e rs            seek to draw from them and the verdict an in ference or in feren ces as to
a n d th e g e n e r a l la y o u t, in tellig ib le n o d o u b t to th e c o r o n e r b u t n o t, I           b lam ew orthin ess on s o m e o n e ’s part for causing death. T h at is alm ost
im a g in e , to th e ju r y , to say th a t to p u t to th e m a d o c u m e n t a m o u n tin g                 in evitab le. It can n either b e av oid ed nor legislated against. S o lon g as on
to e ig h t o r n in e p a g e s o f clo sely ty p e d d ire c tio n s u p o n m a n y m a tte rs w as        D   the face o f the inquisition the verdict d o es not give the appearance o f
an error. T h e effect o f it can n ot h ave provided the jury with clear                                         identifying by n am e or oth erw ise an yon e as blam ew orthy for the cause
g u idan ce u pon a num ber o f essen tial m atters, w hich w as accurate in law.                                 o f d eath, rule 42 is c o m p lie d w ith. It w as com p lied with by this coroner.
T h a t, for rea son s 1 h ave ex p lain ed , it cou ld n ot h ave d on e. O n the                                 It w ould have b een co m p lied w ith had he recorded the verdict as, in my
contrary, I think it ten d ed to h ea p c o n fu sio n upon con fusion.                                           view , h e should h ave d on e.
      If there w as so m e direction or other w hich w as not clear to the jury,                                        It w as also subm itted that section 4 and rule 42 cannot co-exist. T h e
the coron er sh o u ld , in the p resen ce o f co u n sel, h ave asked th em , the                            g    rule is ultra vires, it is said. T his has b een said b efo re, n otab ly in Reg. v.
jury, w hat it w as, and sh ould h ave assisted them w ith it by repeating                                         Surrey Coroner, Ex parte Cam pbell [1982] Q .B . 661. In giving the
orally, perhaps w ith am plification, w hat h e had already told them on the                                       judgm ent o f the court I said, at p. 676:
p o in t, or given th em en tirely fresh instructions or d irections if n ecessary.
H e ou ght to h ave p ro ce ed ed to do this after discussion w ith co u n sel                                         “B e that as it m a y , it is our view that on the facts o f this case a
w h o , u n d ou b ted ly, w ould h ave b een o f con sid erable help to him . It is                                   verdict o f ‘lack o f ca r e’ w ould not h ave con travened rule 3 3 .”— that
 n o t u nk n ow n in crim inal trials for jud ges to answer jury’s q uestions as to                                   is the p red ecessor to rule 42— “It is th erefore not necessary for u s
 the law in writing; nor e v e n to anticipate the p ossib le n eed by a jury for                             F        to d ecid e w h eth er the rule is ultra vires. B u t, w e think w e ou ght
that, w ith a w ritten direction u pon a p oint or points o f law . B ut this is a                                     n everth eless to exp ress our con clu sion u pon this p o in t, w hich is that
practice w hich , for g o o d reaso n , is sparingly resorted to. W h en it is it                                      Mr. S e d le y ’s subm ission upon it is ill-fou n d ed . Such conflict as m ay
m ust b e h and led w ith circum spection , the judge being m indful o f the                                           in any given circum stance appear to arise b etw een rule 33 and the
 n eed to con su lt w ith co u n sel b efo reh an d , and to sh ow them the n o te                                     duty to inquire ‘h o w ’ m ust b e resolved in favour o f th e statutory
                                                                                                                       duty to inquire w hatever the co n seq u en ces o f this m ay b e .”
 b efore it g o e s in to the jury room .
      W e have heard su bm issions upon the co ro n er’s d ecision to record as                               q
                                                                                                                      I accept that in stances m ay arise w here ob serving the statutory duty
the verdict m erely the w ords “ unlawful k illin g .” I can understand his                                       m ay carry the risk o f a clash b etw e en section 4 and rule 42. But careful
 anxiety to record a verdict w hich did not o ffe n d against rule 42.                                            fram ing o f the verdict co n sisten t, o f cou rse, w ith the jury’s con clu sion
 C oron ers quite o fte n , for very g o o d reason , have to refrain from putting                                sh ould , and in d eed m ust, avoid that. C oroners by n ow are w ell u sed to
 u pon the inquisition all the forem an says w hen an nou ncing the jury’s                                        coping w ith this p rob lem and I h ave no doub t do so successfully. I am
 con clu sion . B y rule he is p rev en ted from d oin g that. H e has to elim in ate                             firm ly o f the op in io n that rule 42 is intra vires.
 irrelevant m atter and on ly record w hat his good sen se and ex p erien ce                                          F in a lly , th e ev id e n c e. T h e jury’s finding o f unlaw ful killing by n eglect
 lead s him to con clu d e is the form al verdict, b ein g o n e w hich the jury is                           ^   is, it is subm itted on b eh a lf o f the p olice officers, against the w eight o f
 en titled in law to find.                                                                                        the ev id en ce. It u sed to b e said, and m aybe by som e still is, that
       H e re , h o w e v er , I regret to say that the co ro n er’s jud gm ent w as at                           insufficiency o f evid e n c e is no ground for q uashing a co ro n er’s jury’s
 fault. W h ich ever version o f w hat the forem an said be right, it is clear                                    verdict. I can n ot subscribe to that. T h e d ev elo p m en t o f judicial review
TOO
W atkins L .J.           Reg. v. West London Coroner, Ex p. Gray (D.C.)                               [1988}
                                                                                                                                                        [c o u r t o f a p p e a l ]
to its p r e s e n t s ta te w ith Its d e v o tio n t o , l j ^ i o n g s t o th e r th in g s, n a tu r a l
ju s tic e , c a n n o t p o ssib ly allo w v e rd ic ts b y ju rie s a t in q u e sts to s ta n d
                                                                                                                                     G O L D v. H A R I N G E Y H E A L T H A U T H O R IT Y
w h ich a r e b a s e d u p o n n o o r w h olly insufficient ev id e n c e. B y a n a lo g y , I
se e n o th in g in section 6 o f the m ain A c t which runs cou n ter to that.                                     198 7     March 10, 11, 12;                       Watkins, Stephen Brown and Lloyc
      H o w e v e r , th at is n ot t h e p osition h ere , in m y o p in ion . I exp ress n o                                April 14
view o n the strength o f the ev id e n c e, excep t to say that an oth er jury
m ay n o t h a v e fou n d it co m p e llin g en o u g h , esp ecially if properly d irected ,
                                                                                                                    Medical     Practitioner—Negligence—Duty       to inform—Sterilisation
                                                                                                                B      operation— Failure to give warning o f possibility o f fertility being
to h ave fo u n d a verdict o f unlaw ful killing. T h ere w ere o f course o th er                                     restored—Subsequent pregnancy—Claim in negligence fo r non­
verdicts o th e r than an o p e n verdict, w hich the jury cou ld have returned.                                        disclosure o f risk—B ody o f medical opinion against giving warning
I h a v e already referred to so m e , at least, o f th o se. In m y o p in io n , a                                    as to risk o f pregnancy— Whether accepted professional standard test
n u m b er o f th o se cou ld have b e e n left to this ju r y in the circum stances                                    applicable to non-therapeutic advice
but w ere n o t. A s to w h eth er there w as m aterial at this in qu est fit to be
le ft to a jury to con sid er a verdict o f unlaw ful killing by n eglect, I prefer                                             During the course of her third pregnancy in 1979, the plaintiff,
to ex p ress n o o p in io n w ith in m ind w hat m ight h app en hereafter. I think                                        after indicating that she did not wish to have any more children,
                                                                                                                C           was advised to undergo a sterilisation operation at the defendants’
d ifferen tly w ith regard to all that to ok place on arrest. W ith ou t goin g
                                                                                                                            hospital after the birth of her child. The operation was duly
in to that e v id e n c e in d eta il, the m ed ical aspects o f it esp ecially, I am in
                                                                                                                            carried out but the plaintiff later became pregnant and j>ave birth
n o d o u b t that I w ou ld h av e directed the jury that it w ould h ave b een                                            to a fourth child. She brought an action for damages for negligence
u n sa fe, w ro n g e v e n , t o fin d that the arresting officers m iscon d u cted                                        against the defendants alleging, inter alia, that she had not been
th e m se lv e s in a difficult situ ation in any sen se w h a tsoever.                                                     warned of the failure rate of female sterilisation operations and
      S o , this verdict has to b e q uashed. W hat then m ust b e d o n e? Further                                         that if she had been warned her husband would have undergone a
re lie f lies also w ithin th e discretion o f this court. A lb eit with very                                   _           vasectomy instead. Medical evidence was adduced at the trial that
con sid erab le relu ctance and w ith the provisions o f section 13 o f the A ct                                ^           there was a substantial body of responsible doctors who would not
o f 1926 in m ind , I se e n o alternative but to order a fresh inquest b efore                                              have given any such warning in 1979. The judge however held that
an oth er co ro n er and jury. I w ould also m ake the d eclaration as to the                                               the test whether there existed a substantial body of medical
standard o f p r o o f in accord ance w ith w hat I h av e said as to that in this                                           opinion who would have acted as the defendants had done applied
ju d g m en t.                                                                                                               only to advice given in a therapeutic context and did not apply to
                                                                                                                             advice given in a contraceptive context. Applying his own view as
                                                                                                                             to what information should have been given, he found that the
     R o c h J. I agree that th e verdict o f the co ro n er’s jury in this case
                                                                                                                £           defendants had been negligent in not warning the plaintiff that the
sh ou ld b e q u ash ed and that a fresh inquest in front o f a n ew coron er b e
                                                                                                                             operation might not succeed.
ord ered . I con cu r in the m aking o f the d eclaration as to the standard o f                                                 On the defendants’ appeal:—
p ro o f in coron ers’ in qu ests.                                                                                               H eld, allowing the appeal, that for the purposes of ascertaining
     I add o n e co m m en t to the jud gm ent w hich W atkins L.J. has just                                                 the test as to the duty of care owed by a doctor to a patient there
d eliv ere d , o n the form o f inquisition. It is m ade in the h op e that th o se                                          was no distinction to be made between advice given in a therapeutic
resp on sib le for the fram ing o f th ese form s m ight give further con sid eration                                        context and advice given in a non-therapeutic context; that,
to the w ord in g o f o n e part o f the form and that a redrafting m ight assist                                            accordingly, the judge erred in holding that advice given in a
a co r o n e r’s jury to co n cen trate on the m atter w hich they are required to                              f           contraceptive context was not to be judged by the contemporary
co n sid er. It is the third entry o n the form w h ic h at p resen t reads:                                                 standards of a responsible body of medical opinion; and that, on
“T im e , p la ce and circum stances at or in w hich injury w as su sta in e d .” It                                         the evidence, there was a substantial body of responsible doctors
se e m s to m e that it sh ou ld be: “T im e , place and circum stances at or in                                             who would not in 1979 have warned the plaintiff of the failure rate
w hich d eath w as su sta in e d ,” and that if that am en d m en t w ere m ad e the                                         of female sterilisation operations (post, pp. 489f—490c, 4 9 1 b~ d ,
w ord in g w o u ld then con form to the w ording o f ru le 36(1 )(b) o f the                                                492c-e).
C oron ers R u les 1984.                                                                                                         Bolam v. Friern H ospital M anagement Committee [1957] 1
     H av in g m ad e that co m m en t, I concur in the jud gm ent w hich W atkins                              q           W.L.R. 582 and Sidaway v. Board o f Governors o f the Bethlem
L .J. has just given.                                                                                                        Royal Hospital and the M audsley Hospital [1985] A.C. 8 7 1 ,
                                                                                                                             H.L.(E.) applied.
                                                Application granted.                                                             Decision of Schiemann J. reversed.
                                                O rder fo r fresh inquest.
                                                N o order fo r costs save legal aid                                          The following cases are referred to in the judgments:
                                                   taxation o f costs o f next o f kin.
                                                                                                                             Bolam v. Friem Hospital M anagement Committee [1957] 1 W.L.R. 582;
                                                                                                                H                2 All E.R. 118
  Solicitors: E d w a rd Fail, N eale & C o., T w ickenham ; R ussell Jones &
                                                                                                                             Emeh v. Kensington and Chelsea and Westminster A rea Health A uthority
Walker; B eachcrofts; P ow ell M agrath & Spencer.                                                                              Q.B. 1012; [1985] 2 W.L.R. 233; [1984] 3 All E.R. 1 0 4 4 , C.A.
                                                                                                                            Eyre v. M easday [1986] 1 All E.R . 4 8 8 , C.A.
                  [Reported by Simon C a s s e l l , E sq ., Barrister-at-Law]
                                                                                                                            Jones v. Berkshire A rea Health A uthority (unreported), 2 July 1986, Ogr
m Reports                     I1971] i a h pr
                                                                                   - _             Re 462 Green Lane (U ngoed-Thomas J )                                                           317

53] i WLR 977, 38 Digest (Rep!) 882, m                 •


             by an originating s u m m o n s
;s i n i t i a t e d
        sought an ord er cancelling the
o d in g ,                                                                                   ntract. in which case the entrv in the rpp-kr^r will u -it    j
                                                                               remain.     To ask merpfv t h ^ o          i         reg*ster Wl11 be allowed to
ney Borland p ursuant to s 54 of the Land
1 Lane, Ilford in the London borough of ^



                                                                                                                                               r ,o b.c ct %
                                                                     ■            «            »              »              «             cr ; e"         « S” Land Rceis" " m A a

                                                                ,                                                                          r        ‘l,ere/ a “ ,t bc p i“ d,n8s: * « •
!ves W            pleas 011 tlle Parc of Ae   p ro .                 w r it.    T h is «           , «h, " X          "    „ T ,L           ' ‘                “   ,h o “ B h " had bcgun by
 -y         fraud- Both these pleas involve                         it is only by this m e am ha t h , ’n t t                                              m a tte r of substance because
 1 est factum plea itself does not neces-                           issues invol ved and be s u S of h i L f                            * * Pf ^         J                 are the serious
 esented before m e it turned on exactly                            relev a n t d „ c „ a r ,                                                                 " T       *?                     H   * e
  sative allegation o f fraud. It is clearly                         these cases. Commencine- the nmreM*          . . ^ f J's sucl 311 im po rtan t part in
 us nature, and involving considerably *                            this case involve only the very small addition-fl        Wj? uld “ r the circumstances of
         an action in which the issues are                          on the rules as they sL nd it                                    °j lssuing          and
fall discovery by each side to the other                            here there is an allegation of fraud the n m      re(5turt'mCTt does exist that, whereas
b those issues as so defined.
                                                                    be continued as though commenced by writ w he'1^                   $° SCarted and cannot
   28, r 8, th at in any m a tte r begun                            summons.                                  *          111 acl com menced by originating
   th e court th a t it should be continued
                                                                    Ruling accordingly.
x th e proceedings to continue as if the ®
ie case o f a plea o f non est factum in                            Solicitors: J E a ia n <&r Co, agents for Oliver Dimdore dr Beilis, Ilford (for the proprietor).
n by w rit w ould fall w ithin the court’s
■ O rd 5, r 2 (so far as m aterial in the                                                                                                            Jacqueline Metcalfe Barrister.
 fafefa a claim m ade by the plaintiff is
• by writ.
1 based on an allegation of fraud and ^                     f         Br,t,sh School of Motoring Ltd v Simms and
.native allegation. It is an allegation
■‘e- It seems to m e th a t O rd 5, r 2,
                                                                         another (A R Staffoid (trading as Mini
O rd 28, r 8. O therw ise O rd 5, r 2,                                    Countryman School of Motoring) and
i 5, r 2, should, on account of its more
d th ijj.O rd 28, r 8, should be read as                                         Cooper, third parties)
 : o p t l |P O rd 5, r 2, i e w hat Ord 28, ®             g     WINCHESTER ASSIZES
 lings to continue as if the case had been                       TALBOT J
 ceedings should be, or be treated as,                          29th JULY 1970
 t ord er the proceedings so to continue
                                                                Road traffic-N egligence-D river undertaking driving te st-D u ty o f examiner
£ O rd 28, r 8, came into being, laid
reel u n d er the Land Charges Act 1925, ^
old be tried by action and should not
                                                           „                      z z ’z z g s r z f t                                                r“ -               *»«* » « «
                                                                c « r »                                                                           "d h                                   W         »
 ed there the principle on which he


 th e register, before the substantive                        but which was not insured for her to drive In f L                 f ° i ! j d r m n S sch°ol
 m eans o f an action, seems to m e to /                    . first defendant negligently failed m nh«>        - •    co,u rse     the driving test, the
so t the right m ethod. The register                       ^ road and drove straight into       m rf • ^           ,Wa^ si®ns and m a rkings in the
d: and w h ether th a t record of an                          aware n f a „ /           T    3 r° ad Junctlon- A lmost im m ediately she became
                                                              S   !          ,J S „ bdL Ft S ™    d ,t a * frT  ^  «   -      -    « e le L e d .




                                                               s o t h a t t h e r e s t c a r c a r n ^ t o a h a l t w h e n ^ w a ^ m o r e t h a n ^ h a tf- J v a y ^ a c r o & ^ ^ e h
                                                                                                        w i>tcrT8®ierws5i2BS"~^— E rsro raxn rsrrfirn s

  There was a collision between F s car and the test c a r . ^ i c h caused the test car 10
  spin round and collide w ith the plaintiffs car, which was stationary on the road.                  g Cleveland RQaifjP B ournem outh approaching the junction o f th a t road with W ynd-
  In their action for damages against the first defendant, the plaintiffs joined the second                ham Road, Cleveland Road also extends to the other side of that junction and where
  defendant, alleging, inter alia, that he had been negligent in that he had failed to                     Cleveland Road reached W yndham Road, there are signs that traffic on Cleveland
  supervise or control the first defendant’s driving and that he applied the brakes                        Road should give way to traffic on W yndham Road. T here are also give way'
  w hen it was unsafe to do so, causing the test car to stop in the path of F's car. The                   lines at the m ouths of Cleveland Road. Mrs D rew was approaching W yndham
 first defendant alleged breach of contract between the driving school and herself                         Road driving in a northerly direction, came to the junction w ith W yndham Road and
  because of the driving school’s failure to insure the test car. ,                                  jj stopped, _ She was undergoing a driving test in a m otor car owned by the plaintiffs.
                                                                   /                                      Coming from the opposite direction was another m oto r car (the test car), driven by
 H eld - (i) The allegations against the second defendant failed, because—                                 the first defendant. She also was undergoing a driving test and the driving exam iner
    (a) it was his duty in assessing the first defendant's fitness to hold a full driving                  was the second defendant. Coming along W yndham Road from an easterly direc­
 licence to observe w hether or not mistakes were made, and he was not to interfere                        tion, that is to say, from the left from the point of view of the first defendant, was a
                                                                                                          Ford Galaxy m otor car driven by M r Fisher.
 with her driving except when it became necessary to do so to avoid danger to the
 public (see p 320 g, post); and                                                                              W hat happened so far as the first defendant is concerned, as 1 find on the facts,
    <b) in the sudden em ergency which arose, the step which he took in applying                          was this. She had come into Cleveland Road from another road about 70 or 80
 the brakes, although In the circumstances th e w rong one, was nonetheless reasonable                    yards from the junction w ith W yndham Road, turned left into Cleveland Road in
 2 nd did not am ounf rn npclio^nrv* (a*** *-* t r-             ^        ( 1 8 1 6 ) 1 Stsrk 4 9 3        bottom gear and then accelerated along Cleveland Road, changing u p into second
                                                                                                          gear. It m ay be, I am not really sure about this, th a t she got also into third gear,
   (11) In the absence of any express condition, there was an implied te rm in the                        but I do not think that it m atters. It is quite plain to m e that she did not observe
 contract between the first defendant and the driving school that any car provided                        the give way’ signs, nor did she take any notice of, if she observed them , the ‘give
 by the driving school for driving lessons and the driving test would be covered by                      way lines across the m ou th of Cleveland Road. She, w ithout pausing, w hen driving
 insurance; accordingly the first defendant was entitled to damages flowing fro m the                    at something under 20 m p h w ent straight into the junction and almost im m ediately
 breach, nam ely the damages awarded against h er as a result of the accident which                      she became aware of M r Fisher’s car bearing down on her from the left and she
 she would not have had to pay had she been insured (see p 321 h, post).                                 im mediately accelerated. Meanwhile the second defendant, w ho was sitting by
                                                                                                         her side in the passenger seat of the dual-controlled test car, also becam e aware o f
 N otes                                                                                              0 ^       R-shei s car. At some stage he applied the brake, sensing the danger. The
                                                                                           e
 For apportionm ent of liability w here the defendant creates a situation of emergency,                  result was that the test car came to a stop w hen it had passed over the first h alf of
 see 2 8 Halsbury s Laws (3rd Edn) 91, para 95, and for cases on the subject see 36 Digest               the road and got into the second half of W yndham Road. There followed a collision
 (Repl) 190-192, 1006-1018,                                                                              between M r Fisher's car on the nearside front and the extrem e nearside rear of
                                                                                                         the test car. That caused the test car to spin com pletely round so that it came into
 Cases referre d to In j u d g m e n t                                                                  contact w ith the plaintiffs stationary car and caused dam age in respect of which %l i
 Bywdl Castle, The (1879) 4 PD 219, [1874-80] All ER Rep 819, 41 LT 747, 36 Digest                      plaintiffs m ade their claim.
   (Repl) .190, 1006.                                                                                        One o f the issues was w hether or not the second defendant told the first defendant
Jones v Boyce ( 1 8 1 6 ) 1 Stark 493, 36 Digest (Repl) 23, 101.                                        to stop w hen he sensed the danger. I have reached the conclusion th a t whilst I
                                                                                                        am quite sure that he honestly believes th at he did tell h er to stop, he did not
 A ction                                                                                                m fact do so. I reach that conclusion on the facts in this way. The first defendant
 This was an action by the plaintiffs, the British School o f Motoring Ltd, claiming                    has no recollection that he ever told her to stop. Secondly, w hen the second defen-
 damages against M argaret Frances Simms (the first defendant) and Cyril Bernard                        dant m ade his report, as he was required to do, of w hat occurred to his superiors,
 Cooper (the second defendant) in respect of dam age to a m o to r car sustained o n                    it can be seen from that report that there was no reference at all to the fact that he
 31st October 1968 as a result of a collision between three cars whilst the first defendant             had told her to stop. Furtherm ore, it would appear from the evidence th at the
 was undergoing her driving test w ith the second defendant as examiner. The first                      first defendant had correctly obeyed other instructions to pull into the side and on
 defendant joined A R Stafford, trading as the Mini C ountrym an School of Motoring                     one occasion to m ake an em ergency stop w hen told to do so. In those circumstances
 (the driving school), as first third party to claim indem nity against liability in respect           I have reached the conclusion as I have already stated on this point. Those are the
ot_a counterclaim against the first defendant by the second defendant, w ho was                         bare facts of the accident.
joined as second third party, in respect of injuries sustained in the collision. The                    , 1 deal now ,w ith the question of liability. First, as regards the first defendant, the
tacts are set out i n the judgm ent.                                                                   fact that she tailed to notice, or it she did notice, to see and obey the ‘give way’ sign,
                                                                                                       was clearly, in m y view, an act of negligence. Furtherm ore, the fact th at she drove
W E Barnett for the plaintiffs.                                                                        into and over the junction w ithout having regard to other traffic which m ight be '
M  R Selfe f o r the first defendant.                                                                  approaching along the m ore im portant road, again clearly was an act of negligence.
H j M Tucker for the second defendant.                                                                      The m ain issue here is w hether or not the second defendant was also guilty o f
The driving school did n(|t appear and was      not   represented.                                     negligence in that he applied the test car’s brakes so that it stopped and the collision
                                                                                                       resulted. W hat was alleged against him in the first defendant’s original defence
                                                                                                       was that he applied the brakes w hen the first defendant was proceeding across
T A L B O T J . These proceedings arise out o f a collision between three m o tor cars
                                                                                                       W yndham Road thereby causing the test car to stop in the path o f M r Fisher's car.
that took place on 3 1 st October 1968. 1 think that at about 10.00 am on that day
                                                                                                       The plaintiffs eventually joined the second defendant as a defendant. They alleged
the position of the three cars involved was as follows. Mrs Drew was driving along
                                                                                                       that he failed to supervise or control the first defendant’s driving, he failed to keep a
    proper look-out and heed the presence or position < |j||V Fisher's car, he failed to         does not mean u flh h e becomes liable for his act. He w ould become liable if it was
    pay any proper regard to die 'give way' sign or d o tte c K h ite lines, or that the first   rash. 1! it was SPfct which in the agony of the m om en t he m ight reasonably take,
    defendant paid sufficient regard to it, he failed to take control of die test car or the     which he would not have taken had he become aware of all the circumstances, then
    brakes soon enough, he applied the brakes when it was unsafe and that he stopped             he is not to be held liable for it. The second defendant was faced with this sudden
    the test car in die path of M r Fisher's car. I think that a proper conclusion for m e       emergency. It was not for him to stop the first defendant as she was approaching
    to arrive at is that the second defendant applied the brakes w hen he sensed that real       the cross-roads, or to tell her to slow down. He was to observe how she did it and
    danger was about to take place. A t the particular tim e there was, on the forecourt         how she dealt with the situation. Only w hen it became quite plain that she was
    o f some industrial premises which adjoin Cleveland Road and W yndham Road and               going to create danger did he, in the sudden emergency, take action. It would seem
   °j?                  test car a large pantechnicon van which obscured the visibility to       that he took the wrong steps.. It would be, in m y judgm ent, quite wrong, if not
    the left u p W yndham Road. I am satisfied that he appreciated the danger as the             quite impossible, to have expected him in that fraction of a second to have decided
   test car was quite plainly going across and was pot therefore in a position to stop           whether or not it was safer to brake or to go on and w hether or not the first defen­
   should danger arise. It m ust have been almost im m ediately following on th at that          dant would go on. He did what I would have thought m ost passengers in a m oto r
   he became aware that there was in fact danger, nam ely the danger of M r Fisher's             car in similar circumstances m ight have done if they had been in a position to do so,
   o n coming on the left. Does that action on his part result, or should it result in a         and that was to stop the vehicle.
   finding of negligence against him , negligence which partly or wholly caused this                In m y judgm ent, therefore, I do not think it right on these facts to m ake any
   accident?
                                                                                                 finding of negligence against the second defendant. T hat really deals w ith the sub­
       The second defendant, as I have said, was a senior driving examiner appointed,            mission m ade by counsel for the first defendant that her negligence had, as it were,
   by the Ministry of Transport to undertake the driving test of those who subm it               come to an end and that the real and sole cause of this accident was the negligence
   themselves for it in accordance w ith the statutory requirements. 1 have not examined         of the second defendant. There was, in m y opinion, 110 cessation in the causation
   the regulations and I a m told that there would be no purpose in doing so because             of her negligence—her negligence caused the collision which caused the plaintiffs
   there is nothing in the regulations that defines his position or his duties. ■ His duties,    to suffer damage.
  nowever are plain. He is there to examine and test th e driving of the subject who                [His Lordship reviewed the medical evidence relating to the injuries suffered by the
  submits himself or herself for the test. He m ust observe, record and use his discretion       second defendant in the accident and awarded him damages against the first
  111,              vmS seen w hat he has seen, w hether or not the subject is fit to hold       defendant.]
  a full driving licence. In order properly to m ake a test of any subject or candidate,            Another issue arises between the first defendant and the driving school. This
  lie m ust not interfere w ith the driving, it being his duty to observe w hether or not        claim is based on a breach of contract alleged to have been m ade between herself
  inista es are m ade and if mistakes are made, w hether they are of sufficient gravity          and the driving school. The m atter arose in this way. She w ent in or about October
  to fail a candidate. ^H e is not therefore in the position of a driving instructor o r of a    1968 to the driving school, in order that she m ight receive driving lessons.           She
  passenger supervising a learner who is there to correct any mistakes as soon as                received lessons and eventually entered for the driving test. It was whilst, she was
 possible He is there to observe w hether or not mistakes are made. In order to                  driving the test car which belonged to the driving school that the accident happened.
 satisfy him self as to that, in m ost cases he has to allow the mistakes to be made.            I am satisfied on the evidence which I have, heard from the first defendant and her
 It is laid down as p art of the instruction for driving examiners in the Ministry of            husband, as a resuit of w hat the driving school told her and her husband after the
  Transport m anual that examiners should not operate or adjust controls or fittings
                                                                                                 accident, that t lie test car was not insured for her to drive at the tim e of the accident.
 oi a test vehicle even at the candidate’s request except where it is essential in order
                                                                                                 She, therefore, was unw ittingly an uninsured driver. T he result to her is this, that
 to avoid danger to the public. If it is necessary for m e to express any opinion on
                                                                                                 she herself having judgm ent, as she will have shortly, entered against her for damages
 that tor the purpose of deciding this case, I do so. In rny judgm ent, that is a proper
 instruction to give to driving examiners.                                                       will have to pay them rather than look to an insurance com pany to indemnify her. It
                                                                                                 is pleaded that there was an implied term , because there is no evidence of any ex­
     Let m e now therefore examine it. His duty is not to interfere except w hen it
                                                                                                 pressed term , that she would be covered for all insurance purposes by the driving
 becomes necessary to do so in the interest of public safety and the safety of himself
                                                                                                 school during the tim e she was in a vehicle provided by them for h er driving lessons
 and the candidate driving the m otor car. In those circumstances, I do not think that
                                                                                                 and test. I am prepared to accept that in such a contract as this is, in. the absence of
 the allegations m ade against the second defendant in the pleadings which allege that
                                                                                                 any expressed condition, there is an implied term th a t such a person going to a
 ne failed to supervise or control the first defendant and the other allegations that I
                                                                                                 driving school, will be covered by insurance in the m o tor car provided by the driving
  lave mentioned are well founded. There remains the essential one on which the
                                                                                                 school. Therefore, there was a breach of contract by the driving school in providing
first defendant relies in her defence, w hether or not the second defendant was negli­
                                                                                                 her with a car which was not insured for her driving. She is entitled to damages'
gent m applying the brakes when he did, thus causing the test: car to stop in such a
                                                                                                 which flow from that breach. The measure of those damages, in m y opinion, is the
position that M r Fisher's car just collided w ith it at the rear. I have had cited to m e
                                                                                                 damage she now has to pay which she would not have had to pay had she been
the well-known cases of Jones v Boyce1 and The Bywell Castle2. It is quite plain, that           properly insured.
w hen an examiner is faced with, a position of emergency th at arrives suddenly, lie
m u st take such steps as m ight appear reasonable to him in the sudden rising of
                                                                                                 Solicitors: I, Dawson & Co (for the plaintiffs); Colin Bell & Co, Bournem outh (for the
the emergency. If die steps that he takes tu rn out to be the w rong ones, then the
                                                                                                 first defendant); 5 M Gibson, Bournem outh (for the second defendant).
Jaw does not dem and th at in those circumstances he should be held to be negligent.
The expression so often used is 'an act taken in the agony of the m om ent'. W here
                                                                                                                                                            D eirdre McKinney Barrister.
such act is taken in the agony of the m o m en t and it happens to be the wrong one, that

I (1816) i Stark 493                      a ( 1879 ) 4 PD 1 19 , [ 1874 -80 ] All ER Rep 819
ION.                      VOL, XT,                                                                                                                  15
                                                                      PBOBATE BIVISION.
                                         T01* XV.
s o f th e husband a n d wife,                                                                                                             1889
                                         o f aliuK m y to th e wife should be continued until th e a p p e a l   1
 s first trial, on th e second                                  m opinion of th e wife’s c o n d u c t was a v ery                     B   tjtlek
                                                                                                                                            v.
 iiic h a v e rd ic t was ta k e n               w » c l pronounced one, an d I was su rp rise d t h a t th e j u r j                  B utler.

lie wife, a c q u ittin g h e r of       'e m M w m e to no conclusion u p o n it.             However, th e fa c t r e m a p s
                                                                                                                                       B   dtleu
                                                                                                                                             ^
;ed. T h e Q u e e n ’s P ro c to r      t i l *t th e t a t tria l th e ju r y , a c tin g , as bow appears, u n d e , h e                       AND

des          collusion a n d th e        m i i t m m of th e collusion betw een h u sb an d a n d witc, found
 f a r th e r a lle g e d t h a t th e   w ife not gu ilt V of a d u lte ry . On th e second tr i a l the ju ry b e in g
M s sec o n d tr ia l th e jury                                 o th e r th in g s to d ecid e w h e th e r she had com­
ic te d in collusion to k e e p          m itted adultery* d isag reed upon th a t po in t. A s they- are th e                              _
;e of t h e C o u rt, b u t th e y       in ig m o f th e M ite r o f fact, a n d n o t 1 , 1 am b o u n d to ta k e it
m m i t t e d a d u lte ry . T h e       ||» t    there ha* been n o v e rd ic t o f a d u lte ry a g a in s t th e wife. I
 n isi, a g a in s t w h ich’ th e       »       w t e n titled to allow any fe e lin g o f m y own to prevail, a n d
                                         t i n t tw fa g *>, I th in k 1 am bound to c o n tin u e th e a lim o n y , a n d
ncmy sin ce th e m o n th of
                                         I i f , con tin u e it until fu rth e r order
nation o f th e wife, refu sed
                                             Solicitors for th e wife           Clinton & BucM ey; M r. B u tle r in
ent.
                                         JWflOll.                                                                      TV. L.
t th is refusal.      No v e rd ic t
st th e wife, a n d t h e o rd er
der.    I f th e o rd e r is n o t                                                                                                     Dec. ft. 10.
                                                                  [IK THE COURT OF APPEAL.]
 e an o rd e r c o n tin u in g it
:d en y. Loveden (1), Wells                                            THE CITY OF LINCOLN.
n v.           (4)]                                         -Damage*, Measure of— to ss o f E q u ip m e n t f o r Navigation.

                                            A c*»Uij»i©ft took place between a steamer and a barque, the steamer being
■ase for a fL fa., th o u g h I
                                         iik.*e to blame. The steering compass, charts, log and log glass of the barque
C o u rt to m a k e a n order            were twit through the collision. The captain of t h e barque made for a port of
3n no fin d in g o f a d u lte ry                 navigating h i s s h ip by a coinpass which he found on board. T h e
                                         twnjae while on her way, without a n y negligence on the part of the c a p t a in or
o u g h t to do a n y th in g in
                                         crew, * n d o w in g to the loss of the requisites fo r navigation above mentioned,
otion m a s t be p o stp o n e d         grounded, a n d w a s necessarily a b a n d o n e d :—
                                             BeM, by the Court of Appeal, that the grounding of the barque was a natural
                                          m A reasonable consequence of the collision, and th at the owners of the steamer
; person , a n d was h e a rd             *ere liable for the damages caused thereby.
>nv.
                                             A p p e a l from a ju d g m e n t o f B u tt, J., re v e rs in g t h e re g is tra r ’s
                                          xeport.
                                              T h e facts were sh o rtly as follows. O n N o v e m b e r, 7, 1888, th e
th e o rd e r w hich I thinl-             b a rq u e Albatross was r u n in to ■ b y th e ste a m e r City o f Lincoln in
fc th e o rd e r for p a y m e n t        t h e N orth, Sea, a b o u t tw e lv e m ile s n o r th of N o r th H in d e r L ig h t.
aw Eep. 2 P, & D. 833.                    T h e sta rb o a rd q u a rte r of th e b arq u e was c u t off, a n d th e r e b y
i P. D. 91.                               th e s te e rin g com pass, th e lo g a n d lo g glass, a n d th e la rg e c h a rt




                                                                                                                                                         Cf
16                                       PEOBATE D I Y I S I O ^                   YOL. XV.   VOL. XV.                  PEOBATE DIVISION.                                         17

   ^889        and the coasting chart were lost. Though she was difficult to .                   L o rd E s h e r , ^ 1 1   I n this case the bad navigation of t h e  1889
The C i t y op navigate in consequence of the collision, the master of the                    City of Lincoln did n o t merely damage the Albatross, it had this The^Omy of
 Lincoln. A l b a t r o s s , made for the Thames, steering by another compass in             further effect, it d e p riv e d the captain of the la tte r ship of his
               a box which he found in the hold. In consequence of the loss of                to st chart a n d best com pass and also of his log line. A fte r he
               the log he was unable to calculate the distance he ran, A lig h t­             bad lost these th in g s , it was very difficult for him to know w here
               ship was subsequently discerned, which those on the barque sup­                he was, but he properly resolved to make for the Thames. H e
               posed to be the Kentish Knock Lightship, and thereupon, after                  had however to do so n o t knowing, owing to the above c irc u m ­
               sounding, her course was altered to the north. She, however,                   stances, ex actly th e p o in t from w hich h e was s e ttin g h is course,
               almost immediately afterwards grounded, and was in consequence                 unable to mark it off in a proper chart, and without the means of
               necessarily abandoned. The registrar held that as the grounding                calculating the speed of his vessel. W e are advised that he was
               of the barque was not caused by any negligence or want of care                 not guilty of negligence in not k n o w in g w hat th e lig h t was w hich
               of those on board of her, the defendants, the owners of the City               lie saw su b se q u en tly or in a n y th in g which he did. But the fact
               o f Lincoln, were liable for the damages sustained by the owners               th a t the master was not negligent is not enough to decide this case,
               of the Albatross. Butt, J., reversed this report on the ground                 lor there may be in te rm e d ia te circumstances in a case which
               that there had been negligence on the part of those in charge of               prevent the ultimate damage from being the direct result ot the
               the Albatross.                                                                 defendants’ act. B ut in the present case I am of opinion that the
                                                                                              ultimate loss of the ship was caused by the captain being de­
              Barnes, Q.C. (Stubbs, and Stokes, with him), for the plaintiffs.                prived of the means of finding out where his ship was, which
           The decision of the registrar was right. There was no negligence                   deprivation was the direct result of the wrongful act of th e
           on the part of those in charge of the Albatross. Her loss was                      defendants. If th e d efe n d an ts h av e done a w rongful act, w h e re b y
           caused by the wrongful act of the defendants, it was a conse­                      the plaintiffs or their servants have been deprived ol the
           quence of this wrongful act without the intervention of anything                   means of a v e rtin g an a c c id e n t w hich su b se q u e n tly happ ens, th e
           further.                                                                           defendants are responsible for it a n d su ch a c c id e n t— as in th e
              [They r e f e r re d to Jones v. Boyce (1); Wilson v. Newport Bock              present case—is not too remote. T h is appeal must, therefore, be
           Co. (2 ); The Pensher (3) ; The Countess o f Durham (4); The                       allowed.
           Wotting H ill (5); The Argentina (6) ; The Mellona. (7) ]
              S ir W. Phillimore, and Aspinall, for the defendants. The loss                                     I am of the same opinion. I th in k th at the
                                                                                                 L in d le y , L .J .
           of the Albatross was not a direct consequence of the collision, the                view of the facts taken by the registrar was correct. W e are
           damages arising from it are too remote. The intervention of the                    advised that there was nothing negligent or unseamanlike in the
           act of man after time for deliberation breaks the chain of con­                    conduct of the master of the Albatross, a n d therefore we cannot
           sequences.                                                                         hold that it was his negligence or want of seamanship which led
              [They referred to The Flying Fish (8) ; Adams v. Lancashire and                 to the ultimate loss of this vessel; in this respect we differ from
           Yorkshire By. Co. (9) ]                                                            the decision of the Court below. B ut this does not dispose of
              Barnes, Q.C,, in reply.                                                         the ease, for the question then arises whether the loss of the
                ( 1)   1 Stark. 493.                            (5) 9 P. I). 105.             ship was not too remote a consequence of the collision to render
                (2)    Law Eep. 1 Ex. 177.                      ( 6 ) 14 App. Gas. 519.       the owners of the City o f Lincoln responsible for the loss of the
                (3)    Swa. 211.                                (7) 8 Wm, Hob. 7.             Albatross. That depends on the application to this particular
                (4)    9 Monthly Law Magazine,357.              (8) Br. & L. 430.
                                      ('■>) Law Rep. 4 0 . P. 739.
                                                                                              mm of the general rule a p p lic a b le to damages. I have always


                                                                                                         •
                                                                                                                 VOL. XV.                 upB O B A T E DIVISION.
18                                                 PROBATE DIVISION.                              VOL. XV.
                                                                                                                 not cau sed b y w a n t o f p r o p e r s k ill a n d c a re o n t h e p a r t o f t h o s e           1889    :
     1889           u n d ersto o d t h a t r a le to be as la id dow n in M a v n e on D am ages.
                                                                                                                 on   board of her.          That being so, it appears to me that the                              Tm    C it y o f
The    C ity o f    I t is th e re sta te d t h a t “ D a m a g e is sa id to be rem o te, w hen
                                                                                                                       m ay b e s ta te d th u s .     B y t h e m is c o n d u c t o f t h e d e f e n d a n ts        -----
  Likoqlh.          although a risin g o a t o f th e cause of a c tio n , i t does n o t so
                                                                                                                 ills plaintiffs’ ship was placed in a position of the utmost peril, this
 Ltoaksy, l . j .   im m e d ia te ly a n d n ecessarily follow from i t as th a t th e offendin g
                                                                                                                 being o r ig in a lly entirely caused by the fault of the defendants.
                    p a r ty can be m ad e resp o n sib le for it.” (1)        F u r th e r on occurs t h is
                    passage, “ T h e first a n d in fa c t th e o n ly in q u iry in a ll th e se cases
                                                                                                                 The pla in tiffs, to save t h e i r sh ip , and minimise so far as p o ssib le
                    is w h eth er th e d am ag e c o m p la in e d o f is th e n a tu r a l a n d reaso n ­
                                                                                                                 the loss to the d e f e n d a n ts , endeavoured to reach a place of safety.
                                                                                                                 While so endeavouring, w ith o u t any negligence on the part of
                    able re s u lt of th e d e fe n d a n ts’ a c t : i t w ill assum e th is c h a ra c te r,
                                                                                                                 those on board her, or any w a n t of s k i l l — because, having regard
                    if i t can be shew n to be su c h a co nseq uence as in th e ordinary
                    coarse of th in g s w ould flow from th e a c t.” (2) , T h a t is a g e n e ra l
                                                                                                                 to the advice we have received, I am entitled to state th at •
                    w ay o f s ta tin g th e ru le , w hich was a p p lie d b y L o rd H e r sc h e ll in
                                                                                                                 and also w ith o u t any intervening independent moving cause, the
                                                                                                                 Albatross runs ashore. In these circumstances, are the defendants
                    th e case o f th e Argentina. (8)           W e h a v e th e n to consider w h at
                    is th e m e a n in g o f “ th e o rd in a ry course o f th in g s .” S ir W a lte r
                                                                                                                  liable for w h a t happened to the A lb a tr o s s subsequently to the
                    P h illim o r e h a s a sk ed u s to ex c lu d e from i t a ll h u m an c o n d u ct.
                                                                                                                 collision. ? In my opinion they are. The original fault being
                    I can do n o th in g o f th e k in d . I ta k e i t t h a t re a so n ab le h u m a n
                                                                                                                  Ilie defendants’—I mean by th at the collision—they are r e s p o n ­
                    c o n d u c t is p a r t o f th e o rd in a ry course o f th in g s.      So far as I
                                                                                                                  sible for w h a t follow s. They are responsible for all I h e natural
                    c an see m y way to a n y d efinite pro p o sitio n I sh o u ld say t h a t th e
                                                                                                                  consequences occasioned by their original misconduct, and w h e n
                                                                                                                  I sav original misconduct I do not mean only the collision, but
                    o rd in a ry course of th in g s does n o t ex c lu d e a ll h u m an co n d u c t,
                    b u t in c lu d e s a t le a st th e reaso nable co n d u c t o f those who h a v e           the deprivation of the Albatross of the u s u a l m e a n s of navigation.
                    su sta in e d th e d am ag e, a n d who are s e e k in g to save f u rth e r loss.             1 have stated th at they are responsible for the natural conse­
                    T h a t p rin c ip le was a c te d on in' Jones v. Boyce (4), w hich I h a v e                quence of that original misconduct. But if th at consequence
                                                                                                                  were caused by any w a n t of skill on the part of the Albatross, the
                    alw ays re g a rd e d as so u n d law.      L e t us see, th e n , w hat o ccu rred in
                    th e p re s e n t case, a n d w h a t was th e real cause o f th e loss of th is              liability would n o t attach. Again, if the consequence had been
                    vessel. I t was th e fa c t t h a t th e c a p ta in was, b y th e collision,                  caused by anything which those on board the Albatross, by the
                                                                                                                   exercise of p ro p e r skill a n d care, could have prevented clearly
                    d e p riv e d o f th e m eans of a s c e rta in in g h is p o sitio n a n d o f p r o ­
                    p e rly n a v ig a tin g h is sh ip . H e was d e p riv e d o f h is com pass, h is            that liability would not attach. B ut here, as I have said, we have
                    lo g -lin e , a n d h is ch arts. H is sh ip was n o t u tte r ly u n m a n a g e a b le       teen advised that there was no want of skill on the part of those
                    b u t she was in a v e ry b a d sta te , a n d th e necessary co n seq u en ce                 m      board the Albatross. I t is not suggested th a t there was any                                    1
                    of a ll th is was t h a t th is c a p ta in lo st h is vessel w ith o u t a n y n e g li­
                                                                                                                   interposition or independent act of a third party, or th at there
                    g e n ce o n h is p a rt.     U n d e r th e se circ u m sta n c e s th e case fa lls
                                                                                                                   urns anything done by those on board the Albatross which con­
                    w ith in th e ru le I       h av e la id dow n as to th e te rm             “ o rd in a ry     stituted a want of proper skill or care. U n d e r those circum­
                    course o f th in g s .”      T herefore, I a m o f o p in io n t h a t th e ow ners
                                                                                                                   stances I am clearly of opinion that what happened to the
                                                                                                                   Mbatross subsequent to the collision was the result of the original
                    o f th e C ity o f Lincoln m u st p a y for th e loss of th e Albatross.
                                                                                                                    fault of the d e f e n d a n ts , and by th at I mean not only the original
                       L o p e s , L .J .   W e h av e b e e n a d v ised th a t, h a v in g re g a rd to          fsiilt of the collision, but the fact th at by the collision the plain-
                    th e c o n d itio n o f th e Albatross a t th e tim e , h e r u ltim a te loss was              l i f s were deprived of all those instruments of navigation which
                                                                                                                   * n necessary for the purpose of properly n a v i g a t i n g a ship. I
                          (1) 4th Ed. p. 44,                                 (3) 14 App. Gas. 519.
                          (2) 4th Ed. p, 45.                                 (4) 1 Start. 493/
20                                             PEOBATE DIVISION.                             VOL. XY.      VOL. XV.                    PEOBATE DIVISION.
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1889
         1889     th in k , th erefore, th e decision of th e le a rn e d ju d g e should be               she m ade a new w ill h er p ro p e rty w ould go to h e r b ro th e r an d
                                                                                                                                                                                                            M il l s
Tim C it y of reversed.                                                                                    not as she wished it.
 L in c o ln .        ■                                                        A p p e a l a llo w e d .     S u b seq u en tly M rs. M illw ard o b ta in e d th e fo rg iv en ess of testa - MaLWABD
                                                                                                           trix a n d u rg e d h er to m a k e a n o th e r w ill, b u t th e te s ta tr ix replie -,
                     Solicitors for p la in tif f s : Stokes, Saunders & Stokes.                           « No 1 shall n ever m a k e a n o th e r w ill, le t i t re m a in as i t is.           n
                     Solicitors for d e f e n d a n ts : Rowclijfes, Rawle & Go.                           » late r occasion a M e n d of th e te s ta trix , M rs. Sim m ons . m c f f l i w
                                                                                           E,    S, K,     sation as to th e d e stru c tio n of th e w ill, p o in te d o u t th a t i t was .
                                                                                                           BOt too late to m ak e a n o th e r ; b u t' to th is th e t e s ta tn x answ ered, .
                                                                                                           “ I shall n o t m ak e a n o th e r, I n e v e r co u ld bring m y m in d to it
                                                                                                           The te sta trix d ie d a few clays afte r w ith o u t m a k in g a n o th e r w i .
     S m . 13.                        MILLS v. MILL WARD and A nother.

     "              Ifr/j!_.Revocation— Destruction without Authority of Testator-Subsequent                  B , D ea n e, for th e d e fen d an t.    T h e la n g u a g e used b y th e te sta ­
                                    notification— Wills Act (1 Viet. c. 26), s. 20.                         trix to M rs. M illw ard a n d M rs. Sim m o ns a m o u n te d to a r a t i h e ^
                    T ie will of a testatrix was destroyed in her presence, but without her consent         lion of th e d e stru c tio n of th e w ill, a n d was th erefo re e q u iv a le n t
                  or authority, by a relative. Subsequently the testatrix, though pressed to do             to a d estru ctio n of th e w ill b y th e deceased in h e r p resen ce a n d
                  bo, refused to make a new will, saying that she could not bring her mmd to it,
                                                                                                            l,v her d irectio n w ith th e in te n tio n of re v o k in g it.
                  and that it must remain as it was
                     Held that there was no sufficient evidence of a subsequent ratification of the          '* Indermck, Q.O. (S e a r le , w ith h im ). T h e words used b y th e tea-
                  destruction of the will bo as to constitute it an act done by the direction and           tatrix were n o t e q u i v a le n t to a rev ocation , a n d a ratificatio n
                  by the authority of the testatrix, and that probate might be granted of the               su b se q u e n t to d e s tru c tio n co uld n o t satisfy th e re q u ire m e n ts of
                  will as contained in an affidavit of the executor.
                                                                                                            the 20th section o f th e W ills A c t defin in g re v o c a tio n : “ B u rn in g ,
                     Qusere whether, where a will has been destroyed not only without the
                  authority of a testatrix, but against her wish, any subsequent ratification oi            tearing, or otherw ise d e stro y in g th e w ill b y th e te s ta to r or by
                  the act of destruction will make it a revocation within s. 20 of the Wills Act.           some person in h is p re se n ce a n d by h is d ire c tio n w ith th e in te n ­
                                                                                                            tion o f re vok in g.” H e re th e d e stru c tio n was n o t by th e te s ta trix ,
                     C h a b l e s M i l l s , the p la in tiff , propounded as so le executor the
                                                                                                             and i t is n o t p re te n d e d t h a t i t was done b y h e r d ire c tio n .
                  last will a n d testa m e n t o f M a ty S ta c e y , as c o n ta in e d in a n affi­
                  davit of ite c o n te n ts, a n d the d efen d a n t, John M illw ard , b y h is              B u t t , J.   T h e q u e stio n h e re arises u n d e r s. 20 of th e W ills
                  guardian ad li te m op p osed probate, on the ground t h a t the w ill                     Act.     I n ord er to e sta b lish re v o catio n i t is c o n te n d e d on b eh a li
                 had bfceii revoked by t i e te s ta trix ,                                                  of th e d e fen d a n t t h a t th o u g h M rs. M illw ard h a d no au th ority to
                    Ik e m e       beard before B o lt, J., without a ju r y .                               destroy th e w ill, an d was in fact a c tin g d ia m e tric a lly a g a in s t th e
                    I t appeared th a t the testatrix d u ly executed her will l e b -                       wish of th e te s ta tr ix in d e stro y in g it, y e t as th e te s ta trix a fte r­
                 m s x r 22 IdSfivfcM by it disposed of h er whole estate, amounting                         wards expressed h e r satisfaction w ith th e sta te of th in g s w hich
                                                                                                             had b een b ro u g h t a b o u t b y th e d e stru c tio n , t h a t am o u n ts t e a
                 liaas.      T i e will r«t*u»ed           execauon m t i e o ^ i o u j u tfit               ratificatio n of w h at M rs. M illw ard h a d done, an d t h a t such ratifi­
                 te sta tr ix , who sh o r tly before h e r death g a v e it to one Mrs,. E liz a            cation was ta n ta m o u n t to a d e stru c tio n b y th e te s ta tr ix an               y
                 Millward, her sister-in-law, to read. Mrs. Millward, finding that                            h e r a u th o rity . I d o u b t v ery m u c h w h e th e r t h a t * a te D a b k ;
                 neither her name nor that of her hu sb a n d appeared m it, lost her                         a rg u m e n t in an y circum stances, b u t i t is n o t n ecessary for m e to
                 temper, tore it up and threw the fragments into the fire m the                               decide th e p o in t, as I h o ld t h a t th e words a ttr ib u te d to t h e ^
                 pxeSence of the testatrix, telling her at the same tune th at u n le ss                      trix do n o t a m o u n t to a ratificatio n o f th e d e stru c tio n b y Mrs.

                                                                                                              MilliMKd-
          ! ! , ° : f :n3!d e i" bfe si?'0; that. ii sll0aM be an assem bly in w h ich the               no attention o utsid e. T h e y w ere £ew in n u m b e r, a n d th e -w h o le
                                             m ousynig m a g ita te d m o v e m e n t; a n cx- •         activ ity w as on to o sm a lt a scale to be p ro p e rly d e sc rib e d as a                                 j.   w. Dwyer
                                                             ; e x c ite m e n t o r e m o tio n com-    “ tum ult.” F o r these rea so n s, th e c ia im fails, and. th e re w ill b e                                     TT
                            “ ™     " 3, 0 l . t!,c ass.emfa!* ; and gcncraHy> though »ot                ju d g m en t fo r the d e fe n d a n t w ith costs, to be ta x e d o n a so licito r                         iV?e?> ^ ,l!!an
                                                              1   agree w ith the subm issions           an d o w n clien t basis.                   -   -                        ■ ■ ■■ '                                 District
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            i.\e c e w e r
                                   m a tie ’ Uiat i! is a q ^ s t i o n o f degree w h e th e r any
         “J i T   y 01         c'a n ? ro Pcriy be said to be acting tumultuously-                                          - ' J u d g m e n t- f o r       th e d e fe n d a n t w ith -
              i P ^ J crn 10,consider both the m eaning of the words and the - c                         \\    '              ''                             c o s ts .   --   -
         tZ " 7                 VV'nelner thC WOrds “ riotousIy a n d tu m iiltao u slv ” T
                          a f Cry are ^ be re a d             cum ulative re q u ir e m e n ts ,^         ---. S o lic ito rs: A tte n b o r o u g h s ; Lee, B o lto n & Lee.                 - ,T y             ..
                  C " ^ - c ^ r a c t c r . u n til very recently the victim s-of-.
         * ,^ Z              110 Ciaim 10 b e com pensated fo r th e -in ju ry '-they:#
                    J " a ?o asc9Ge,lce of ^    crime. C om pensation for J o s r T
                   '• a rrol Was a . speciaI case" ™ s ^           the q u e s tio n :! ^
    '                           3 Sp®Ciai case? If 3 -crowd 0 ! people c o l l e c t i n g
                                            1 this should become obvious to to T l ;
                        ° o o m er, and it would then become their du ty to p r e - ^                    o          . ...             -    - R E G IN A v, L A M B                   '       ■' - '       : - ,               C.A.
        ^ . “ ‘<5 cro w a irom becoming a r i o t . ' This is a duty' w h ic h 'h a s " ^                ei-                    .■                   -   ■        :
                                                                                                                                                                 h ' -    \ r -;       1967
        m-cu ^ e o g jiise a ror centuries, and which until the J9th c e n tu ry '^                      Crime—ffomicide-—Manslaughter—•Mens rea—Defence of 'accident— June^ *J>
              '    v 'T'*" *:'ie         siunjiListraiive area, the hundred o r w aper-hT                      Mistake—Whether act “unlawful ”—Whether intent required-—               —------
                                                                                                        - y 'Whether test objective or subjective— Unlawful and dangerous act        j ypj®
        !^ ?5f       'WiMteVer Marac i( m ^ ht b s c a I k d i an d there w a s 'a -d u ty ;l                  —Shooting with revolver — Defendant. not knowing bullet .in ' GeoW-rey
                         ^ ■ com^ ns^ w r dam age which was done by p e rs o n s^                       -Os., .revolver moved into firing chamber by pulling trigger■—No inten-     Lj.neJJ.
        7 ;T *          ri0 f QSly a n a lu m « It«ously.: T h e A c t of 1886,                                tion to fire revolver — No assault or intent to harm— Death
              , , , m ore than.m odernise the m ode o f obtaining comtj                                        resulting from pulling trigger. ... . -                 .   i t 1 --
        a,i,» uaiisj.errea. the ourden from the inhabitants of the hui
                                                                                                             ' ■. ' ■ The defendant in jest and with'no intention to harm, pouited
        *'apei,ia,.e to ijie. Joeai police authority. T here is nothin                                          '-'-'at his-friend, who was also treating-the incident as a joke,' a
     I.w \ u; ; lve t ° ’t l a crowo of Pe o Ple wll° are acting riotouslv >,V                              , : .revolver which had two bullets in.'chambers neither being opposite
                                                                                                        ' t-,,-- the barrel. Without intending to fire the revolver the defendant
     ; : : ; ; d lT U:? y* 11 Seei5is to m e    ‘he right to compensation" f,~ •
                                                                                                        f T • pulled the trigger and his friend was killed. ' The defendant'was
    I T : . U’j5a! 5 as f v 63 becaiJse             authority had failed                                :-'i- -/.charged with manslaughter, and his defence'was that the killing'
    ^ J Il pt!:01,c1Wi10 '!€re menaced                       hy &tbi                                    •'-V.. ■’ was an accident because die had mistakenly thought. th a t. the •
    : c r ‘w         r , ve. b e e n ' . 00VI0ns   1,0   thc forces oi
                                                                                                            r?.-:- striking: pin. could not hit thesbullets and had not' knows,that.                                         -'
                    i ' T 1 !IIIW 40 tim e- In        judgm ent, t!>~ v ,                          .
                                                                                                         ty,. palling the trigger rotated the cylinder thereby bringing o n e'o f'
    ^ ^ a u o u s i y - was ad d ed to “ riotously ” for-the s w                                                     the bullets into the firing position; three expert witnesses'■agreed
                                                                                                                   ''that -the defendant’s mistake was natural for someone riot' aware .
    ^       n ^ as m tenaed to o m it the liability o f com per-                    .   .    . .
                                                                                                                        the way the mechanism worked, - The trial judge took'the yiew                                             '
    MA' Te UJe n oters were ie such Bombers a n d in such                                      .                     that the pointing of the revolver -and the pulling of the itrigger i;'                                 ...
    agjtatea com m otion,-and were generally so acting, th at th<                                         ; y . was something which could, of itself, be unlawful even-df-there
                                                                                                          ; >■ r was h o . attempt to alarm or intent to injure, and in summing up -'
    ° V f * anU, ° ! ° er m m M liave be£® well aw                                                       '•>••• he did 1not refer to the defence of accident .or the need fori-the
    t                   '"t       0a(J c ° a c m e ir d u ty , sh o u ld h ,-/e • T e n -sh"-                      : prosecution to disprove accident .before the jury concluded''that ■'.                                      ' cT
    it) p re v e n t th e rio te rs fro m c a u s in g d am ag e .             \   '                     -y-'; the act was unlawful. The direction to the jury w as:— .-. hT-o'--i-T                                         ''    .-
.         -Applying those-criteria to the facts o f d h is case, in r - c T o .                         i.,-i'.i .            “ I t is- ~aosi 2Bght3K; If 'desiht; rasolts- from- 'art' ealaaslsf .                           ''    -
                                                                                                                        i- - ' - “               -       *- - i r -                      -    -       -
                   ff ' iS‘. 1,J!0U8h there was 110 d ou b t a com m otion - Z „ -
                  j»-           hi uii, sisop, ms activities of the rioter
                                                                                                                   [R eported by M is s Stet.x a S o lo m on , T arrister-at-L aw .j
,9 8 2 V    '      ' '   ;                 Q J c ^ ? ’S B EN C H D IV ISIO N               •.                   ;   2 Q.B.                             QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION                                                       983

           A-.                  ■ / Jjnaiislaiighterif death results from an extreme degre;.          „ <-•   , :   - , T h e d e fe n d a n t’s: d efe n ce w a s th a t, as n e ith e r b u lle t ;w a s o p p o ­
        j %7 V.' •/.v’,'V/.,.;',.>;Jc^ri^s,-:;iiegligence> on the p a r t ,of the accu       ITe-e      , „         site th e b a rre l, h e th o u g h t - th e y 1 w ere in su c h ch a m b e rs: th a t th e              1967
  ■— ^ —7— —                      ; ^botli;5;grosiE£!svon which manslaughter can be £oun*'; h h
       Regina                     a qmtei; possfele that to some extent they over'                                  s tr ik in g 'p in could, n o t h i t th e m ','th a t h e w as u n a w a re th a t p u lling           Regina
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               v.
. •. Lamb         '-.""t""' "'The:7<iefendaB.f^was convicted, and in answer to a question e-                        th e trig g e r w o u ld b rin g o n e b u lle t in to th e firing p o sitio n o p p o site             L am b
             .                  the trial judge the foreman of the jury stated that they            i-              th e b a rre l, a n d .th at th e k illin g 1 w a s a n accid en t. ■ T h re e 'e x p e rt
' - ..            ' . the defendant guilty on both grounds. ; ■                                                 ;   w itnesses fo r th e prosecution, a g re e d th a t the m ista k e m a d e b y th e
         " ' ' a - c c a ' Gni appeal; — .e-i;.--.. . . . r             - .       ■      ■     ■                    d e fe n d a n t w as n a tu ra l f o r so m e b o d y w h o w as u n a w a re o f the
 •                               " .Held,.(1} Mens rea being an essential ingredient, mans                          w ay in w h ich th e rev o lv e r m e c h a n ism w ork ed ;- M r. M c C afle rty , a
   : -.v . .             : could not be. established in relation to the first ground .except by
'               ..■            proving that: element of intent without whici                                        fire arm s ex p e rt, s a id :         .'   •••;•’   v .t    '   . - 'o ':
. •. ■                ' ’ assault (post,."p.'988c); and that the whole direc r. v i . i , 5 , ,                              ,     “ I c o u ld u n d e rs ta n d s o m e o n e w ho h a d h o e x p e rien c e
                            ■the statement that'it was manslaughter if death resultca t .c n .                                w o u ld n o t a p p re c ia te th a t t h e 1ro u n d to th e le ft o f "the b a rre l
                        . unlawful . and dangerous act on the part of the deic\..i,:ni ve *                                  w o u ld m o v e in to the barrel, w h e n the trig g e r w as p u lle d .”
                      ■ 1. vitiated by misdirections based on an erroneous concept of C. e ' ■              '
                                                                                                                        M r. B u rr, a n execu tive officer ^ a ttac h ed to th e fire arm s b ra n c h
                        . . (post, p. 988 f ). , v .
                    . ■ ^           R e g . v. Franklin (1883) 15 Cox C.C. 163; A n d r e w s 7 . D.r: Uu ■     :   o f S co tlan d Y a rd , s a id : - ;        .         ■■
                               of Public Prosecutions [1937] A.C. 576; 53 T.L.R, 663; [{<                                          “ I w ou ld ex p e ct th e live r o u n d to be o p p o site th e b arrel
                            "2 All E .R ,■■ 552, H.L. and Reg. v. Church [1966] I'Q .B 5°-                                    w h e n I p u lle d th e trig g e r.” V   '
                     . * [1965] :2i,W.L.R. :1220; [1965] 2 All E.R. 72, C.C.A., considered!
                                                                                                                       ■    '- F o lic e-eo n sta b le P u lle n sa id t h a t h e h a d n o t a p p re c ia te d u n til
                          '■■':■ ■ (2) That,, since the jury had been misdirected on the ' f « i                ;
                          ' ground and. had -been told that the two grounds overlappee, uiu                         ' th is ca se th a t p u llin g the trig g e r m o v e d the cy lin d er, - ' •
                            'the defendant .'had 'not been accorded the right of having T_                          -      ■ O n N o v e m b e r 24, d u rin g th e .c o u rs e o f d ire c tin g th e"ju ry G ly n -
                               defence"'of ■.accident ■ and mistake considered by a.e j-^y ,Ul-p                     Jo n e s I . s a id ; '       .                        .
                               were "left. without direction on an essential matter, t‘x t"\ d."
                           ■ could not stand, (post, pp. 989a-b, 990f); and that accordingly, the               i                    “ I f y ou find th a t a n y o rd in a r y citizen of s o u n d m in d a n d
                     . ' appeal must be. allowed and the conviction must be qi                                         '. ' p o ssessed of h is rea so n m a s t in e v ita b ly h a v e reeo g n iscd th a t
                                                                                                                                to p o in t th a t lethal, w ea p o n a t h is frien d, k n o w in g th a t he w as
                                                                                                                            ' ig n o ra n t o f h o w to use it, k n o w in g th e re w ere tw o live ro u n d s
                     ... A p p e a l against conviction.        '                 ■ ■ ■ ■ ■ '■ ,
                                                                                                                          - in the rev o lv in g c y lin d er— h e p resse d th e -trigger— if it w as a n
                     ■ . On November 22, 1966, at the Central Crim inal C ourt; hclorc                                       . a c t w h ich m u s t su b je ct th e d e c e a se d to so m e risk o f in jury,
                     Glyn-Jones J. an d ' a jury, the defendant, Terence W aher „a :u 1,.                                       w h y then, h e m u s t b e ta k en ,' su rely, to h a v e k n o w n p erfectly
                     aged 25, was 'arraigned on an indictment charging that, <                                                  w ell th a t w h a t h e w as d o in g w as d a n g e ro u s . . . I f yo u are
                ■' ' tember 22,-1966,''.lie unlawfully killed Timothy O ’L ^ .n a J a„. * ~                            ' •'' satisfied o f th a t, th e n 1 d ire c t y o u as a m a tte r o f law , a n d you
                                                                                                                         ■       m a s t tak e it fro m m e , th a t 'to u se a revo lv er, a le th a l w ea p o n
                     the indictment the defendant pleaded not guilty.            .- ■ . ■          ■                     . . su ch as this revolver, in the c irc u m sta n c e s.o f this ca se , in su ch
                        ' The following statement of facts is taken, substantially/ front                               .-- -.a m a n n e r .as in th e c o n te m p la tio n o f a n y .o rd in a ry m a n ,
                     the judgment.'..-,The undisputed, facts in-evidence were tT,„ ol:e                                  ' - 'p o ssessed o f h is rea so n , w ill ca u se real a n d u n n ec essary risk, of
                                                                                                                       '' ' in ju ry to a n o th e r, is an u n la w fu l act, w h e th e r or: n o t it falls
                     defendant-'possessed a-.Sm ith & Wesson .revolver, with .& five-                                ... . w ith in a n y rec o g n ised c a te g o ry o f c rim e .. , -.. - -       0   . - .-
                     chambered cylinder, and that each time the trigger was pu!                                                      “ M r. C o rn y n h as la id g re a t stress o n t h e f a c t th a t th re e
                     cylinder rotated clockwise; that the defendant, in jest and wiu; no                                        w itnesses h av e given, ce rta in evidence.' [H is L o rd s h ip sta te d
                                                                                                                              . th e evid en ce o f M r. M cC afferty, M r. B u r r a n a P o lice-con-
                     in.tenti.on to do'harm , pointed the revolver at O ’Donaghue, Ms bet-,                                     sta b le P u lle n set o u t ab o v e , an d c o n tin u e d ; j M e m b e rs o f 1 lie
                     friend, who .was treating the incident as a joke; that the revolver■                                . 'j u r y , th a t is n o t th e p o in t.”                      . ■.•    . •
                     had two bullets in the chambers, neither bullet being in the .                                         In d ire c tin g the ju ry G lyn-lon.es J. d id n o t re fe r to th e 'd e fe n c e
                     cham ber opposite -the barrel; that the defendant, having no.intes-:- .'T-                         o f ac cid en t o r   10   th e n eed fo r the p ro secu tio n to d isp ro v e ac cid en t
                     tion to lire the revolver, .pulled the trigger, hs peiiiny rotated the ' ' I"                      befo re th e ju ry c a m e to a conclusion th at the a c t w as w rongful.
                     cylinder and so placed a. bullet opposite the barrel, the ballet w:e;       ..:                        A fte r retirin g, th e ju ry retu rn ed fo r fu rth e r d irec tio n s.        Deri:?:;
                     struck by the sinking pin and O ’Donaghue was killed.                                              the co u rse o f giving fu rth e r directions G iyn-Jone;: J, s s id ;
                          QUEEN'S b e n c h d i v i s i o n                                                           QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION                                              985

•• v ;    ■■           m anslaughter if d e a th results from an unlaw ful:aiui                     : It is unlaw ful to put anyone, in1 a position o f danger w ithout
        d a n g ero u s;a ct o n the part o f the accuscd. i t -is alsoriinafl-'r-               justification or excuse if yo u are aw are o f the danger, because then           1967
  .... slaughter.;if d eath results from a n e x tre m e d egree o f/ca re le ss* '’:            there is m en s rea.- T h e test is subjective and n o t objective. T he         R e g in a
      ’ n ess,.n eg ligen ce, o n the part o f th e accused. T h o s e 'a r e f b o tM                                                                                                v.
                                                                                                 judge .was therefore w rong in saying that if a n y ordinary citizen              Lamb
  - :' grounds f o n tvhich m anslaughter c a n b e fo u n d . '-Tti'is.fq u itr i
       'possible-that to .some extent they'overlap . .              ■■■■■ ■■■■ -                 o f sound m ind would realise there w as som e danger the defendant
                                                                                                 m ust b e taken to have know n, i f h e had applied his m ind to it,
      T h e jury returned a v e rd ic t of gu ilty o f m anslaughter. '; .There- ;
                                                                                                 that what lie w as d oing was. dangerous. T h e m isdirection was
 u p o n th e f o llo w in g 1o c c u r re d : ' ' ,                f f i ; . 'f f ..if.:.
                                                                                                 so serious that it vitiated the w h ole o f the summing-up.     ' ,
            ■     -G ly n -J o n e s I . M r. F o re m a n , w o u ld y o u be good enough:-:         T h e judge m isdirected the jury w ith regard to gross negligence
       to tell m e w hether y o u find h im g u ilty o n th e ground, that:
                                                                                                  b y disregarding m en s rea, and h e o u g h t to have told the jury that
  ■ -. d eath resulted from an unlaw ful and d a n g e ro u s act, o r o n the,-
 ' : - g r o u n d that d e a th re su lte d from negligence o n th e part, o f this ?           the lest o f gross negligence w as n o t purely objective and that the
       m a n i or on b oth grounds?              -      ■                           i—:".-'       intention o f the defendant should b e considered.
              T h e .F o r em a n . O n both grounds, m y Lord.             . %•                       T h e d efence o f accident w as relevant and w a s not put to the
      T h e d e fe n d a n t w as se n ten c ed to th ree y e a rs’ iin p rison m en t/.H e       jury in the sum m ing-up. T h e judge virtually told the jury mat
 appealed against con viction , by leave o f - th e single ju d g e , o n t h e :                 it w as crim inal negligence and thereby usurped the jury’s function.
 fo llo w in g g ro u n d s: (1) that the judge failed to direct the jury on .                    O n the question of recklessness o r th e grossness o f the negligence,
 th e burden, and standard of p ro o f; (2) th a t the judge m isdirected                         intention is of some relevance, but it w a s never dealt with.
 the jury o n the la w ; o f m anslaughter; (3) that thc judge removed. "                             A s to m ens rea, reliance is placed upon R ussell on Crim e, H t h
 from the jury’s co n s id e ra tio n the defence o f accidental k illing; ;(4):i                 cd. (1958), pp. 644, 650, 657 a n d -Reg. v . Church.1 T h e m odern
 that th e ju d g e m isdirected the jury o n the m ean ing o f an unlawful                        law is correctly stated in that case and in Andrews v . Director of
 act by directing them that using the re v o lv e r in such m anner a s 1to ’                     Public'Prosecutions,2      ■ . v ; : . ■■■       :      ' :
                                                                                                  - T h e m isdirections a re of particular im portance in view o f the
 subject a n o th er to risk o f in ju ry w ith ou t law ful justification was
 an u n la w f u l:a c t: (5) that th e ju d g e m isdirected the jury on. the.                   fact that the jury returned fo r further directions after a long retire-
 m ean ing o f a dangerous act b y directing them that an act m ust be                           • meat..                                                            ^ '■
                                                                                                     -   A fter the verdict the ju d g e ' sh ould not have asked ■ the jury
 dangerous -if an ordinary m an m ust contem plate som e danger
                                                                                                 . u pon w hich o f the two grounds . o f m anslaughter their decision
 arising fro m -the perform ance o f the act; (6) that the judge m is­
                                                                                                   w as based: see.R ex v . Larkin? f i n these circum stances 'the con ­
 directed the jury on the m ean ing o f recklessness by directing them
 that an ordinary m an m u st be acting recklessly if h e pulls, the.                               viction should b e quashed.      ■ f i / f . '.  ;■ f       '             ■
                                                                                                    f- J. C. Mathew for the Crown. It w as im possible at the trial
 trigger o f £ revolver in w h ich h e know s th at there a re tw o cart­
                                                                                                    to support the judge’s direction on the first ground of m anslaughter
 ridges; and (7 ) b y directing th e m that the defendant co u ld have
                                                                                                    and it still cannot b e supported. H ow ever, the direction under
 b ee n reckless and co u ld b e co n v icte d o f m anslaughter even: if he
                                                                                                 :; the secon d heading o f gross negligence w as w h olly adequate and
 d id n ot, intend, to fire the revolver and did not think that the
                                                                                                    there w as no real, reason w h y the jury should, have been confused
 revolver w o u ld fire b e c a u s e there was an em p ty cham ber under the
                                                                                                    b y w hat the judge said under th e .first heading. ^          ' fvf,:- .
 ham m er w h en h e pulled th e trigger.                                '■ - .      f ;:;f.
                                                                                                 - . "A s to m ens rea in negligence, it is the degree of negligence which
                                                                                                : im putes m ens rea to thc person c o n c e r n e d .' T h e "defence evidence
     Jam es C om yn Q.C. and John IJoyd-EJey for the d efen d a n t                                 w as sufficiently put to th e jury in the summing-up. T h e judge left
 T h e ju d g e se rio u sly m isdirected the jury on the d efin itio ns of                         the issue to the jury as to w hether there w as m anslaughter by
 m anslaughter, and w a s w ron g in saying that intention a n d m en s rea                     . negligence. , T h e two grounds o f manslaughter overlap, i A lthough
 w e re ir re lev a n t.'' M e n s r e a is necessary.     T h e judge w a s w ron g                the - jury w rongly convicted on the first • heading they, rightly
 in sta tin g th a t it w as u n la w fu l to nut a n o ih e r p erso n in inherent
 danger w ithout ju stifica tio n or excuse.         T here m u st be a n unlaw ful                W.                                     -■
 ac t in th e sense th a t it w as >
                        QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION                                              2. Q .B .                   QUEEN’S BENCH. DIVISION                                                        987

 convicted on the second, and what was said regarding                         ..        . a g re ed w as natural fo r somebody'-"who -w as n o t a w a re o f 'the w ay
  ing was correct; if ..applied to m anslaughter by negiigen -                            th e revolver m echanism w o rk e d .;-'T h o se w itnesses w ere ail'ca lle d ,                      196?
 -The only subjective te s t. is k n o w led g e b y the perso,- ~f          A„-         'fo r .th e .p ro se c u tio n a n d in clud ed , th e se n io r experim ental .officer a t           Regina
                                                                                                                                                                                                v.
  was doing, and thereafter it is 'a n objective test ta                                  th e M e tro p o lita n p olice labo rato ry.'" ■       ■                              ■             Lamb
  sideration those m atters-in the circumstances of the ease             c er                    T h e defen ce o f accident was,, how ever, in effect w ith d ra w n fro m
: to determine whether a reasonable m an would think t t e t it was. a • /                th e . ju ry b y th e tria l ju d g e in a. m anner w hich w ill be. further
■ dangerous thing to do. : N o injustice was caused by the judge asking--;.;              ex a m in e d in this judgment. I n d e e d th e trial ju d g e m a d e n o m e n ­
  the jury for a special verdict. :           ■            ' . '.h:.'.e;^5-:y.-.;,r;.     tio n of th e w ord “ accident ” in his sum m ing-up nor o f th e evi-
                                                                                        - den ce o f th e ex p e rts save t h a t - h e - a t o n e s ta g e 'd ir e c te d '.th e ju ry
   ' :Sac.hs I. : The .appeal is allowed and the conviction, quashed h                    th a t th e ir evidence w as not r e le v a n t                  ■ "                  -
 for reasons to be'given later. ■       .      ■ . • ; ■; t: ty-.-‘.;cvr:c; :              : .-, T h e general effect o f th e sum m ing-up w a s : th a t: a v e rd ic t of
       ■ ■ .        ' /. v       ■■       ■   • . Cur,                                    guilty cou ld b e'..returned o n - e it h e r o r b o th of. tw o g ro u n d s as
                                                                                            fo llo w s:         ;. •'       ■   '    : . 'h ?..y,     ' -.. -   ;      c
      June 22, 1967," Sachs L.J. read the following ji                                                   “ It is m anslaughter if 'd e a t h results from a n unlaw ful a n d
  co u rt.' On November. 24, .'1966, the defendant was convicted’-of/th                       ..''■..dangerous act'-o n th e p a r t ;'of th e accused. - i t is also m an-
  manslaughter a t the. Central' Criminal C ourt and .'Sentenced ::td-'T                        . sla u g h te r if d e a th resu lts fro m a n e x tre m e 'degree o f careiess-
                                                                                                     nessT negligence, o n th e part; o f the a c c u s e d ,: T h o se are b o th
  three years1-im prisonm ent He appealed against conviction: b yty                     '     - "g ro u n d s on w hich m a n sla u g h te r c a n be-'found.- I t. is q u ite
  leave of the single judge and his appeal was heard on .‘i r x *2 a,.                            ' p o ssib le th a t to so m e extent.they overlap..
  13, 1966..-' The court <then quashed the conviction, a                                . ...,' A s re g a rd s .th e first, o f those g ro u n d s, w h ic h .w a s p resse d u p o n
  the reasons would be given later. '                 ' '                                 th e j u r y v ery stro n g ly indeed,, in th e co u rse o f his - sum m ing-up,
      The issues lay .w ith in a narrow coinpass, for both .counsel:.;                    the. tria l ju d g e no d o u b t fo u n d ed h im se lf o n that p a r t o f the ju d g ­
  agreed that neither at the trial nor in this court was there'any dis--- 'i'            m e n t .of E d m u n d D av ies J. in Reg,:y, C h u rc h 1 w hen h e 's a y s 3:
  pute as to the' facts. y-The defendant, Terence Walter Lamb'.-'aged-h;-
                                                                                                   ' ' ' “ T he unlaw ful act m ust b e 'su c h as all sober and reason­
  25, had become possessed of a Smith & Wesson revolver. It was a : >                              able people w ou ld inevitably;:recognise m ust subject the othei
 ■revolver in the literal old-fashioned sense, having a five-chambered >1                            person, to, a t least, the risk' of some harm resulting therefrom.
  cylinder which rotated clockwise each time the trigger.w as;pulled;t .                           albeit not serious harm .” . y e T
  The'defendant,.; in: jest,.'with'no intention to do any "Iran.\ ' o v                           . U n fo rtu n a te ly , h o w ev e r, h e fell in to e rro r a s to th e m eaning of
  the revolver at the deceased, his best friend, when it-hs
                                                                                              the.-w ord “ unlawful. ” i n 't h a t p a ssa g e a n d 'p re s s e d , u p o n ; th e ju ry a
  bu llets'in the''cham bers,: but', neither bullet w as in . ,s chr-nur-.
                                                                                              d efin itio n w ith w h ich e x p e rie n c e d 'c o u n se l fo r th e Crown h a d .d is­
; opposite the barrel. : His. friend was similarly treating the ir u,er­
                                                                                              agreed d u rin g t h e 't r i a l a n d w h ich he fo u n d '-h im se lf u n a b l e 't o
  as a joke.' The .defendant -then pulled the trigger and thus
                                                                                            ...support o n th e 'appeal. T h e .'t r i a l j u d g e to o k , th e v ie w T h a t th e
  Ms friend, still yhaving no intention to fire the revoA .-. T
                                                                                              p o in tin g o f 'th e 'r e v o lv e r a n d 'th e ', pulling, o f th e trigger -was -som e­
  reason ,w h y -Ih e;-pulling..;of .the trigger produced th
                                                                                              thing w hich c o u ld o f itself : b e : unlaw ful even :if th ere’ w as n o
  was that its pulling, rotated the cylinder and          so place
                                                                                              a tte m p t to a la rm o r in te n t to injure.- T his view is exem plified in
  opposite the b a rre l:so th a t it'w a s struck by the striking pin or
                                                                                              a p a ssa g e in his judgm ent w h ic h .w ill be cited la te r.              r       - ■"
  hammer.                              -- -                   . ■ . t .■■■ ■■■
                                                                                                ' ' I t w as no d o u b t o n that basis that he h a d b e fo re co m m en c in g
  - 'T he defendant’s defence was that, as neither bullet was oppq-..'.
                                                                                              his sum m ing-up sta te d that h e w as n o t going to “ involve th e jury
  site the barrel, he. thought they were in such chambers that the ''1"
                                                                                              in an y c o n sid e ra tio n o f the niceties o f the q u estio n w h eth e r o r n o t
  striking pin could not hit them; that he was unaware that the"
                                                                                              th e ” action, o f th e “ accu sed d id co n stitu te o r d id n o t constitute an
  pulling of the -trigger would bring one bullet into the firing position: j
                                                                                              a s s a u l t ” ; an d th u s he d id n o t re fe r to die defence of accid en t o r
  opposite thc barrel: and dial the killing was thus an accident
  There was not only no dispute that that was what he in feet                                  1     f!%6] 1 0 .13. 59; \ 1965] 2
                                                                                             W.L.R. 1220; [l% 5] 2 Ail E.R. 72,
  though!, but the mistake he made w as one which three experts ..                           e.c.A.
  ''-988 V * ;                             QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION                                                           2     Q .B .           ■   . 'Q U E E N ’S BENCH DIVISION                             j
                                                           *                                                                                                      «*'           '                   '       '
         . ,c. a .      the need fo r th e p ro se c u tio n to d isp ro v e accident before .coming ttf l                  answ ered; “ O n b oth - grounds, in y L o r d a n d th a t'a c co rd in g ly                         C. A,
         ' 1967         a'con clu sion th a t the.:act w as u n la w fu l           " • • •. • ■                            .the verdict should stand, ' n                                   ; 7':-'-                              1967
        -/j^ ina                M r. M a th e w ,fh o w e v e r /h a d at all tim es p u t.fo r e ..r d the co~-              '"--Taken" by them selves the directions on law in -.-regard', to the                               Regina
        ^•'i 'arnh.' .. rect view that'for' th e'act t o b e unlaw ful it m ust con stitute at least                                                                                                                                v.
                                                                                                                             second ground w ere substantially; correct, b u t this court w ould in
                         w hat h e then term ed'" a technical assault.” in this court mc.re&vu-
                                                                                                                             any event have to proceed w ith caution w hen asked to uphold
                         h e rightly con ced ed th at there w as no evidence to g o to; the jur} c l
                                                                                                                             th e''v erd ict w hen so m uch o f th e first part o f the sum m ing-up
'." - . r .■ ■ .' a n y assault o f an y Kind. : N o r d id he feel able to subm it that tp,e                    *   ^
7 jh:;;;:-;-':..- .' acts o f the defendant''w ere on any other ground unlaw ful hi the                                      w as vitiated by m isdirections. ' AH th e m o r e 's o when; th e jury
                         crim inal sense o f that w ord. Indeed no such su b m isv o n could in                              have been told that the two, .grounds for their consideration
                         law b e m ade: i f ; f o r instance, the p ulling o f the trig;/.t ha,: Lac                        overlapped, '                                  :         ■■ ■'■■■
      jfe .             no effect because'' the striking m echanism or the am m unition luic! '                    ‘           M oreover the directions o n the,first ground included a passage;
  y j ^ i P b ; ..       b een d efective h o o ffe n c e w ould have been com m itted b y the                                                 If y o u find th a t an y ordinary citizen o f s o u n d m ind a n d
  y e t'e b b ,.;        defendant.          .' 1 ; ;.-r --'hr ' - - ■'                                                         '; /- po ssessed, o f h is reason m u st inevitably h ave recognised
.j          ;". " .        ' '■ A n o th er w a y 'o f p u ttin g it is that m ens rea, being n ow a a esien-                    ".' - that to p o in t that le th al w e a p o n a t his frie n d , k n o w in g th at
                      -                  tial ingredient in m anslaughter (com pare A ndrew s v . D ire c to r of                       h e w as ig n o ra n t o f.'h o w to.;'use it, kn.owi.Bg th e re w e re tw o
                                                                                                                                     '..live ro u n d s in 'the r e v o lv in g 'c y lin d e r, h e p resse d th e -trig g e r,
                         Public Prosecutions* and Reg. v . C h u rc h 4), that eivdd n c i                   t
                                                                                                                                        if it w a s an a c t w h ic h m u s t su b je c t the dec ea se d to so m e risk
         7               present case b e .established In relation to the first grou,:;J except by                                      o f in ju ry , w h y th e n he m u s t-b e .taken, surely, to h av e k n o w n
  ' j i t ' ' proving that elem en t of' intent .without w hich there ccr. bo r,v                                                '' ; perfectly w ell th a t w h a t he w as d o in g w as d a n g e ro u s,” .
                                                                                                                                and later on the sam e p a g e :
                     -     I t -is p erh a p s: a s ' w e ll to m ention that w hen a ,h:g che fh^.r,;-
                   “ unlaw ful in the''crim inal sense o f that w o r d ” the coart lias in                                                   If y o u a re ' satisfied o f : that, then- I direct y o u , a s a
                   m ind th at it i s : long; settled, that it is not in. point; to consider                                     . . , m a tte r o f law , and you m ust'.take it from me, that to use a
                                                                                                                                      revolver, ' a le th a l       w ea p o n ••su c h   as th is rev o lv er, ' i n ' the
                   w hether an act is unlaw ful m erely from thc angle o f c iv il fiabibiiar..
                                                                                                                                   ’-circumstances of this case, in: such a m anner as in the con -
                   T h at w as first made'..clear; in the “ Brighton P ie r ” caseh(Rcs>, v.                                       -     tem plation o f any o rdinary;.m an, possessed of his - reason,
                   F r a n k lin 5). T he. relevant-.extracts from that and front ::.t„r iud;-                ,        -5       ... w ill cause real arid unnecessary..risk o! injury to another, is
                   m ea ts are collected;, in -R u ssell on Crim e, 11th ed, (1958), p.p. 65 i —                                     'a n unlaw ful act, w hether or not it falls w ith in 'a n y recognised
                                                                                                                                      category of crim e.”       7 - ;;- - :-h '
                     " .T h e w h ole of. that p a rt. o f the su m m in g -u p , w hich concerned                         T here are m oreover both in the-.'original sum m ing-up and in the
                    the first ground w a sith u s vitiated by m isdirections based on art                                   further.'directions given w hen the' jury after an hour’s retirement
                    erroneous co n cep t'.o f; the law; and the strength w ith which tha.                                   asked fo r m o re 'a ssista n c e , several passages'-of t h i s ' nature,' The
                    ground w as put to the ju r y no doubt stem m ed from ;h„ urn: v i' ;>                    ,        - . general tenor o f the summ ing-up, o n the first ground w a s 'fa n s to
                  . o f the trial judge,."expressed.m ore than on ce in the c z a t c of i t :
                                                                                                                           cause the jury to apply objective 'tests which w ithdrew from 'them
                    discu ssion o n ■ law. iin. relation to the und ispu ted fa<y.s: “ lio v ; c:-n
                                                                                                                            consideration o f w hat the defendant him self th o u gh t.. D irected
                    there b e a d efen ce t o :th e charge, o f m anslaughter? ;ba.<hf'-tjjKvV
                                                                                                                            to ap ply their m inds in th a t fashion in relation t o ;th e first
                    requires n o in te n t” r‘:: ; : .:
                                                                                                                           -ground, they, cou ld hardly avoid starting to 'c o n s id e r th e second
                         A s regards 'th e seco n d ground—crim inal negligence— Mr,
                    M athew n o n e th e le ss. urged that the directions in                  -, c - .                 ^    upon th e footin g that the defendant m ast be taken, to have know n
                    substantially co r r e c t;. .that they were not affected by' an y i,//jr-                              th at he was doing som ething dangerous. O n that basis there was
                    touching the first ground; that the jury, after returning their verd'e:,                                really only one verdict open to them, on the second, ground —
                    u p o n 'b e in g asked b y .t h e trial judge as to w hether their finding                       ' - and having found him guilty upon a m isdirection on the first their
                    was upon the first' ground, the second ground, or both grc                                              verdict on the second wouhl in all probability be thus wrongly
                      3 FTO7] A.C, 576; 53 T.L.R. 663;            *> [!9C6]I Q.B. 59,                                       affected.                               '     -
                   [1937] 2 All E.R. 552, H.L.                    * (1883)15 Cox C.C. 163.        '       .       • 7            This is, however, n o t the only-reason, why the verdict on the
p j \ \ ■■           .    ' ■   .         Q UEEN’S BENCH DIVISION                            I'-'A ";                       ■             2. Q.B.                 .'QUEEN’S 'BENCH DIVISION                                                991

•;’;£•-A--     second groundc'cannot;' stand. N ow h ere .in that part o f tlie sura-                                       :   ;      i; A cco rd in g ly 'fo r the ireasons 'already given th c .court concluded that
:/l% 7 '       m ing-up relating H o ; the ; second ground is. any m en tion n;t,Cc r,l                                         ;-        the con viction m ust be q u a sh ed ;;;. ■                                               196?
;;Regina ■" the view, the d e fe n d a n ti had form ed as to b ein g able t o .; cd iLt                                    '   ;                                                                      .- ■•; Appeal allowed.     R e g in a

             ■•. trigger w ith o u t ;firin g/a bullet, c o r o f the. experts’ unooir;X'.:s
               .'evidence that-.'.-.his; m istake w as understandable and indeed o n ;                                      ;                ■' S olicitors: Registrar of C rim in a l Appeals; Director- o f - Public
              '■ w h ich ,c o u ld be-expected.;.T he sole reference to this evide:.c_' %c.”                                              Prosecutions. "        - " '        ^    •    %     '    .         '
                                                                                                                                ■i:B
                w hea in. relation,-to-^the,.,first ground the trial judge said :
                                 Mr;V.Cdmyfi!'h a s-la id great stress o n the fact that’ three                             :
                   , w itnesses h ave given certain evidence. O ne w a s .M r , M o -
                        Cafferty            co u ld understand som eon e w ho had no expcr;*-iv.'                           ;
                     ••'would n.ot;'appreciate'that the round to the left o f n c la r c-i                                  :
             -.:     ; w o u ld -m o v e m to ;the’-,barrel’w hen-thc .trigger w as p u lle d 5 iVir.
             •         -Burr sa id : ‘ I w o u ld exp ect the liv e round to be o p p csh o ;uc           v                 :
                        b a r r e lw h e n : ; !; ; p u lle d , th e -trigger and Mr. P ullet;, th :      *                 ;
                 -. . p olice-con stab le, sa id -that lie had n o t a p p r ecia te d . until this                                      .• .-.--- -P H IL L IP S v. B E R K S H IR E C O U N T Y C O U N C IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A aril
                      - case th a t th e >p ulling, o f the trigger m ov ed the ^
               • .. . .M e m b e r s;o f:.th e jury, that- is not the p oint.”         .                                                  H ighw ay— -Private street w orksrrO b jeclion to proposals—-R ig h t o f Pakk.er^C.J.;
                                                                                                                                           -     appeal fro m justices—Justices’ decision that lane not. a private
                -.       T h e gen ^ r^ ;,eft^ t;;b f the sum m ing-up w as thus i                                                       - ' ' street— W hether council a “-person a ggrieved ” by justices’                  ti i i(j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          O ’C onnor
               from the jury' the d efen ce'pu t forward on behalf o f the deL-nJai-l,                        >,            '   ■D        -. i f decision— -Highways A c t p. 1959''(7 & 8 E liz. 2, c. 25), s. 2-75 (1).
               W h en the gravam en o f a charge is crim inal n e g lig e n c e - oi'ic';                                                   Justices— A ppeal to ' quarter sessions— “ Person aggrieved ’’— Private
             - referred to : as : recklessness— o f an accused, th e jury have so                                                        "■ -''• street works— O bjections to icouncil’s proposals o n ground that
               con sid er am on g .'other m atters the state o f his m ind, aud that                                                      .      lane was not a,private street—rC o u n til’s right o f appeal, •' -
               in clud es th e '.q u e stio n " o f w hether o r ' n o t - h e thought tha; u a i                                          •;            A county council, w h ic h 'w a s'b o th the street w orks authority
                w hich he was'"doing-1was; safe; i n the present case it w c c L , o f                                      :              --; .. an d ,the highway authority-for a ru ra l district, passed a resolution
                                                                                                                                    ;e             fo r th e 'c arry in g out of. street...'.works in a certain lane alleged to
               cou rse, have 'been'fully .op en t o ' a jury, if properly directed, 10                        u
                                                                                                                                                   be a private street; but justices found th at it was not''a. private
              ■ find the defendant'.'guilty because they considered ..his v - a t as so                                                            street and quashed the resolution, - -'-             .      "        . ' ■
               there b ein g n o danger w as form ed in a crim inally negligent w ay.                                       ;              .-. A ' On the question whether, th e council w as a “ person, aggrieved ”
                                                                                                                                         .' . . by the justices’ determ ination, within the rnea-.ni.ng o f section 275
               B ut h e w as entitled-.to a direction that, the jury sh ouid ; j h              iniv
                                                                                                                                                    (1) of the Highways Act, 1959,1 and so had 'a -right o f appeal to
               accoun t the, 'fact, that; h e had unaisputedly. form ed that view                                                          "■ -. q u arte r sessions:— ' "               ; ■ ■ ' '.              - - -• -- -
               and that there'was. expert evid en ce as to this being an lii’Oc-sm.-.d-                                     ■                     --- 'H e ld , th at the council was a “ person.” and, since .the result
                                                                                                                                    •F ' -
               able. view . ' s r,., -;, ; '    .   ' .                                                                                             o f the -justices’ order was,;.to.-cast u po n th e cou n cil, the legal
                                                                                                                                                    burden of the expense o f repairing the lane w hich a 'c o n tra r y
               ;; Strong t h o u g h t h e ev id en ce of crim inal ceg lig cn ce -.vcs, the                                                        order would h ave rem oved from it, the cou ncil-w as' a. “ .person
               defendant w as' entitled as o f right to have his. defence considered                                                             •".•aggrieved” w ithin the m eaning of section. 275 of. th e A ct o f 1959
               but he w a s'n o t'a c c o r d e d .th is right and the jury w as left wit]                                                          an d .therefore had. a -right of appeal to q u arter sessions;- that one
                                                                                                                                                    shouid look at the totality, of the council’s powers an d duties
               a direction o n an essential matter. .Those defects o f the                                                                          a n d that no distinction, shouid be drawn, between its functions as
               are such that the verdict cannot stand.                                              - ' G                                           highway authority and its functions as street w orks authority.
                         It w as not suggested b y M r. M athew that this w as a e a s e ' '                      :
               for -the ap plication o f the proviso. Indeed the fact that the-jury - ' -' ..As-A;                                                  [R ep o rted b y   M r s . J e n n i f e r W i n c h , B arrister-at-L aw J
               after such a strong sum m ing-up by the trial jikIp.c yet returned                -
                                                                                                                                               1 Highways Act, !959,_s, 275:                 1Ifvii this Act     lu.     oy
               for further directions w ould o f itself m a k e it d e a r that with                    '■-           - .                  “ (1) ■ Where a person aggrieved by               iactnijiii authorised
                                                                                                                                           an order, deteniiinauon or other                  >uri of quarter se
               correct directions there m ight w ell have been a different verdict.                      -' e.r,;y                         decision of a magistrates’ court
