   HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)
                                                  62
        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE
     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
               STADIUM DISASTER
            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                    Before
DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP
            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                      At
               The Town Hall,
                 Sheffield.
                      On
               4th March, 1991




          TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




    From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
         Official Shorthand Writers,
     55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT



     B.L. MOLE Recalled

          Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole
          Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell
          Further Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien
          Further by The Coroner
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
           SIXTY SECOND DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

              MONDAY. 4th MARCH, 1991


            BRIAN LEONARD MOLE Recalled

           Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

Chief Superintendent, can I start right at very basics.
I don't think it has been emphasised just yet. The
foundation of the policing at Hillsborough lies on a
contract, an annual contract, made between the Chief
Constable and the Club for which the Club actually pay
the Police certain amounts of money for the policing
at Hillsborough? - A. Yes sir.

And part of the Police functions at Hillsborough, in
general, are to assist the Club in enforcing the ground
regulations that are there? - A. Yes.

So slightly outside normal Police function but it is
an unusual situation? - A. Yes sir.

You have described in your evidence the degree of co­
operation that there has been between the Club and the
Police and I think you described it as "first class"?
- A. Yes sir.

And that has been with three Club Secretaries? - A. Yes
indeed sir.

And it has been latterly with Mr. Mackrell? - A. Indeed
it has.

Would it be fair to say that your working relationship
with Mr. Mackrell has been excellent? - A. I would agree
entirely with that sir, yes.

A degree of frankness between the pair of you? - A. That
is correct sir, yes.

You could talk about problems, get through? - A. Openly,
honestly and make the point sir, yes.

I think to take some examples of that in relation to the
Stewards the Police have co-operated very helpfully in
the training of Stewards, that is annually, isn't it?
- A. That is correct sir, yes.

That is not just a casual affair that is a very organised,
detailed briefing in all their aspects and all their
duties? - A. I think it is indeed. They meet altogether
with Police input and training goes on at that time sir,
yes.

It is also true there is a Stewards' booklet, which you
mentioned, with their matchday instructions? - A. Yes
sir.
                                      B.L. MOLE



I believe that has been seen certainly by the Police
Xiaison Officers so that they can inspect and make sure
everything is all right from a Police point of view?
- A. Yes sir.

We also heard on matchdays Stewards would a c t u a l l y be
briefed in each sector that they were operating by
the Inspector at that end of the ground? - A. That
is correct sir, yes.

Just so that we can emphasise those Inspectors, you said,
are the ones that regularly police those particular areas?
- A. Subject to leave and sickness I always try and
ensure that the same Inspector is in the same area at
the same match sir.

Is that because the experience of those Inspectors over
each match, experience of problems, difficulties, is
invaluable towards the general policing and indeed
stewarding of any football game at Hillsborough? - A. I
am sure it is essential sir that the knowledge and
experience has got to be of benefit when policing matches
at Hillsborough or any other stadium.

Another example of the co-operation that has been
between the Club also relates to in some degree the
layout at Hillsborough? - A. Yes sir.

I think it would be fair to say where suggestions have
come from the Police or indeed any other quarter whether
Fire Service or whatever, your experience is they have
tried to help and do what they can to achieve those
suggestions practically? - A. I think they always try
to respond positively as best they can sir, yes.

We know in particular in 1981 that the original suggestion
for vertical sections on the terrace came from the
Police? - A. It has been said sir. I was not privy
to the actual agreement but it has sir.

It would fit in with your general experience from what
you have seen in the records that that was an original
Police suggestion? - A. Absolutely.  I think Robin
Herrold and Bob Gosling were instrumental in that.

How that was practically put into effect is Eastwoods
were instructed, they actually got to grips with the
suggestion and turned it into a real proposition? - A.
That is correct sir, yes.

That is then discussed by the Officer Working Party;
Police; Fire Authority; Building Surveyor, it is approved?
- A. Yes sir.
                                  B.L. MOLE



And what everyone, and I am sure you believed at the
end of it, is that you have the Police suggestion which
is transformed into something which is practical and
safe? - A. That is right, sir, that is my understanding.

The same we saw again in 1985. We know there were a
number of suggestions made. You were referred to some
in relation to the segregation at the back of the West
Stand? - A. Yes sir.

You were presumably aware, because you were Deputy
Divisional Commander at this stage, of the suggestion
made by the Police to have the radial fence in the
centre of the centre pen to create two pens, Pens 3 and 4?
- A. Yes, I discussed I think the other day I was conscious
of Officers being in there and it was segregated with actual
fencing sir.
Again we saw Eastwood putting that into practice? - A. Yes
sir.
Discussed by the Working Party and approved again? - A.
Yes sir.
There was another Police suggestion, I don't know whether
you are aware of it, to have a radial fence in Pen 6
and that one was not actually proceeded with. There was
the creation of what we have called the sterile area,
Pen 5, that was another helpful Police suggestion and
then there was going to be a further radial fence in
Pen 6? - A. If I have forgotten it, I can't remember at
the moment sir.
It does not matter, but again the principle is the same,
from the experience again invaluable to the Officer
Working Party of the Police, they perceived ways of
refining and developing the system; it is put into
concrete terms by Eastwood; then it is discussed from
all angles by the Officer Working Party and at the end
of the day we have what we believe is a safe system?
- A. That is the procedure sir, yes.

It would be fair to say, I assume from that, putting
aside the events of the 15th April 1989, the fences
that we saw at that end of the ground and the layout
at the back to achieve segregation with the wall, the
Police were reasonably happy with that? - A. I policed
that in the belief that it was safe to police it and
to the capacities that were laid down in the Certificate
sir, yes.

I don't think there are many people that believe that
the ground was unsafe in any way. We have heard lots
of evidence to that effect? - A. I think it was thought
to be very safe sir.
                                                             4


                                     B.L. MOLE



Q. In that context can I just briefly take you to a Minute
   of the Officer Working Party in 1985 and it is C393?
   - A. Yes sir.

Q. Do you see that is a Minute dated the 18th of April 1985.
   I don't think you were shown this one by Mr. Payne but
   it is in that context and it is very helpful.

         We can see the purpose of the meeting is to consider
   the plans put forward by Eastwood & Co. In fact these
   plans were not taken any further as we know for other
   reasons? - A. That is correct sir.

Q. Under Section 2 it says:

         "The Police representatives pointed out the
         proposals had been prompted in the main by
         comments they had made to the Club. At
         one time both the West Stand and terrace
         had been regarded as exclusively for the
         use of visiting supporters but recent
         patterns of attendances at the Stadium made
         it necessary to allow for some element of use
         by home supporters as well."

   I think you can confirm, we have heard from Mr. Lock,
   from Dr. Eastwood and other people, that after the pens
   were put in in 1981 the Police policy was to try and
   devote the whole of that end to away supporters if that
   could be achieved, but on occasions over the years on
   the terraces we saw Sheffield Wednesday fans wanting
   to stand and more particularly in the actual Stand
   itself there were some season ticket holders? - A.
   That is right. The Stand itself was in fact a greater
   problem and that was subsequently resolved by Mr. Mackrell
   when he arrived at the Club.

Q. In fact just dealing with that, another example of the
   good working relationship that you built up with
   Mr. Mackrell was the fact by the time he arrived the
   problem was the fact there was supporters, home
   supporters in the seats and there were a handful of
   them and you made a request to him to move them
   elsewhere? - A. Mr. Mackrell acted very positively sir.
   We had had resistance for some time and he received a
   great deal of pressure from those few individuals who
   wished to maintain the West Stand but he in the light
   of my recommendation took the decision and virtually
   overnight removed them from that area, so it was purely
   for visitors.

Q. And he has given evidence that in the whole of his time
   there there were actually no occasions when the home
   supporters were actually on the terraces? - A. That will
   be right sir, yes.
                                  B.L. MOLE
              *   \




That is important in the context you were shown an
Operational Order of 1987, Queen's Park Rangers, C512,
I am not going to take you to it, but it does actually
say in the Operational Order about filling the pens in
accordance with away or home fans, but that was at a
time in February 1987 when there were no home fans on
those terraces? - A. No. I think, as on many occasions,
we had a contingency, and Mr. Mackrell would be aware
of it, is the elevated section was an overspill area.
If I had got a shortfall in the actual Leppings Lane,
i.e. small attendance and I was over capacity with
the home supporters, then on the rare occasions could
use the elevator but we didn't, but it was an option
open to us.

I think, if I can just show you another Operational
Order, this is a more recent one.

      Chief Superintendent, perhaps you can see it
from this. This is an Operational Order dated the
14th of January 1989 and it is actually Sheffield
Wednesday and Liverpool? - A. Yes.

We have got the information - it is very brief, I have
culled out the relevant sections - we got the information
about the anticipated attendance and we see that is
a match CategoiyB+. Does that mean there is a potential
for trouble, it is regarded as an important game? -
A. It is a high category match; large attendance
anticipated and some risk possibly of public disorder
or whatever but quite a high powered type of match.

I take the Operational Order is virtually standard
instructions for all matches? - A. Yes.

Serial 9 and Serial 10:

      "Maintain order. Ensure pens are filled
      in accordance with instructions from
      Control. Occupancy of pens by away fans
      will be given at briefing."

A. Yes sir.

And that is the standard Order that would have been in
operation at league matches? - A. For that type of match,
yes sir.

And that would be the same also for a Category C match?
- A. Yes sir.

                      MR. BEECHEY:   The number
                                                 B. L.' MOLE


     MR. BEECHEY:     The number for the last document is
C.515.

     THE CORONER:     How many pages is it?

     THE WITNESS:     Mine is five, sir.

     THE CORONER:   So we know what we  have got. Page 1
is the Introduction page.   The second  page isSerial 9,
the third page is Serial 10, the fourth page is Serial 11
and the fifth page is Serial 12, is it?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     Yes, it should be Serial 12, sir:

I think going back to the level of co-operation, it would
have been standard practice when you were in command of
the ground before each match to have discussions with
Graham Mackrell as to the expected numbers of away fans?
- A. Indeed, yes.

That would be important, presumably, because you would
want to know how many Police Officers you were going to
have to deploy, what category match it is going to be,
and it all assists your policing role, particularly
outside the ground? - A. That's right.   It is all part
of the intelligence and build-up of our plans.

Also, presumably, you sat down and discussed, as I
understand it, which turnstiles were going to be opened
if it was a small match because that assisted Control as
to where those fans were going to go? - A. That's right,
sir.

Again, we had you discussing this matter, but again it is
a matter the club have co-operated in, it is a matter of
segregation and it is an unhappy feature of the modern
game that segregation is necessary? - A. Yes, sir.

It is something that most Police Officers are extremely
conscious of because they are at the sharp end when you
got to problems of public disorder? - A. That is correct,
sir.

I think it is fair - and I had better say at the outset I
am certainly not criticising you on this - when Graham
Mackrell approached you to see whether you could police
the semi-finals in 1987, 1988 and 1989, the most
important stipulation you made was that the ends ought to
be allocated so that one set of fans went through
Leppings Lane into the West Stand and North Stand and the
others in through Penistone Road? -A. I was very positive
on the split within the club, sir, in segregation terms.

It is a very important factor? -A. Very important, sir.
                                               B. L.' MOLE


We know from Mr. Mackrell that he discussed flow rates
through the turnstiles.   You had discussed it, no doubt,
on many occasions before and were quite satisfied that
that wasn't going to cause any undue problems at the
Leppings Lane end? - A. I think Mr. Mackrell was
satisfied he could cope with the split I had got and I
was aware of the turnstile flows and discussed that
briefly with him.

If there was any doubt in your mind that you would not
have been able to cope on the policing side outside those
turnstiles you no doubt would have said something and
said you could not police the match? - A. Indeed I would,
sir.

So when my learned friend Mr. King was asking you
questions about adding up numbers, whatever, as a simple
matter of policing you were satisfied that you could get
those fans in through those turnstiles? - A. As I have
said, having done it twice before, it worked.   Nothing
had happened which attracted my mind to suggest anything
had changed since that time and I was quite confident
that the plans introduced before could cope with the
situation on this occasions, sir.

On both occasions when that split was decided upon, there
was the agreement of the FA and the two clubs involved? -
A. Essential, sir, yes.

Can I move on to something slightly different and that is
the deployment of stewards.   We know from the evidence
given recently, you, along with the club, wouldn't have
expected stewards to be physically present on the
Leppings Lane terraces? - A. Not on a full capacity
match, sir.

Not on any match? - A. My only caveat to that is to say
that occasionally stewards would stand on the corners of
the West Stand of the terraces if they weren't in use and
had viewing positions, but certainly not amongst crowds.

Yes, thank you.   Again, it is an unhappy fact with the
modern game that football fans in general pay little
regard to stewards and they have a difficult job to do?
Is that fair? - A. I think they have an extremely
difficult job and you are quite right, they pay little
regard to them in general.

I think from your own experience at Hillsborough it is
fair to say that they had difficulty getting away fans to
sit down in the West Stand? -A. That is often the case.

It is particularly so if you have got a capacity match
when the fans immediately before the match very often are
                                                B. L.' MOLE


standing.   They are talking to their friends.   They are
trying to get down to the front to see anyone in the
terraces and actually trying to get them into their seats
is a major headache? - A. I think it is, sir.

Again, I know from the consequent view of the Police
Officers actually in the West Stand, rendering valuable
assistance, actually helping the stewards to achieve that
end? - A. I think there is a cross flow of help and
assistance between stewards and Police Officers in
carrying out their respective roles.

For similar reasons, and an additional reason we will
come to, there are no stewards deployed on the perimeter
track? - A. Not deployed, sir.   I think there is the odd
steward who passes through, but in position terms there
aren't any in the front.   I think on occasions they are
on corners, taking my memory back to the four corners
available, but that is about the extent of it.

Is one of the reasons for that a very practical reason,
and important again to the policing of the match, the
more people you get in front of the fans and the
terraces, the more you block the view? - A. Yes.

The more upset the fans get and therefore possible
problems with public disorder? - A. It is an extension of
the banning on banners and flags on the terraces because
it is an obstruction which can cause frustrations,
tempers to flare and encourage disorder, which is
something we are trying to prevent.

You were shown copies of the ACPO Guide and the Police
Standing Instructions? - A. Yes.

Those are internal Police documents, aren't they? - A.
They are, sir, yes.

They would not be available to the club, although no
doubt the advice that is in them would be transferred? -
A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Again, Mr. King asked you a number of questions about the
need for a detailed pre-arranged schedule on the
deployment of stewards to be agreed between the Police
and the club in line with those particular instructions?
- A. The Police, the club and I think another Officer of
the Working Party.   It is to do with the Certificate as
well, sir.

It is everyone? - A. Yes.

I think that at least at one stage you started to answer
that as far as you were concerned there was such a
                                                     B. L. MOLE


schedule and that was the Safety Certificate? - A. I did
   mention it the other day.   As far as I am concerned it
   was contained as part of the Safety Certificate, the
   identification and location of stewards in the stadium,
   and I think that is an agreed plan.

Q.    The   importance of that from your point of   view iswhen
     you are in command of the match you have got to know
     where the stewards are? - A. That's right.   The Chief
     Stewards are identified and they are able to relate to
     the various Serials who are deployed in the same location
     who should have the knowledge because when emergency
     evacuation comes into being then the training they are
     given out of season is to move to certain doors, passages
     etc. in readiness to open those gates or doors if the
     command is received.

Q. You would have had a copy of the Safety Certificate, I
   assume? - A. Yes.

Q.    So you would have had knowledge, and that is where you
     got your knowledge from.    That   is where you and your
     Officers would have expected to see stewards on the day?
     - A. That's right.    I think that would be agreed at the
     various meetings with the stewards as to what positions
     they take up.




         Q. I think you found the stewarding
I think you found the stewarding arrangements in
1987/1988 to be to your satisfaction? - A. That is
right, sir, yes. Sometimes they sit down and they have
to be encouraged to work but other than....

Human nature and I am not going to take issue with
that. Can I just ask you to actually look at the
Safety Certificate, Chief Superintendent? It is C.381
in the bundle.  I should say before we go to it that
there was an additional example of Police co-operation,
Police and Club co-operation, and I am not sure whether
you would have been aware of it but do you recall there
was a request made by the Police for extra stewards at
the Semi Final in 1989 but at the Kop because of the
problems that had occurred with Liverpool fans? - A. I
do not, sir, no. I am not aware of it.

If you look at the Safety Certificate and if you go to
page 4, clause 9, it sets out that the Club should
arrange for a number of safety stewards specifically in
order to carry out the following:

    "(1) Manning of exits as indicated on the
    plans

    (2) Control and direction of spectators
    entering using or leaving the Stadium

    (3) Patrolling the Stadium and dealing with
    any emergency including raising an alarm and
    extinguishing any small fire."

A. Yes, sir.

If one goes to Schedule 3 which is on page 10 we see in
Part 2, safety stewards? - A. Yes.

It says:

    "The minimum number of Safety Stewards required
    for each function shall be as follows   "

and in (2), which is really the important one:

    "Control and direction of spectators entering
    or leaving the Stadium"

Then you go down and it has all the sections of the
stadium there and the number required for each
function, 1, 2, 3 and you will see 2 which is the
control and direction of spectators? - A. Yes.
                                                                      11

                                                             B. L. MOLE

         Q. We see from the list there that in contra-distinction
            to the list for capacities there are, in fact, no
            stewards required for directing fans on to the Leppings
    B       Lane terrace or the North West Terrace in relation to
            the stands themselves? - A. That is what it says, yes.

         Q. I think that deals with my learned friend Hr. King's
            point about the pre-arranged schedule. Can I turn to
            the systems that would have been operated? At League
            matches we know there was the sequential filling of
            pens? - A. Yes.

        Q. That was a system that had been developed and refined
           over the years since the pens had been installed? - A.
           Yes.

        Q. We have seen the Operational Order and it says that you
           fill the pens in accordance with instructions from
           Control and that would have applied, as I understand
           it, to all League matches? - A. That is correct, sir,
           yes.

        Q. Those instructions obviously are directed to Police
           Officers? - A. Yes, sir.

        Q. In fact it would be those Officers who would be at that
           end of the ground who would be physically pointing
           people and directing people into certain pens? - A.
           Yes, sir, in liaison with the stewards.

        Q. We have seen where the stewards were deployed but you
           would agree with me on the day the Police Officers
           would the ones who would be directing? - A. The point I
                is that the stewards would know which pens we were
           using in terms and they would be aware of that
           information.

        Q. So if they were asked they could direct? - A.
           Absolutely.

        Q. That system is employed week in and week out? - A. That
           is right, sir, yes.

        Q. The importance of having experienced Officers at that
           end of the ground we have been into, or any end of the
           ground, where you mention names, in particular of some
           Inspectors? - A. Yes.

        Q* ^ think there was Sykes, Calvert and Creaser, who is
           now Chief Inspector Creaser? - A. That is correct, sir,
           yes.




H
I believe it was also Inspector White on the day.  is
he an experienced Officer? - A. Indeed he is, yes.

They would be the particular Officers who brief the
stewards as to their relative functions? - A. All those
respective Officers work that end on many times and
carry out the function of Serial Commanders on that
location and would brief stewards as to the position,
sir.

Whatever system, and there has been some discussion in
relation to Hr. Lock's evidence, Dr. Eastwood's
evidence and your understanding of how it was going to
be achieved, but putting that aside for the moment
whatever system is in operation that requires, at some
stage, a judgment to be exercised that a particular pen
is comfortably full so that another pen needs to be
open? - A. If we are talking about sequential filling.

I am sticking with sequential filling? - A. That is
correct, sir.

Those instructions would come from Control as seen in
the Operational Order? - A. Yes, sir.

Presumably Control did not only rely on itself but did
it get its information from elsewhere? - A. Indeed,
sir, yes.   It would depend. Initially you have seen
the figures on that order which talked about how many
were expected. You can never tell how many can be
expected. The weather has an effect on it, the day,
and it might well be that you are expecting a couple of
thousand or a couple of hundred.  If, on the day, that
increases then that intelligence is always coming in
during the course of the day to say more en route, more
coaches, more trains or whatever, and it might well
dictate the desire to use two pens, three pens or the
whole area. There is that information. There is
information from the Club who also have an update.
Ticket sales, tell us how they are going, if they have
gone any better or worse.

Particularly in looking at the pens if you are sitting
in Control you get your information from the Club
Control Room as to how many are actually in? - A. Not
exactly how many are in because there is no way of
counting how many are in.

That is perfectly fair. How many had come through the
turnstiles that should... - A. That is right. So that
you would know out of the 10,100 X number had come
through which would give you some indication of the
kind of numbers. Visual interpretation would see that
   they are either half full or full and we would know
   there was more to come, that is the point.  If there is
   more to come you would open another.

Q. Where would that visual interpretation come from? - A.
   It would come from the Inspectors, liaison with the
   chief stewards if they looked at it as well, the
   Control Box, the perimeter track, an overview
   generally. Basically the decision would be taken by
   the Ground Control Officer.  I think evidence had been
   given it was referred to me where an Inspector had said
   to him, "We look as if we are well up now. Can we now
   open the next pen?" and that kind of overall general
   information can be fed to Control and that decision
   would be taken.

Q. I think you said there were six Officers in the West
   Stand who were looking over.  Is that the normal
   position? - A. That is right, sir. It is one of the
   best views in the stadium. The Police Box is the best
   overall view of the whole stadium with a good view of
   the Leppings Lane terraces but the best view of the
   terrace is the one from the West Stand, the bottom of
   the gangways where you can actually see over on to the
   actual terrace.

Q. You have the Officers on the perimeter track? - A. On
   the perimeter track who can also see.

Q. And actually phone the Control Box? - A. Yes.

Q. Then you have the cameras with the zoom facility but
   did you also go down and look yourself? - A. I did.
   When I was in charge of matches I would look and see as
   well.

Q. Is that because you wanted to be sure in your own mind?
   - A. That is absolutely right.   I would look at every
   area and the Kop as well.   It is all part of it that I
   from my style that I would describe.   I would take a
   look at all the areas, see if I have got infiltrators
   even in the seated areas, who might be other supporters
   who had got into wrong areas which I could detect by
   favours or whatever. So I would look at it all and
   then that whole information, would make a decision or a
   judgment to be made.

Q. The aim of that, because we know the fundamental tenets
   of policing are public safety and public order, the aim
   of that is that combined, you were discussing, but to
   make sure in particular that the people in those pens
   are safely accommodated, that they do not get overfull?
   - A. Safely accommodated, yes, sir.
Q. They do not get overfull? - A. Absolutely, sir.

Q. That judgment in effect, whatever purpose it has, at
   some stage it is right to open another pen and let
   people go into the area? - A. Quite clearly we have
   made a constraint on the area and if it was a
   constraint which was not capable of being dealt with
   then it had to be widened.

Q. There was a question put to you that you quite properly
   answered that you would not be monitoring the numbers
   going into the pen. You have answered that yourself
   today by saying you cannot monitor numbers because
   there is no control? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. You do not want to leave the impression with this Jury
   that you were not monitoring the safety of the crowd? -
   A. Absolutely not.  I think you can take a view, I have
   restricted an area. If it is becoming full and I know
   there is another 10 or 15 coaches to come which carry a
   certain.  I know there is 500, common sense would
   dictate to me that I would widen the scope of area for
   people to stand in.

Q. As a matter of fact again, the result of that system,
   whatever purpose is employed and we understand your
   main desire was segregation? - A. Yes.

Q. The practical result of that was to ensure the crowd
   were comfortably and safely accommodated in those pens?
   - A. That was a natural spin off, sir, from that.

Q. That, as we know, is exactly what the Green Guide in
   its guidance gives advice to stewards to achieve? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. I am not going to suggest, because it would not be
   right, that Policemen become stewards because that is
   not your function? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. The effect of the system was to do on a League match
   with sequential filling what the stewards or otherwise
   are exhorted to achieve in the Green Guide? - A. I
   think the natural reaction as a consequence of
   segregation is that we take on some function in liaison
   with the stewards.    I do not think it overrides their
   overall responsibilities but we take the command role,
   as indicated in the notes of guidance, when it comes to
   P u"tting our imposition on it for segregation purposes
   to sequentially fill the pens. Having taken on that
   function then the extension of that is clearly our
   responsibility.
You don t need a written agreement to tell you that you
nave to make sure that the crowd is safe? - A. I would
expect to Mr. Mackrell because the relationship was as
it was, that was what I was doing, one pen, two pens to
start with, I would discuss him whether I was to use
the elevated or the north west, that would be related
to the stewards so they knew exactly what we were doine
on the day.                                            6

It is not doubt because that system was discussed in
the Officer Working Party that we see there were no
amendments made to the Safety Certificate to require
the stewards to be actually directing people onto the
terraces? - A. I presume so, sir, yes.

Some evidence was read quite extensively to you from
Mr. Lock and I think Mr. Manning read to you a passage
in which Mr. Lock quite rightly, in this Court, spoke
very highly indeed of you as an Officer and his
experience of working under you, and I think you would
say the same of Mr. Lock, he was a very experienced
Officer? “ A. I think I said that earlier on, a very
experienced, capable and professional Police Officer,
sir.                                                 ’

I don't know whether you remember the actual dates but
         evidence that he finished work in December,
1984? - A. That is right.   I think, in fact, he
finished then but had a lot of leave before he actually
retired.   He retired in 1985.

That is right, he retired   in February '85. - A. Yes,
something in that region,   sir.

It is right to say that he was never actually Ground
Controller when you were the Divisional Commander but
only when you were Deputy Divisional Commander? - A.
Yes, or Acting Divisional Commander. It depends on
what role I was carrying out at the time.

His evidence again was, and I think you agreed with
this but correct me if I am wrong, that it would only
be on the occasions when the Divisional Commander was
not available to police a match that Hillsborough that
^Ati*         would have been in overall command on an
 A category match when he was Ground Controller? - A.
That is correct, sir.

So it is on occasions as opposed to regularly? - A.
That is right.

Going back slightly to the filling of the pens, you
actually did not do this at any stage, as I understand
it, in your career, whether as an Inspector or Chief
                                             B. L. MOLE

Inspector? That was not a function you carried out,
you were always in command? - A. No, I have policed
Hillsborough many, many years ago as a PC in the
sixties when the World Cup was on, but I have never had
a responsibility for the actual running of the
terraces, it has always been in a command position at
Sheffield Wednesday, although I have done it at
Sheffield United.

The main difference, as I understood your evidence,
between that and the system described by Mr. Lock is
that he actually took positive action to prevent entry
of fans into an area which he considered to be full? -
A. He has given that evidence, sir, yes.

Can you just describe again the system that you would
have employed if you were opening up another pen, for
my benefit?   If you are sequentially filling a pen and
a judgment is taken that it has reached the proper
level, what would you then do? - A. Whilst I have been
in command - it would be a category "B" like the one
you have shown me, and in fact I think I was in command
at that match, I can't be sure - that decision would,
of course, be taken by the Ground Controller, but I
have seen it done.   I have never ever seen the tunnel
blocked off or the instruction given to do it, and I
would expect, as I have tried to say earlier, seeing
the numbers that are coming, bearing in mind the
anticipated numbers, one comes to a point where you
realise there is a lot more to come, and it is that
fine decision, and that would be taken rather earlier
than later.  I don't believe in crisis policing, in
that we are getting to the point where we think, "My
goodness now is the time to stop it and let's open the
gate".  In that sequential filling it is a matter of
looking and saying, "Yes, it's fairly close now, open
the gate", and I would do nothing more than that.   I
think I said in evidence that I wouldn't be closing the
tunnel.  That seems to me like a measure that is rushed
upon me, and if I was having to take that course of
action I would argue I had got too far in my sequential
filling in the first juncture, I would be opening it
earlier rather than later.

I think you actually mentioned that you seemed to
remember Mr. Creaser coming up and saying, "Can we open
the pen?", as opposed to, wCan we close it?"? - A.
Absolutely.  Mr. Creaser would not be saying can we
close it - can we open another one, that's how I would
see it, and I believe that is the way it should be
done, that we would be looking at it, "We are getting
fairly well together now, let s move it and widen it up
a bit to another one", not saying, "Goodness, gracious,
we're full, let's close it off".
                                              B. L. MOLE

I might come back to that.   I want to talk about the
planning andthe Operational Order.  Again   you were
asked a number of questions by Mr. King about the
planning? - A. Yes.

He put to you and you disagreed with him that the
obvious route onto those terraces was through the
tunnel?   - A. I did disagree with him, sir. It is an
obvious route but it is the obvious route of routes
that are available, sir.

Is it your experience that not all the fans that attend
want to go down that tunnel? - A. Absolutely, sir, yes.

Of course, that is because the normal entry is through
the turnstiles? - A. It is, sir, yes.

You have given evidence of what fans did, they come in
more slowly? - A. Yes.

They slow down, they mingle, they go and get
refreshments and they go elsewhere, and they find their
way round to their favoured viewing positions? - A.
That is right.  There is no sense of rush.   They come
through the turnstiles, there is a serial deployed to
search and direct them on both sides of the turnstiles;
there is an element of searching even once they have
come through.  There is a slowing down process at the
back of the turnstiles.  There is a need to use toilet
facilities, to go and fetch refreshment, and there is a
lack of urgency in the general gradual entrance into
the Stadium.

We know on the day there was an exceptional entry and
we have heard evidence that some 2,000 fans came
through gate C. That is not something you have ever
experienced, is it? - A. No, sir.

We were told that it was roughly a row of some six fans
every second going through gate C, so row upon row
marching through? - A. Fine, sir.

If that evidence is accepted that would be, I imagine,
quite a fast entry.  I am not suggesting they were
running but it is quite fast, it is en bloc, if you
have got six fans? - A. It seems that way, sir.

From a Police point of view would different
considerations apply to a block of fans moving at a
fairly rapid pace to the normal entry through
turnstiles? - A. I think it depends what the purpose of
the entry is, sir.  I made the point the other day that
in the circumstances I have been given the purpose of
entry was to relieve trauma and tension and pressure
                                             B. L. MOLE

outside.  My experience - and I mean in general public
order terms - is when I am relieving such a thing, then
the first thing in people*s minds is to recover
themselves and regain composure, and that is what I
would expect.  If it was a matter of releasing the
gates to get them into seats, then yes it would pose me
another --- if that was the intention then it would
pose me another problem.

I just want to explore something, drawing on your
experience, because it could be quite important.
Assume for the moment that the fans that came through
gate C were not the ones that were suffering the
crushing at the turnstiles? - A. Right.

So that the ones being crushed up at the front of the
turnstiles are not naturally going to get round to gate
C. - A. No.

So we are at a stage fairly close to kick-off when the
fans coming through gate C are actually intent on going
in to watch the match? - A. Yes, sir.

They have not been subjected to as much crushing and
difficulty as at the front. - A. So we are not
relieving their tension, yes.

You are relieving, and I am not at all seeking to
challenge this, you are relieving the pressure on those
who are being crushed. - A. Yes.

If you have got rank upon rank moving one second, six
people through gate C, so it is bang, bang bang - that
was the sort of level - is it your experience of
general crowd behaviour that they tend to follow the
leader? They build up a flow? - A. I think probably in
general terms in those circumstances that would be the
case.  There would be an element of them who were doing
exactly what I have described, moving to the sides,
leaning on the walls, gathering themselves, but in
general that would be ....

It would be an element? - A. Yes, sir.

Just to be fair to you, I ought to tell you that the
evidence that has been given is that even with people
coming through at that rate, approaching 70% did not
       £ 80 int? Pens 3 and    so it is between 30% and
34a on best estimates who went into pens 3 and 4 even
with that exceptional entry. - A. So you are saying, in
fact, they did what I described? - A. Yes.

It was not an obvious route, but ....
                                             B. L. MOLE

     THE CORONER:   Just a minute, Mr. Catchpole.   I
know where you get your percentage from because you
have worked it out on the numbers in the respective
pens, but I am not sure whether you can necessarily
extrapolate from an overall percentage split to a
specific on the people who came through the gate.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, I am sorry, I certainly was
not intending to do that.

To be fair, when you come through gate C, if you are
moving in this solid flow of people one of the first
things you see is the tunnel, isn't it? - A. Yes, sir.




             /Q. This is at a time
                                      B.L. MOLE
              ♦   *




This is at a time, on our hypothesis, is very close to
kick-off? - A. As I understand it sir, yes.

      MR. CATCHPOLEs Sir, I certainly did not intend
to give that evidence.

      THE CORONER:    That is fine.

       MR. CATCHPOLE: Again to be fair, on this hypothesis,
of people coming through at this rate and again a matter
for the jury if this evidence is accepted, just to be
fair to the individual Police Officers who are positioned
behind the turnstiles, when you have got a flow of people
is it that much more difficult to direct if the flow is .
already established than if you have been, told in advance
that you can make preparation? - A. I think that is
probably true, yes sir.

So if you are anticipating a problem you have got to tell
the people on the ground:  "Get into position because
you may have this problem"? - A. If you have the time and
the opportunity that is correct, yes.

If those Officers who were behind the turnstiles are not
told for example that the gate is going to be opened
that necessarily hampers their ability to react to the
situation that then occurs? - A. Well they probably1would
not react as quickly as they would had they been briefed
before sir.

And also if there is a need to direct fans away from a
particular area they again need to be told that a parti­
cular area should not be allowed .... A. In general sir,
yes, unless they actually saw a problem which they
reacted to but normally I would accept we should say
to them:  "Stop going where ....

Talking in specific terms about the Police Officers
behind the pens, the same would be true of the Stewards
that were in that particular area? - A. Yes sir.

Turning to planning for the semi-final itself, 1987 was
something of a new thing for you, a capacity match at
Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes, it was.

You by this time had obviously gained considerable
experience of Hillsborough? - A. Yes sir.

And you devised a system that you considered to be the
safest system for the way of filling those terraces
which is "find your own level"? - A. Yes sir.

And if it had not been a safe system you would not have
operated it? - A. That is right sir, yes.
                                                         21


                                     B.L. MOLE



Q. I think we have some aspects reflected in the Operational
   Order again that was drawn up as to precise measure
   of safety. We have seen the general intention, police
   at safety, and again we have heard from many Officers
   they don't need to be told they have got to look after
   the public safety? - A. That is right sir.

Q. But presumably that is one of the reasons why Officers
   are on the perimeter track, again as they are at league
   matches, to make sure that the crowd in those pens are
   safe? - A. All areas of the ground sir, yes.

Q. Please understand the only reason I focus on Leppings
   Lane is so that we don't extend it unnecessarily but this
   applies generally. Again that is why we see the six
   Officers stationed at the front of the West Stand so that
   they can look down on to the pens as well? -A. That is one
   of their functions sir, yes.

Q. Again public safety? - A. Yes.

Q. I think it is also one of the advantages that you
   perceived in arriving at the players' tunnel at about
   10-to-3 was that you could actually view the overall
   packing of the ground - and I use that word advisedly -
   the overall packing of the ground in Leppings Lane and
   at the Kop for your own purposes? - A. Yes  sir.

Q. And if you in that position in 1987 or 1988 saw any­
   thing that caused you trouble or anxiety, you would have
   done something about it? - A. Indeed I would sir, yes.

Q. So what is the advantage of the players' tunnel in
   particular.   Is it because you get a good view? - A.
   You get an overview.   I have an overview from the Police
   Control, but the players' tunnel is where attention is
   focused at that time of the day. People are coming on
   to the pitch.   It gives me an indication as to if I have
   got supporters infiltrating the areas because if
   Liverpool come on the pitch and I see people cheering
   in the Notts, end then I can do something about it.
   If Notts, come on the pitch and I see them cheering in
   the Liverpool end I can do something about it and it
   gives me that general overview so that I know I have
   got segregation maintained and a fair balance. You can
   see flags appear; banners appear; you can see movement
   that people can get their arms up to wave banners etc.
   You can see all the things that give you indications.
   It is a minute's flash but at least you can get a
   perception.

Q. So your primary concern is packing and one of the
   functions of that is again safety of the people for
   whatever reason? - A. Segregation, safety, public order,
   all rolled into one ball looking at the whole overview
   of the ground sir.
                                   B.L. MOLE



I want to enter the mechanics of the system of "finding
their own level". We have heard, particularly Mr. Lock
and others speak very high of Chief Inspector Creaser.
Was he one of the Officers you handpicked? - A . Excellent
Officer sir. Well experienced; knows the functions
and roles, particularly in the West Stand and terraces.

Yes, he has given evidence.  In fact he did the duty as
Inspector from about 1981-1987 and subsequently as
Chief Inspector he is there and 80% of his time is
actually at Leppings Lane end? - A. That is right sir,
yes.

His evidence was that he received an Order from Police
Control to the effect that it was "find your own level".
He wanted to check the system and that would be con­
sistent with the Operational Order that you devised?
-A. When did he get the Order sir?

On the day. - A. In 1989?

1989.- A. I was not aware of that but yes sir.

It is consistent with the Operational Order. The reason
I put to you is because you designed the Operational
Order? - A. Yes indeed.

I want to just take you through some of the evidence
that he has given to this Inquest.  I apologise if it
is a little bit repetitive but I hope it will become
clear why I am putting it to you after I have finished.

      Sir, for your note it is Wednesday, 5th December 1990
I actually have not got the day number written on the
transcript.

      THE CORONER:   I can find that.

      MR. CATCHPOLE: He gave evidence starting at
page 28F-G sir. I will start with his answer to a
question which was in hypothetical terms about dis­
tribution of fans. He then went on and said:

      ".... I will talk now in more specific
      terms, at Hillsborough if there is for
      example when there is a league match away
      fans coming then I would certainly fill one
      or other of the two central pens first and
      it might be that that is the entire
      complement of away fans but I would try to
      facilitate the people as much as I can
      within my terms of reference to watch the
      game of football they have come to watch."
                                                           23

                                   B.L. MOLE



This is in answer to my learned friend Mr. King.
Turning the page to page 29D the question was put to
him:

      "And one of the ways you can do that ...."
      which is directing the fans and ensuring
      they go into pens       just coming now to
      the Hillsborough ground, is for example
      you can cordon off or block off a tunnel
      which is the means of entry on to the centre
      pens and direct people round the sides.
      That is one way of controlling the numbers
      going into a given pen, isn't it? - A.
      It is, yes sir."

Again for your note, sir, page 33, starting at letter E,
Mr. King asked the question:

      "If the pen is too full for the safety of
      the persons in it       and Mr. Creaser
      interrupted quite properly said:  "A. We
      don't let that situation arise."

Mr. King:

      "I am sorry? - A. You should not let that
      situation arise."

Mr. King again:

      "You shouldn't let it arise, right. Well,
      I agree with you, so what provision was
      there in the Operational Order designed to
      prevent, shall we say the centre pens,
      getting too full? What was the system in
      operation on 15th April directed to that
      problem? - A. The situation would be that
      Officers would be told, 'Do not allow any
      more fans entry' into whichever pen was
      causing the problem."

Again for your note sir 34C.   Mr. King again:

      "What I want to know is who on 15th April,
      which Officers, had the specific duty of
      preventing fans getting into Pens 3 and 4
      when they had become too full? - A. You
      misunderstood me. What I am saying is that
      if the pen became full then I or another Officer
      present, on their experience of policing
      that football match, would make a decision
      it is time now to stop any more fans entering
      a particular area, wherever that may be, and
      the Officers deployed there would be dependent
      upon the Officers available for deployment
      at that time."
                                  B.L. MOLE



It then goes on at page 35B-C, I am sorry for the
length of this but I will put the questions in a moment.
Question, Mr. King:
     "I do understand that.  I am trying to
     find out - there may not have been - whether
     there was a specific plan in the operation
     planning for first of all discovering
     whether or not, say, the centre pens were
     too full, and then for taking steps to
     ensure fans didn't go into the centre pens.
     What was the system which was going to be
     put into operation? - A. The system would
     be that when the information was received
     that the pens were full, in fact, that would
     be as they were approaching becoming full,
     some positive action would be taken to
     prevent more fans entering that part of
     the ground.

     Q. Let me take that in stages then. To
     whom would the information be sent? - A.
      To the people controlling the match.
      Q. And who were they on 15th April, 1989?
      - A. There was a set up, the Police Ground
      Cbntrol, which would be headed by a Chief
      Superintendent, who would be assisted by a v
      staff of four or five people in his Control
      Room.

Then further down just below letter 'E':

      "Q. So you say the information would be
      passed to them, right? - A. In some respects
      they would be one of the sources of the
      information because an Officer at the rear
      concourse, or an Officer who walked down
      the tunnel, would perhaps gain the
      impression that the centre pens were full,
      and I have done it myself.  I have radioed
      back and said - at different matches -
      'These pens are full', only to be advised
      by those in control to say, 'No, they are
      not full actually, there is plenty of room
      at the front.'"

Then I think lastly 37E:

     "Q. You are not suggesting though, are you,
     that there was a specific briefing dealing
     with a potential problem of overcrowding,
     are you? - A. What I am suggesting is that
     in the informal briefings people will have
     been advised to monitor how the pens are
     filling up.
                                                            25


                                     B.L. MOLE



        Q. You are saying that? - A. I am saying
        that, yes.  In fact, I received specific
        instructions myself to that effect.

        Q. From whom? - A. Superintendent Murray."

  Now you will be relieved to hear that is the end of my
  quotations.  It has probably become obvious why I ....
  - A. Yes, I understand sir.

Q. That accords with the system that was described in
   evidence by Mr. Lock and Dr. Eastwood and the thrust
   of his evidence was that the system of "find your own
   level" as far as he was concerned, senior Officer, was
   that it required through Police surveillance a level
   of monitoring in order that a judgment could be made
   whether that particular system was in fact successful
   on the day and if it wasn't positive action would be
   taken to direct fans in a different way.

         Now was that in your mind what should be done
   in operating this system when you were planning it?
   - A. I don't take any exception to what has been said
   at all and I think in earlier evidence I have agreed
   entirely.  I think the question is when it is recognised
   something is done about it and this is the emphasis
   I have tried to put on. The Kop fills in its own way
   and when something is recognised that it is wrong it
   is responded to.

Q. I understand that. - A. The same applies to the terraces.

Q. I understand that entirely, Chief Superintendent. The
   difference with this is that Mr. Creaser appears to
   have understood that there was a change, there was
   obviously a change in the way it was policed but the
   emphasis was still a requirement that someone should
   be monitoring those terraces so that if_ for example
   there was a need to direct people in different directions
   that instruction would come from control or from one
   of the senior Officers and the Officers would then
   direct people to other routes? - A. I can't say if there
   was a change in policing policy because 1989 of course
   I was not there.

Q. I am interested in what you understood. Was that the
   way the system was going to be operated? - A. My under­
   standing was quite clear that the pens found their
   own level.  If, as any of the Officers in positions
   of overview either from above the Control Box or the
   front saw a difficulty I had an expectancy that they
   would alert me or the Control to it and I would respond
   to it and that really is the extent of how I see it
   without having a specific plan and I think so far as
                                    B.L. MOLE



the mention of Mr. Lock and Mr. Eastwood are concerned
there was a little confusion, I think I said the other
day, Mr. Lock has never experienced the "find its own
level" in policing terms and there is some confusion
with his league match system.

You see that is a separate point which I will come back
to in a moment.  I will just make a note of that.

      Can I put the question again so that we can be
quite clear. Do you envisage that there was a require­
ment for Police surveillance in order that a judgment
could be made as to whether the system, if it had been
adopted, had been successful, or whether some positive
action needed to be taken in order to avert a dangerous
situation? - A. No, I expected the Police and Stewards
to alert me to any problem they saw but not to be
specifically briefed to monitor as to whether or not
the "finding its own level" was working because my
experience was that it had worked.




                    Q. Can I just
                                                                    27

                                                            E. L.~ MOLE


        Q. Gan I just show you a passage from your evidence to the
           Taylor Inquiry?   It is Day 7, page 21.   If you look
           just below F you will see thee is a question from Lord
           Justice Taylor.   Can you read that and the answer? - A.
    B      Yes, sir.

        Q. Do you accept that evidence and stand by that? - A. I
           think that is absolutely right.

        Q. I will follow Mr. King's example and I will read the
           question and if you could give the answer I would be
           grateful.   Lord Justice Taylor:

                  "Q. Does there come a point - you have said several .
                  times that you rely upon the filling to find its
                  level - but does there come a point at which Police
                  surveillance would have to judge whether that had
                  been successful or whether a dangerous situation was
                  arising?"

             A.   "A. I think, sir, that is absolutely right."

        Q.        "Q. Is there a specific order to that effect?"

             A.   "A. No, sir.   The Control Box is situated in such a
                  position that it can see very clearly all aspects of
                  the ground.   In addition the cameras are generally
                  on that particular area because it is usually the
                  visitors area and we watch that.   If that problem
                  was seen, and I can say from my experience, has not
                  arisen, but had it arisen then I would as Commander,
                  or Mr. Murray as the Controlling Operator, would
                  have reacted to it."

        Q. I just want to go back to the question: did you envisage
           there would have to be some level of Police surveillance
           in order to... - A. I don't think I have ever argued with
           that, sir.   What I have said...   You asked me if there
           had been some change in policy and I had introduced a
           level of surveillance to make me aware.   What I am
           saying is that no, I have not.   I have an expectancy
           that the Officers, and the stewards, would carry out that
           function and if it came to the point that their
           assessment was that it wasn't working they would alert me
           and I would react to it.   That is the only expectancy I
           would have, sir, but I have not written a plan into it.

        Q. You understood, or expected in the plan, that there would
           be monitoring of those terraces? - A. There always is,
           sir.

        Q. You would have expected that if there was a problem that
           would have been brought to your attention as Police




H
                                                B. L.- MOLE


Control?   In the plan, brought to the Ground
Controller's attention? - A. Yes.

He then makes a judgment based on the information
available to him about what he is going to do? - A. Yes,
sir.    What I am saying is there is no specific plan for
"find its own level , as there isn't a plan for "sit down
in the North Stand."    However, if it is seen, I expect
it to be reported to me.    I would respond to it and take
action.

The reason I am exploring this is partly arising out of
the questions put by my learned friend Mr. King.     Now I
may have come to a mistaken impression of the evidence
you gave.   I want to be fair, because I will develop it
if necessary.   You are not saying, as I understand it,
that the system of "find your own level" was simply a
willy-nilly let the fans rush in and do what they want? -
A. Absolutelyinot, sir.   What I am saying is I would
expect Officers to carry out those functions regularly,
in any area, anywhere, any time, to monitor, assess and
maintain public safety.   I don t expect anybody to be
allowed to run in in a mass and put themselves at risk
and do things you are trying to describe now.    The
monitoring is a continual function.   If a recognition
occurs, that would be reported to me and I would take
positive action, or whoever it was reported to.

I am glad it wasn't willy-nilly.   That again goes back
to the importance of having experienced Officers in that
situation? - A. Absolutely, sir.

I just want you to assume, again going back to your
conception as the Officer planning this event, you would
presumably accept there is a risk - that is the wrong way
of putting it.   You would accept there is a possibility
that some positive action, for whatever reason, may have
to be taken in relation to some area on the Leppings Lane
terrace, whether it be the central pens, the side pens or
the wing pens? - A. I wouldn't anticipate that some
action would have to be taken.

No, but you would anticipate there was a possibility that
some Officers may be required to take positive action?
I am not saying a particular problem. - A. I would
anticipate any Officer in the ground may well come up
with something that required my attention, or Control's
attention, to respond to it.

Assume that the pens - 3 and 4 - have become full, is it
fair to say an operational option open to you if you are
in Ground Control is to - I used the term 'close off the
tunnel", but effectively I mean stand there and say... -
A. I conceded that.   I think I said it is a tactical
                                                B. L, MOLE


option open to me.   I have never had to use it. It is
one that could be utilised and I find nothing wrong with
it, except I think I discussed the use of barriers and
the closing of doors, which I think could be dangerous,
but there are ways it could be utilised.

That is a very helpful answer which I can now link in
with what Mr. Lock was doing at league matches. His
evidence effectively was the entrance tunnel would be
blocked.   He never closed the doors.    He put barriers
up and he would have Officers there to direct people to
the wing pens or whichever pen was open.    Mr. Creaser
seems to be saying in his evidence that he also took
positive steps to close a pen in the sense he would have .
someone at the end of the tunnel directing them either
side. - A. I have not had the benefit of his evidence,
sir.   AIL I can say is that I have not experienced it,
but if Mr. Creaser says he does, fine.

That is what I am coming to because Mr. Creaser, of
course, would span Mr. Lock's day and your day? - A. Yes,
sir.

He would have been the senior Police Officer at that end
of the ground in charge of carrying out any instructions
from Ground Control to fill the pens? - A. Non league
matches, yes, he would be the Inspector in charge of the
West Stand and terraces.

Would it be fair to say - if that is right, and it is a
matter for the jury to come to - but if it is right that
his evidence was there was a positive direction by him
which effectively sealed off the tunnel, that was never
brought to your attention? - A. No, it comes back to the
sequential filling.   If that is how Mf. Creaser carried
out that function, and he says he did, it is not for me
to argue.   I have no knowledge of it.   I have always
felt that he has got to a point and he has said to me,
"We need to widen it," open more, not close anything.
That is the point I make.

So there may not be any real distinction or difference
between Mr. Lock's evidence, Dr. Eastwood's evidence, Mr.
Creaser's evidence and your evidence?    It is simply a
matter of how the instructions are carried out by the
person, the Inspector, at that end of the ground, or by
the Ground Controller? - A. The task would be given to
open the next pen in sequential filling.    If in carrying
out that function Mr. Creaser, or whoever it was, felt it
was necessary to do other things to accommodate it, fine.
I would expect him to use his discretion and carry out
the function.
                                                   B. L.- MOLE


The fact it hasn't come back to your knowledge doesn't
worry you because you have got faith in Officers of that
calibre? - A. That is correct, sir.

     THE CORONER:     Are you changing subjects?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     That is a very convenient time to
break, sir.

     THE CORONER:     Very well.

                    (Short adjournment)

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Mr. Mole, we left off having now
agreed there was inherent within the system at least, the
expectation there would be monitoring carried out in the
way you have described and monitoring for one of the
purposes was overcrowding which is a threat to public
safety? - A. One of the many aspects, sir, yes.

I think that probably come as a relief to Mr. Mackrell
who gave evidence that his expectation was there would be
monitoring of those terraces for overcrowding rather than
just willy-nilly allowing people in.   That would be
fair, for him to have that expectation? - A. Yes.

We have touched on this already, that whatever the system
and however it has been described by my learned friend
Mr. King in his questions to you, whatever that system it
doesn't cater for the opening of Gate C or any of the
other exit gates? - A. No, sir.

To be fair to everyone there, once that occurs one is in
a very different ballgame? - A. Yes, sir.

Is it fair to say that as a Police Officer when you are
faced with a wholly exceptional event such as being the
evidence of what occurred outside on that day, when you
are faced with a wholly exceptional event then you have
to react to those circumstances, under a lot of pressure,
that you have to react to the individual circumstances? -
A. Absolutely, sir.

That is what your experience and training all goes to? -
A. You draw on experience, yes, sir.

Can I just now touch on one other matter?   We have
talked about the stewards and their function. - A. Yes,
sir.

Now you have agreed with me that the stewards would be
briefed on the day by Inspectors?   That was part of the
normal operation? - A. I think initially they are seen by
their own management and then when they are sent out to
                                                                          31

                                                                B. L.- MOLE


                the various locations they are briefed by the Sector or
                Serial Inspector in charge of that area.

         , Q. We have had evidence, again from Mr. Creaser, who
     B        overheard the briefing by Inspector White. - A. Yes, sir.

             Q. We also know Inspector White is an extremely experienced
                 Officer in that area? - A. Yes, he was.

             Q. Mr. Creaser has given evidence of the fact he knew where
                 the stewards would be deployed and that doesn't surprise
                 you? - A. Not at all, sir.

             Q. That is what you would expect? - A. I would expect it.

             Q. In fact his evidence was they were deployed in their
                 normal positions, that is, in accordance with the Safety
                 Certificate I have shown you? - A. Yes, sir.

             Q. He also gave evidence, and I am not going to read it, it
                 is on page 50 of the transcript I referred to on Friday,
         .      of the content of that briefing from Inspector White,
 D|             which he thought was very professional from a very good
                Officer? - A. That is what I would expect, sir.

             Q. The content of that briefing was in relation to the
                stewards' duties and the demarcation line between
                stewards and Police.   That would be normal, wouldn't it?
                - A. It would, sir.

             Q. Precisely he referred to the fact that stewards' duties
                were largely concerned with showing people to their
                seats.   The thrust of what he was saying was that he was
                giving them instructions like, if there was a problem or
                argument over who was occupying which particular seat,
                the seat would have a number on it corresponding to the
                ticket and he would say that that was a matter for
                stewards to resolve and not a matter for the Police? - A.
                Yes.

             0. That is the sort of thing you would expect stewards to be
                doing? - A. One of their duties, sir, yes.

             0. One of the things that is noticeably absent from this is
                any briefing by Inspector White, or, indeed, Chief
                Inspector Creaser, as to the duty of stewards to be
                monitoring the terraces. - A. I can't comment, sir.

             Q. You would expect, I assume, that since we know the
                stewards didn't actually monitor the terraces at league
                matches, because that was not part of their function
                because of the way it operated? - A. They didn't have a
                laid down function.   I think in their overall training
                it is one of the conditions, and I think it is probably




HI
                                                                    32

                                                            B. L.- MOLE


            in their guidance, and I would expect, as with Police
            Officers, that their observation and recognition of a
            problem would be brought to attention, sir.

    B|   Q. That may well be so, but the positions of the stewards as
            Chief Inspector Creaser knew it, in the Safety
            Certificate and on every league match and in the semi­
             final, were really in a number of places, and I can
            outline them to you.    There was the West Stand where
             they were showing people to their seats.   There were the
            gates to the West Stand where they were checking for
             tickets.   There were the exit gates and at this
            particular match there was someone on the gates in the
            wall in the rear of the concourse?    I think you have
            agreed with me that those in the Stand itself who can
            have difficulty showing people to their seats, that is
            almost a full-time job at that stage to get people into
            their seats before the match? - A. Yes.    I think you
            will also find there were stewards at the top of the
            stairs and the left of the West Stand, which is a vantage
            point, and at the right of the West Stand, because we
     .      have a propensity for the flag to be stolen, and that was
D(          always manned as well, sir. Theyhave an overview of    the
            terraces.

         Q. Those were the positions they would occupy during league
            matches? - A. I believe at semi-finals as well, sir.
            From my experience they would normally be in those
            positions.

         Q. The point of it is that of all the stewards who were
            there in the positions known to the Police, the only ones
            who were in a position to see anything would be those in
            the West Stand? - A. Absolutely, sir, yes.

         0. Just so I can get the flavour of your evidence, is what
            you are saying this, that the stewards if they saw
            something should have reported it to a Police Officer? -
            A. Initially they would no doubt go through their own
            command structure and ask the Chief Steward.   The back­
            up is that anything that wants responding to would be
            passed to a Police Officer who would carry out the
            function.

         Q. The difficulty which I don't think I am going to have to
            come to now, is that what I was understanding you to be
            saying was that suddenly when the system you adopted, the
            "find your own level" was employed, suddenly there was
            going to be no monitoring by the Police and suddenly it
            all comes back to the stewards for these three games out
            of nine years. - A. I don't think I have ever tried to
            say that.




H
That's not right. - A. Part of one of our many functions
is monitoring public safety, public order...    I expect
the stewards in accordance with theirs... That    is not
abrogated neither.   There is a joint effort in
recognising and responding to developments.

So we have got the Officers at the front of the West
Stand looking down, we have got Officers on the perimeter
track, we have got people in the Control Box and we have
got stewards as well in the West Stand and if they see
anything they either take it to their own Chief Steward
or they take it to you? - A. Likewise, yes.

Again, to be fair to them, at league matches that is not .
something which they are specifically briefed to do
because different considerations apply? - A. I think I
would still expect the...   Well, I know I would.
Having spoken to stewards and Chief Stewards I would
expect them still to alert me. They have a input, just
as I do, if they saw a problem.




   Q. If they see a problem
If they see a problem undoubtedly they have to report
it but what I am saying is that at League matches there
is actually a very different system which involves a
tight control exercised by Police Control? - A. We have
put constraints on it. I think that is the word I
would use. We have constrained the entrance to the
terraces and, therefore, we take a more high profile
role in dealing with that constraint or extending it.

So what you are saying is that if a steward sees
something that is dangerous? - A. I would expect them
to alert the chief steward, alert me, Police Officers
or whatever to respond to it.

What you are not saying, as I understand it, is that
when the system of find your own level was adopted for
these three Semi Finals that suddenly the whole system
that has gone before is thrown out of the window and
suddenly the stewards have to be positioned so that
they are actually on it? - A. No, no. The only
difference is that there is no constraint of how that
flow is brought into the terrace. That is the only
difference. The actual monitoring, functions and
responsibilities remain exactly the same other than,
"We will open a bit more now" which was ours in •a
League game.

This comes to a very important point because when we
were talking before you were saying that the practical
effect of the system at League matches was to achieve
safe... - A. Segregation.

Safe segregation but also the safe filling of pens so
that you have safe numbers in a particular pen. They
have a comfortable pen if you see what I mean.  I shy
away from numbers because you cannot count them in but
you have... - A. So do I, sir. The function is to
maintain segregation and to fill in a staggered way.
That is the best description I can give.  I think I
said if I have only got 200 people running along the
whole width of it I have got problems. So we have to
manage it in that way. You can look at it and once it
is becoming clear that we have got a lot more to come
then I would open a bit more.  I think I have said that
once or twice, sir.  It is a staggered type of opening.

I want to be fair again to you, Chief Superintendent,
because you have given evidence that you knew of the
reason in general terms of why the pens were originally
introduced because of the crushing incident? - A. Yes.

That, of course, that would have been something which
was in your mind. You do not want a repeat of that by
   overfilling pens? - A. No, I think the evidence I gave
   was that the radial fences had rectified the problem.
   So I had got a safe ground. What I am saying is that
   in 1981 there was a problem.  That was rectified by the
   Working Party by the introduction of radial fences. So
   for me I am on the base line ofstarting on the premise
   that the ground is safe.

Q. Because it has prevented lateral movement across the
   whole of the terrace? - A. The problem that had been
   identified was the lateral movement.

Q. I am sorry, I was putting a slightly different thing.
   When you are filling the pens - I thought we had
   already agreed this or at least I thought we had - you
   ensure that the people within the pens are comfortable
   and are safe. That is a necessary corollary of
   actually judging when a particular pen is full? - A. It
   would be absolutely wrong of me to say, "Well, there is
   5,000 coming. Pack them all into one pen."

Q. Yes, that is exactly the point. So you have got your
   eye on public safety is what I am trying to
   establish? - A. There is always an element in a
   Policeman's function of public safety, sir.  I think I
   have accepted that.

Q. So the practical effect of the Police filling the pens
   is to achieve in however many pens are open the safe
   filling of the pens. Whatever reason the Police are
   doing it for the people in those, so far as the Police
   are concerned, are at a safe level? - A. I know what
   you are trying to say and all I can respond by saying
   is that it is one of the many functions.  The main
   priority and objective is segregation and containment
   of fans. A part of that is also ensuring the comfort
   and safety of those fans and allowing them to view
   something they have paid to view in reasonable
   circumstances.

Q. I am sure that we are agreed we are talking about a
   necessary element of that is ensuring that people are
   safe in the pen? - A. One of the elements is that, sir,
   yes.

Q. You are asked a lot of questions, I am not sure how in
   relation to the actual facts of the day that this takes
   matters a lot further. You were asked a lot of
   questions by my learned friend, Mr. King, about the
   need to achieve even distribution across the terraces.
   Now on the system of find your own level.  I assume
   that my learned friend is reaching for the Green Guide.
   We know it is in the Green Guide. On the system of
find your own level, is it fair to say that what was
thought in the planning behind this was that fans
should go in where they want and ease out and there
will be a self-levelling process? - A. Yes.

That was what was in your mind when you were planning
it? - A. Whilst I have said that a lot like to be
behind the goal likewise many do not because they know
it is congested. So they go for the better points on
the wings where they can observe and so there is a
balance built into it.

Again back to the effect of the monitoring that you
expect to take place from experience and from
everyone's position there, the effect of that is that
if there was a situation which appeared to be
potentially dangerous because you want to anticipate
problems then action would be taken? - A. Absolutely,
sir.

So if you get to the stage - and this is quite
important and again it is a hypothesis which you have
not faced - where the centre pens are obviously filling
very much more so than the wing pens at that stage,
assuming it comes to your attention, there ought to be
some direction that...? - A. Indeed, I described it.
The Coroner asked me what I would do if in fact other
pens were full and I talked about putting Serials 14
and 15 down the back and encouraging spread and talking
about the perimeter track Officers encouraging spread.
It is initially having the recognition that I have a
problem to respond to and I think I conceded that one
of the options might well be closing the tunnel, not
that I have ever done it but it is an option that I
would take into account.

The importance again of that is, and correct me if this
is wrong, that the thrust of your evidence is that you
are not just allowing 10,000 fans to go into one area
or even 5,000 in just the example you have said, what
you are saying is if it becomes obvious there is an
uneven distribution of the fans which poses a threat to
public safety then action would be taken to ensure that
the distribution is levelled out? - A. Absolutely. My
experience is that it does not and the two matches
before people did very sensibly approach locations
where they wanted to be and if they found difficulty
moved on to other places. That is my experience and if
there had been something which said, "I have a problem
here" and I think I drew the comparison with the Kop
side where I had a problem and did something about it,
then I would do something about it.
I know it is not written down in any particular order
but is it fair to say as a matter of expectation that
you, as the person planning this event, did not
actually feel the need to put in black and white that
that should happen because that is something that would
have been fundamental to the surveillance and
monitoring that was going on anyway? - A. Yes.

And would have been fundamental to the Officers who
were there? - A. That is right.  I have described all
the Officers, their experience and capabilities and
they would know how to react to those matters.

Is it also fair to say so far as you were concerned in
planning the find your own level your plan and
expectation catered again, in accordance with the
provision I am sure you are familiar with of the Green
Guide, that at the end of the day when you have got the
capacity in an even distribution is desirable? - A. It
is desirable. My experience says you never have a
proper even distribution because there is always an
encouragement to be in the best place and so it is a
little denser providing that density is not excessive
and shows to me a problem is being experienced but I
would not expect it to be even. I do not think anybody
would.

I think that is fair. Everyone has said that the
centre pens are by and large more popular but if it is
an obviously uneven distribution? - A. Obviously over
densely populated then something has got to be done.

It is fair to say, and I will come back to it because I
am trying to be fair to you in the light really of
questions that were put by my learned friend, Mr. King,
your plan and expectation dealt with that because you
expected a response in the event, unforeseen as it was,
that there would be an uneven distribution? - A. Yes.

Your experience led you in 1987 and 1988 to say there
were no positive steps that were required, whether at
the back of the concourse or elsewhere, to direct fans
round? - A. Nothing happened in 1987 which made me
change the plan for that area in 1988 and nothing
happened in 1988 which made me consider changing the
plan again.

What was achieved was an even distribution on the
system that was employed? — A. It was achieved with
common sense and practical policing and practical
stewarding.  It achieved that and worked very well.
Q. I have to preface this - and I am not seeking to
   abrogate the Club's responsibility - by saying you were
   actually put by my learned friend, Mr. King, who was
   responsible for achieving an even distribution.  You
   put it in the terms that it was the Club's
   responsibility under the Green Guide which is
   absolutely right. We know that there were different
   considerations in general that applied here that the
   effect of the system that you have been describing is
   to achieve an even distribution of the fans. Not
   absolutely perfectly but that is what you were aiming
   at, the rough even distribution probably with more
   localised density in the centre pens? - A. At the end
   of the day we would have to resolve it if there was not
   an even distribution.  I would expect during the build
   up of it that the Club's role would be constant in that
   the stewards would monitor from the positions I have
   talked about. The Police role would be constant. They
   would monitor in public order and safety terms and if
   it was obvious that something was wrong it would be
   reported and reacted upon. Whatever it was, whether it
   was at the eleventh hour or whatever, it would be our
   job to resolve it.

Q. That is why instructions have to go back to Control
   because... - A. I am sorry, I missed that.

Q. The information has to go back to Police Control? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. You will be very relieved to hear that I do not think I
   have got very much more. Can I just ask you again
   about Mr. Lock? He was largely positioned in the Club
   Control Room? - A. Yes.

Q- It is fair to say.. - A. I am sorry, this is while he
   is working for the Club, this is current?

Q. Yes, while he is working for the Club. On the day
   there is also an experienced Police Constable who is
   also positioned in    - A. PC Guest.

Q. PC Guest.  Is his function largely, either by the means
   of the radio or the land line, is to provide the Police
   Control Box with such information as is available from
   the Club Control Room? - A. He is the liaison officer
   with the Club. He is the Police liaison officer. Any
   information which is coming to Mr. Lock from his
   stewards, any information which is coming on the
   screens, they have a full bank, more than the seven we
   have in control, they have a full bank of screens. Any
   information from there as to crowd capacities, he would
   relay that either by land line or radio to the Control
                                                                        39

                                                                 B. L. MOLE


            Box and he would be our link if we wanted to contact
            Mr. Lock for any reason.

    Bj   Q. The kind of information he would be relaying, of
            course, would be how many people had come in? - A.
            Capacity.

         Q. You would expect that to be a fairly regular update? -
            A. When I have been operating. The difficulty is the
            facility in the Secretary's office, in fact, on Semi
            Finals it is a little more difficult because they use
            his office as a reception room sometimes and so it is
            not always as available on the Semi Final situation but
            a normal League match I would visit Mr. Mackrell's
            office on a number of occasions to update myself from
            the monitor that was in his office. He had that
            understanding with me that I could come and go as I
            liked to his office for that purpose. So I would
            update myself albeit Mr. Guest would update the Control
            Room on a fairly regular basis as to his view but I
            would not be seeking his information.  I would normally
            get my own.

         Q. There was one thing put to you, as a senior Police
            Officer in command of a match, you have to draw on all
            the information that is provided to you right the way
            round in order to make a balanced judgment? - A. Yes,
            sir.

         Q. You would be aware of that. You would discuss the flow
            rates and you would be aware of how many people you can
            get through the turnstiles.  If you know how many have
            come in you can make a rough guess on how many come
            out. That is not difficult to do, is it? - A. Maths
            are not the best subject, yes.

         Q. It was put to you that Mr. Lock really ought to be
            suggesting things to Police Control. Would you expect
            Mr. Lock to make comments about the Police operation?
            Is it fair to say with his experience he has got the
            good sense and would not be expected to commenting on
            policing on the day when he is stuck in the Club
            Control Room and not got the benefit of all the
            experience and knowledge and information? - A. Ithink
            there is always an element of that. Somebody sitting
            in the chair that Mr. Lock sits in has ability and
            experience, and a tremendous ability and experience,
            which I have said before and he might find continual -
            interference is the wrong word - assistance might be
            something he would not expect. He would expect, if
            there was some recognition, and I think there is a 10
            per cent point or 15, I am not sure which percentage,
            when capacities are being reached, that type of



H
                                                   B. L. MOLE


information I would expect Mr. Lock to relay to
Control.  If there was a blockage or breakdown on a
turnstile you can monitor that because each turnstile
flags upon the screen and so if one is only moving 50
people and the other is moving 700 people then there is
a problem with turnstile No. 5 and I would expect Mr.
Lock to relate that to Mr. Murray and say, "We have got
a blockage on 9, 16" or whatever it might be. So that
kind of information I would expect but not an
interference with the operation by saying, "I used to
do this job and you are not doing it right".  I would
not expect that kind of an interference.




                           /Q. The final point..
                                             B. L. MOLE


The final point was again something that came out of a
document put by my learned friend, Mr. King, about
contingency plans.  I think this came out of the ACPO
Guide, that there ought to be a contingency plan agreed
between the Police and the Club to cope with unusually
large numbers.  I don't know whether this is right, but
isn t the contingency plan such as it is, not
formalised, but if you have a lot of people outside
don't you delay the kick-off if all the circumstances
are right? - A. No, not necessarily.  It is one of the
options and it is one I described the other day as an
option to delay kick-off. There are things for and
against kick-off and all the factors have to be taken
into account.

I may be able to short circuit it. The absence of a
formalised contingency plan does not mean to say that
there were not a number of options that could be taken
in the event that had occurred? - A. Yes.

You had, as a Ground Commander, as the match Commander,
a number of potential things you could do? - A. An
example I can give is the fact that we anticipate
infiltration of the Kop by other supporters.  If that
had not occurred then a contingency is to put people in
that part of the Kop.

So it all goes down to what may be suggested as the
lack of something in black and white.  It does not mean
to say that it is not catered for because it is drawn
up on the basis of experience and on the basis of what
actually happens on the day? - A. Yes, sir.

You don't know what you can do until you know the
circumstances in which it is occurring, the time at
which it is occurring and hundreds of other unknown
factors? - A. That is right, sir.

Thank you very much, Chief Superintendent Mole.

           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Chief Superintendent, you are a very experienced Police
Officer and have taken a particular interest in the
policing of football matches, haven't you? - A. Yes,
ma am.

I believe you give lectures on the subject? - A. I used
to lecture at the Wakefield Academy of the West
Yorkshire Police to Inspectors from all across the
region, yes.

I am sure that senior Officers had great confidence in
your ability as a Chief Superintendent at a semi-final,
                                                               42

                                                        B. L. MOLE


           and fully accepted the system that you adopted.  I
           believe that not only were you capable of being in
           command and alert to any problems connected with
           football, but you would also ensure that the general
    B      public in the vicinity of the Hillsborough Stadium were
           not inconvenienced in any way, is that right? - A.
           Absolutely.

        Q. You know Leppings Lane is a main route between north
           and south Sheffield, and the closure of such a road for
           a considerable time would involve a huge detour for
           traffic, so for that reason you would close the road
           for five or ten minutes at the end of a match, is that
           right, only - not before a match? - A. There is always
           an option to close it at any time really because the
           ends of the road are always manned, but you have quite
           rightly said that because of the inconvenience to
           residents, which is one of the considerations I have to
           take when policing a match, I would not wish to close
           it for long periods of time.  I would only close it for
           such a period of time as was essential to achieve an
           objective.

        Q. And that would be at the end of a match, wouldn't it? -
           A. In normal matches it is ten minutes before the end
           of the match, something like that, because the vast
           number of people coming out en bloc are straight into
           the road, and they are at risk of being knocked down or
           run over, so it needs to be stopped.

        Q. You did not receive a request to close off Leppings
           Lane to traffic before the start of the match in 1987
           or '88, did you? - A. Not to my recollection, ma'am.

        Q. In your experience have you ever known of Leppings Lane
           being closed to traffic before the start of a match? -
           A. No, I don't think so. There is always a minor
           closure when I have a train load coming in, and when
           the propensity was for large trains to come in you
           could have as many as 1,000 or more being marched to
           the Ground, if I can put it in those terms, and there
           would be a short stoppage while I crossed Leppings
           Lane. That is pre-match but that normally is a
           crocodile kind of fashion of supporters being escorted
           °?    the pavement, so there is a stoppage for a short
           time in that way, but not an overall closure of
           Leppings Lane fore a period for something, no.

        Q. You told us that you were driven around the entire area
           on the day of the match, to assess the whole situation?
           - A. Yes.

        Q. That seemed a very good idea. Now, if vital messages
           were sent to the Control Box would Officers there be



H
                                             B. L. MOLE


able to contact you immediately at any time,
particularly if there was some sort of emergency? - A.
I have never had difficulty. My driver, I think I have
mentioned, Mr. Buxton, always carried radios, as did I,
and that would be a radio into FI channel, a radio into
match control.  I would carry the same and likewise we
would have both the facility of VHF on multi-channel
sets in the Land Rover and would be listening on the
channel operating football matters.  So in real terms I
had three forms of communications, two of which were
doubled with back up.

Did you have Police Officers positioned on the Spion
Kop for semi-final matches? - A. I did.

About how many Officers would you have there? - A. I
would be guessing if I gave you a figure.  I think I
have got two serials up there which is something like 2
and 20, and I am guessing at the moment because I have
not read the Order for sometime. Their functions would
be operating from the back, and if you look at the Kop
you will see fairly big gateways in the middle of the
Kop, and they were stationed there so they can view
down the Kop, so really there are two levels on the
Kop, right at the back and half way on, where the
entrances are.  I think X and Y and Z, if my memory
serves me right, are big letters.

So they would be positioned at the back, you say, and
in the middle? - A. Just because it is constructed -
not actually amongst the supporters - the entrances
where they come up stairways to get onto the Kop are
quite big openings, and you can stand at those and have
a view, so you are half way down and at the back, as it
were.

I believe there is room there for 22,000 fans standing
on that terrace, so that is more than double the figure
of the Leppings Lane terrace, isn't it? - A. Without
being pedantic, I think it is 21,000 from my
recollection, but yes, I would agree.

Your senior Officers such as Superintendents knew and
understood and accepted your system of find your own
level on the Leppings Lane terrace. Now your method
would ensure that the doors of the central tunnel were
in the locked open position, so you told us? - A. Yes,
ma am.

To allow for ingress and egress whilst the Ground was
in use? - A. Yes, ma'am.

As it was actually dangerous for the tunnel to be
closed off at any time? - A. I would not wish to
                                              B. L. MOLE

utilise the gates on the tunnel.   I think there is a
real danger with that.

Also that the radial gates on the Leppings Lane terrace
were to be in the locked open position with no Police
control at those gates? - A. Yes, ma'am.

For semi-final matches, and that is when the whole
terrace would be utilised? - A. Yes, ma'am.

But you would make sure that Officers could constantly
observe the filling of the pens from the Control Box,
the West Stand and the perimeter track, is that right?
- A. Yes, ma'am.

And you said that football fans would have enough
commonsense to be able to move to any part of the
terrace, if they were coming in, in the normal fashion?
- A. I think I said the vast majority of football fans
are there to watch football, honest to goodness people
who want a pleasant and comfortable day, and the vast
majority from my experience do go into areas where they
can be in comfort and see things as they would wish to,
yes.

You found this system proved to be a satisfactory one,
providing - and I am going to emphasise that word -
providing fans entered the Leppings Lane terrace via
the turnstiles A-G, and not through an exit gate? - A.
I had no experience of them coming through an exit
gate, and the system is for them to come through
turnstiles in a steady, controlled manner.

As the turnstile entry would admit them at a rate which
would be compatible with the dispersal arrangements for
them inside the Groundj it would also ensure that no
excessively large crowds entered all at once, thus
blocking the system in any way, wouldn't it? - A. I
agree entirely, ma'am.

So the main task of an overall Commander at a football
stadium is for him to know the basic principles of
entry and exit into the ground, isn't it? - A. Yes,
ma'am.

Just in the same way that a driver needs to know the
entrance and exit at a multi-storey car park? - A. I
suppose ....

Or that a driver in Great Britain needs to know that he
needs to drive on the left hand side of the road? - A.
It is a basic requirement, yes, ma'am.
Now, do you agree that the large concertina or exit
gates, A, B and C, are intended for the exit of fans
only at Hillsborough Stadium? - A. That is the purpose
of them.

I would just like to say at this point, if I may ....

     THE CORONER:   You may ask questions, Mrs.
McBrien.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   That if the Police operation in
1989 had been exactly the same as the one in 1988 then
I would be a very happy person today.

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, you said you wanted
to say something, which was very kind of you because
you alerted me to it.   I then said you could ask a
question and you then proceeded to say what you wanted
to say.  I don't like it. Please ask questions:

Don't respond to that comment.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Would you have minded commanding
the semi-final in 1989? - A. Not at all.

Was it your decision to leave on 27th March, or was it
the Chief Constable's? - A. The Chief Constable's
decision.

I am sure anyone who is newly appointed at Chief
Superintendent and in overall command at a football
match would welcome the support and assistance from
senior Officers, but he would be expected to have
commonsense, wouldn't he?

     THE CORONER:    Sorry, what was the question?

     THE WITNESS:   The Officer commanding?

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes, if he was the person in that
position one thing that he would need would be
commonsense? - A. I think that is right, yes.

And he would also have to be able to make major
decisions, irrespective of anyone else's suggestions?
A leader can only usually make their own mind which way
they want the operation to go? - A. I would expect any
Commanding Officer in the Service, Superintendent,
Chief Superintendent, to make decisions. That is part
of his function.

He would also need to understand the Green Guide and
the Safety Certificate, wouldn't he, before he took on
                                              B. L. MOLE

such a role? - A. I would find that as an essential
aspect, to understand the Green Guide.

Would you agree that no major decision should be made
by a Chief Superintendent at a football match unless he
is absolutely certain that the course of action he has
decided upon does not involve any kind of risk
whatsoever to the spectators? - A. It is difficult to
put myself in a position - I am trying to draw a
comparison with many operations. There is always a
risk in decisions ....

     THE CORONER:   I think, Mrs. McBrien, that
question is so hypothetical and so wide open it is an
impossible question for anybody to answer
intelligently.  It just is not possible to answer that
question intelligently.   I think if you want an answer
you must be very much more specific.   I don't object to
your asking that type of question but I don't think
that you can ask it in that form.   I can think of half
a dozen things without even trying where the answer
could be yes or no, depending upon the circumstances.
What^you are saying is irrespective of circumstances
that s it, but that is impossible, so try again. You
see, now you are in difficulty because it is easier to
frame a question in general terms than to frame it
specifically, but you cannot expect the witness to
answer such a wide question.




        /Q.   MRS. McBRIEN:    Whatever decision
                                                                  47


                                            B.L. MOLE



Q.            MRS. McBRIEN: Whatever decision a Chief
        Superintendent makes he should always consider the
        safety side of that decision, shouldn't he? - A.
        Absolutely, yes.

Q. We have been led to believe that there was crushing
   outside the turnstiles on the 15th April 1989 though
   no one has given evidence in this Court to say that
   they were injured outside?

              THE CORONER:    Sorry?

              MRS. McBRIEN:  I don't think we have heard
        anybody giving evidence to say that they were badly
        injured outside the turnstiles.

               THE CORONER:  It depends what you call "badly
        injured".   In fact we have heard from at least three
        people that I can think of who described injuries,
        including Superintendent Marshall in that, and there
        may be more.   I am just trying to remember.  There are
        120-odd supporters who we have heard from.   I can't
        remember every single one's evidence off by heart but
        I can think of at least three, in fact I can think of
        more, so rephrase your question, whatever the question
        may b e .

q   .         MRS. McBRIEN:  To your knowledge, Chief Superintendent
        do you know of any serious incidents outside where people
        needed hospital treatment or were killed outside the
        turnstiles? - A. When I have been in charge?

Q. No, in 1989 sorry, have you heard that anybody was so
   badly injured that they had to go to hospital or that
   they were killed outside the turnstiles? - A. In 1989
   m a 'am?

Q. Yes? - A. I have not heard of anyone having been killed
   outside the turnstiles and I would be speaking of other
   people's evidence, but I have heard of people who were
   overcome and in particular one young boy who was
   carried over the crowd who was overcome, but that is
   what I have been told. My experience at the ground was
   not until about 5 o'clock when I came across the scene.

              THE CORONER:    That is fair enough.

              MRS. McBRIEN:    Right.   Thank you.

Q. We have heard a number of witnesses say that they moved
   from the crushing outside the turnstiles usually to
   a spot near the river or along the service road near
   Gate C? - A. Yes.
                                   B.L. MOLE



In fact my son did just that to avoid the chaotic
conditions outside the turnstiles.

      THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, how often do I have
to say it? We have not actually heard any evidence
that your son did do it. I might as well be frank.
It does not matter whether he did or didn't you are
right, we have heard evidence that people moved on
to the river side, I don't object to that, that is
absolutely clear. Now ask the question you want to
ask arising out of that?

      MRS. McBRIEN:   Well I will leave that part.

      THE CORONER: Well no, ask the question because
you may have a genuine question tucked into it.

      MRS. McBRIEN: Well I know Chief Superintendent
Mole was not there so it may be he would not be able
to help on that.

      THE CORONER:    You are probably right there too.

      MRS. McBRIEN: Now you will be well aware of
the layout of the ground at Hillsborough, and would you
agree that if people are being crushed, wherever they
are being crushed whether it is outside or inside the
ground, all they need is space? - A. Yes, indeed.

And would you also agree that there was plenty of space
going right the way from Leppings Lane to Penistone Road
at the side of the river on the outside of the ground?
- A. The service road?

Yes? - A. Yes, there was space there, yes.     That is in
the segregation zone.

So it could have been utilised in some way for some
sort of organisation? - A. Absolutely.

And to regain control if need be? - A. If control had
been lost it was an area whereby you could have moved
people into a relative safe zone.

Now you mentioned delays on the motorway being a good
enough reason for delaying the kick-off. Now would
you say a public order situation like the one if I
can describe the one outside the turnstiles as being
a public order situation, was that a good enough reason
would you say for delaying the kick-off? - A. In response
to that sir all I can say is I would have to have been
there to experience how quickly it occurred; when it
occurred; whether it was a steady build-up or a sudden
build-up; whether the numbers were such that it did
                                      B.L. MOLE



not affect those inside to any extent, but it could have
been a reason for delaying kick-off.  I have to also
say that it could have been an orchestrated method of
delaying kick-off and I would have to be alert to that
as well. I am not saying it was, I am saying these are
considerations I as an experienced Commander would have
to take into account but it could have been a reason
to delay kick-off.

Would you agree that usually when there are problems
it usually means delay? Whenever people are travelling
if there are problems on the railways or something like
that it usually means people are kept waiting that little
bit longer aren't they? - A. Yes, delay is a factor.
The sad experience is that however much you try and
encourage people to come they won't take notice and
you have to remember the rights of other people as well
sometimes and the rights of the vast majority who are
there they have rights as well and you have to take that
into account. Some people will always use a situation
to their own advantage. Sometimes it is genuine and
you have to find a balance.

But you certainly say it was an option to delay? - A.
Absolutely.

Now I remember you saying that you thought the fans
inside the ground may not be too happy if they had to
wait longer for the match to begin, but the fans in
1989 were not given that option, were they, as far as
you know? - A. Not as far as I am aware.

So the Police had the option but the fans inside didn't.
You said also ...

        THE CORONER:    What does that mean?

        MRS. McBRIENs    You said disorder ....

      THE CORONER: Excuse me, I have not understood
the question. You said:   "The Police had the option
but the fans inside didn't". What does that mean?

        MRS. McBRIEN: The option to delay the game.
The    fans inside weren't given the chance to wait longer
for    the match to begin. They weren't asked would they
mind   waiting longer while order was restored outside.
That   is what I mean really.

      THE WITNESS: Practically I could not do that in
any case.   I think what I was trying to say is that I
have to decide whether or not they would be offended;
bearing in mind the numbers that were there whether
they would react to it and it would be one of those
decisions I would have to take and stand up and be
counted as having taken as to whether or not I had made
the right decision, but I could not really give them
                                                         50


                                       B.L. MOLE



     the option.  I would have difficulty in taking a vote,
     but I know what you mean.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN: No, I did not mean you would actually
     go and say that to them. I mean they just did not know,
     did they, what was happening outside, they weren't aware
     of the situation there but the Police in charge outside
     were aware of it.

           You said disorder affects safety. Now I know you
     were not there in 1989 but would you agree that there
     was certainly disorder outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles
     that year? - A. In 1989?

Q. Yes? - A. Having seen footage of films I think yes there
   was disorder.

Q.         THE CORONER: That is based upon what you have
     learnt since not from your personal experience? - A.
     That is right, what I have heard, what I have seen,
     photographs; films; television perceptions.  If I was
     looking at that I would say:  "Yes, there is disorder".

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN: Would you say it was vital to
     restore order where the disorder was taking place, not
     transfer that disorder to another spot. Would you deal
     with it where it was? - A. I think I would have had
     many options as to how to deal with it. I think I have
     to come back very hypothetically to say:  "Did it
     suddenly appear? What was the build-up time? What could
     I have done before? What couldn't I have done?" and I
     don't honestly know, I can't answer those questions.

           I think there are ways of dealing with things.
     The causation of the disorder is one thing that has to
     attract the mind and my understanding is the causation
     was the frustration of   those trying to get in to get
     to see the game and to   relieve that it may have been
     done in many ways, one   of which was at the point to
     put them into space and I think you have just talked
     about put them into space and one space, bearing in mind
     if I use the path you described to me, that is not where
     they wanted to go. I would have to encourage them to
     go down the south path. Where they wanted to go was
     in the ground and what I am saying is if we had used
     the option of trying to get them down the side that is
     not where they wanted to go so they may not have come
     as easily and therefore I would not have relieved
     disorder. Where they wanted to go was in the ground.

           The space created in that concourse is an area
     to relieve pressure, trauma and safety and it would be
     an option I would seriously look at. Other things
     could have been horses and dogs and they all have
     their problems, as we saw.
                                                        51


                                     B.L. MOLE



Q. We do know that some people did move because they thought
   of their safety before everything else? - A. Absolutely
   ma'am, yes.

Q. And presumably they did not mind waiting until the
   other people who were desperate to go in to see the
   match they would be quite happy to go in later when
   there was some sort of real order there? - A. It is
   difficulty in determining who are the good and who are
   the bad, if I put it in that kind of term, and I don't
   mean that unkindly, as to who will respond and who
   won't respond, and when there is a mass of the number
   we have talked about, I can't put a figure on, perhaps
   this Court has put a figure on, it is difficult to
   decide who will and who won't and it is one of those
   decisions that unfortunately you have to stand and take.

Q. If some people were determined to continue at the
   turnstiles I can only think that may be they weren't
   being crushed that badly or they would have been very
   glad to move to another spot?

         THE CORONER: N o fMrs. McBrien.    This witness
   will not be able to   tell you to what extent they
   were crushed or not,    I don't think. I mean he can tell
   you what he saw onthe videos, well     we can see that
   for ourselves.
         I allowed the question as far as you took it
   which I thought was fair, but to ask him to now draw
   the conclusion as to how bad it was is impossible for
   him. It is not his expertise anyway.

         No, try something else. In fact don't try anything
   else, we will stop for lunch instead and we will press
   on with Mrs. McBrien in the afternoon. 2 o'clock.

                    (Luncheon adjournment)
                                                                 52

                                                      B. L.' MOLE


Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:   I would like to come back to a point
     I made this morning.   It is connected with the system of
     filling the Leppings Lane terrace.   This morning you
     agreed that your senior Officers, that is,
     Superintendents, understood and accepted your system of
     "find your own level" on the Leppings Lane terrace?
     That is right? - A. Yes.

Q. And how you would have the tunnel doors in the locked-
   open position as well as the radial gates in that
   position too? - A. Yes.

Q. In fact that system proved to be successful as long      as
   the fans entered the A to G turnstiles only for the
   Leppings Lane turnstiles, and did not enter through      an
   exit gate in considerable numbers all at once? - A.      I
   never experienced that latter aspect.   It operated      very
   well under normal circumstances.

0. Now we have only heard from one Superintendent and that
   was Superintendent Marshall.   He said that you asked him
   which role he wanted to fulfil at the 1989 semi-final.
   He said as he had worked...

          THE CORONER:   That is quite impossible because this
     Officer wasn't there in 1989.

          THE WITNESS:    I think in the pre-planning, sir.

          THE CORONER:   Oh, the pre-planning.    I beg your
     pardon.   I misunderstood you.

          THE WITNESS:   Yes, that would be right.

Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:   He asked you... - A. Mr. Marshall
     was my deputy for some time.    A very capable and
     experienced deputy.    If he asked me - quite clearly I
     was considering it as well, but I am quite sure he would
     approach me and quite openly ask me if he wanted to do
     that.

          THE CORONER:   I interrupted you, Mrs. McBrien.
     Can you say what he asked him?   I have got lost.

Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:    I shall start from the beginning
     again.    We have only heard evidence given by one
     Superintendent up to now and that is Superintendent
     Marshall.    He said that you asked him which role he
     wanted to fulfil at the 1989 semi-final.     He said that
     as he had worked inside as Ground Commander in 1988 he
     would work outside in 1989.     It was you who discussed
     this with him, wasn't it? - A. Yes.
                    %
                                                B. L.- MOLE


He told us it was a good team that had operated in 1988
and he said he had great respect and admiration for you
as overall Commander.   Now as Ground Commander he said
he had a good knowledge of the ground layout and he knew
there was a high perimeter fence in front of the Leppings
Lane terrace and that there were radial fences dividing
the pens.   He said he knew the most popular part of the
terrace was immediately behind the goal and that the most
popular route to that area was the central tunnel.   He
thought that your tried and tested method of "find your
own level" was a satisfactory one and that he had raised
no objections to it whatsoever.   Is that right? - A. He
certainly raised no objection to it and I am quite sure
that would be the case.

Now I will go on from where I was this morning.   That
was just something that came up in connection with this
morning's questioning.   You said that allowing people
into the stadium is the club's responsibility, but would
you agree that the club would never allow an uncontrolled
entry of fans into their ground as they would be able to
utilise their computerised and monitorised system of
turnstile entry, which would ensure ticketless fans did
not gain entry? - A. I would not expect them to do that,
no.

You said you did not use a filter system for ticketless
fans.  However, would you ensure that ticketless fans did
not cause an obstruction at the turnstiles? - A.
Absolutely, yes.

Would you agree that if they were allowed to obstruct in
that area at any time that that would slow the rate of
flow down? - A. The difficulty arises in that I would try
and stop ticketless fans being in the area, but I think I
mentioned earlier the difficulty is what to do with them
and what the law allows me to do with them.  Whilst I
would want the objective of not having them there,
sometimes it is not as easy as that.   I have mentioned
about the loss of Officers from positions if I was to
take arrest action.   We have to find a balance, but my
main objective would be not to have them there.    If they
came in such a number that I would have difficulty I
would have to find resources to deal with them.

Would you agree that you wouldn't allow a free for all? -
A. Absolutely.

     THE CORONER:       Wouldn't allow...?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:       A free for all:

By going through the turnstiles they would be checked
there, both by the Officers outside and inside the
                 I
                                                B. L.' MOLE


ground? - A. If it is in the capability of doing it.    In
certain circumstances you are overwhelmed.   I don't
know.   The intention would be to check them and filter
them out at the turnstiles and send them away.   That is
right.

If you had not been able to filter them out up to that
point, they certainly would be stopped at that point? -
A. Yes.

Now you said you made contingency plans for ticketless
fans, such as directing them to a specified area where a
transistor radio was produced for them to listen to the
match there.

     THE CORONER:   No, I don't think Mr. Mole said that.
That is Mr. Marshall who said something like that:

Remind us, Mr. Mole, what you were planning to do in
1988? - A. I had a contingency that if there was a build­
up of ticketless fans then the Liverpool ones would be
taken to an area on that side of the ground and I have
difficulty in remember whether it was by the bridge or
Niagara, but Notts were certainly going to Hillsborough
Park.   That was my contingency for moving them.   I am
aware of the comment you have made but I didn't make that
because I didn't have that facility.

In fact, just to get this right, in 1988 that contingency
never arose? - A. It did not arise, no.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   In 1988? - A. In 1988.

So you were not aware that the bridge area was used in
1988 for that purpose? - A. Not to my knowledge, no.

I have read about it somewhere but... - A. It was
designated as an area.   I have no knowledge of it being
used for that as a holding area for ticketless fans.

     THE CORONER:   Be careful.   Mrs. McBrien said the
bridge area.   You may be thinking of a different bridge.
Mrs. McBrien is thinking of the little bridge which goes
across the River Don next to the stadium.   Is that the
one you... - A. This is what I say.   I have done matches
where I have had holding areas at Niagara and I have done
matches where I have had holding areas at the bridge area
you are describing, which is up to the traffic lights at
Parkside Road, that kind of location, just over the
bridge.   Is that what you are talking about?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:    No, I mean the bridge that is very
close to the stadium.    The one that goes over the River
Don.
                                                 B. L.- MOLE


     THE CORONER:   Can you just point on the model where
the bridge that Mrs. McBrien is talking about.

     THE WITNESS:    My area was beyond that, not actually
on the bridge.    It is too close, that, for my area.   If
I was to utilise an area it would be beyond that, up by
Parkside traffic lights, but I didn't have occasion to do
it.

      MRS. MCBRIEN: I have read that other areas were
used.    In fact a football ground, I think, was used at
some time? - A. I think that is Niagara.    Niagara is the
Police Sports and Social Club, which is a football
ground.    If it helps I can say that subsequent to the
15th of April, I did the first two matches of the season
and used those areas for that very reason.

What I read, and I don't know where I read it, was that
the bridge area which was near the stadium could be a
holding area, as the fans could absorb the atmosphere of
the match as it was in close proximity. - A. Could be,
but I didn't use it.

They could hear the cheers, the roars and they would be
as satisfied as they could be as they hadn't got tickets?
- A. Yes.

When you roved around was one of your main priorities to
ensure that no serious congestion ever arose outside the
turnstiles at Leppings Lane? - A. That was one of my
functions, yes, together with many others, but it was one
of the functions.

Have you ever known of severe congestion   arising outside
those turnstiles prior to 1989? - A. Not   severe
congestion.   There has been congestion.     We have had to
queue down the footpath, as it were, and   just let things
take their time steadily, but not severe   congestion
causing me any concern.

As I said earlier, your system for filling the terrace
proved to be a satisfactory one, providing the basic
safety rules were applied.   That is, entry by
turnstiles.   However, in the most unlikely event of fans
scaling a gate or a wall and managing to throw open a
large exit gate to allow at least a couple of thousand
fans in suddenly, in the event of such a dreadful thing
as that happening I would like to draw your attention to
the radial fences...

    THE CORONER:    What is the question, Mrs. McBrien?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   This is not a criticism.   As I have
said earlier, I was quite happy with the system that
                                                    B. L.- MOLE


operated in 1988, but in the event of something as
dreadful as that happening, then I think I would like to
draw your attention to the fences, the radial fences, and
the radial gates, how they may have played a part to help
in the outcome of what happened.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:     If that is all right, sir?

     THE CORONER:   No, it isn't, because the Officer has
nodded but he can't answer it.   It is not a question.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   They are just questions about the
radial fences and gates.   I haven't asked a question
yet.

     THE CORONER:     Go ahead and ask a question.

     MR. MANNING:    If she were to put the words, "Do you
agree that the radial fences would have played a part?"
that then turns it into a question.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   I am not saying the radial fences
played a part in it.

     THE WITNESS:    You are drawing my mind to the next
series of questions?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:    I was only going to draw your
attention to questions related to....

     THE CORONER:    Ask the questions.

     MR. MANNING:    I tried!

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   You said you were not present at the
1981 semi-final? - A. No, I was out of the county.

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I am sorry.   I am
going to bring you back to this because you said you were
drawing the attention of the Officer to a situation where
people had scaled the walls, had got into the ground, and
that you were drawing his attention to the radial fences.
Now I want you to ask a question arising out of that
rather lengthy picture which you drew.   If you didn't
have a question you should not have drawn it to his
attention, should you?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:  I have forgotten what that one was.
That was a different question.
                                               B. L; MOLE


     THE CORONER:   I would ask the question for you if I
knew what it was, but I do not know what the question is.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Sir, I have finished with that
question and this is entirely different.   This is about
the layout of the pens.

    THE CORONER:    Go on then.




           Q. MRS. MCBRIEN:   You said you were not.
                                                                     58

                                                              B. L. MOLE


     Q.        MRS. McBRIEN: You were not present at the 1981
          Semi Final? - A. No.

B|   Q. wfen crushing occurred on the Leppings Lane terrace but
        you are aware it happened now, aren't you? - A. I am,
        yes.

     Q. Fans crowded in the centre area at that time and
        crushing took place and so the terrace was an open one
        at the time, wasn't it? - A. It was, yes.

     Q. I believe the Police acted very promptly on that
        occasion by opening the perimeter gate immediately and
        allowing at least 150 fans to escape to the safety of
        the pitch?

               THE CORONER:   Can you stop, Mrs. McBrien?

     Q. Do you know that or not? - A. Not in details, sir, no.

     Q.        MRS. McBRIEN: So you would not know that the
          Police actually helped fans over the perimeter fence as
          well at that match? - A. No, sir.

     Q. It is my understanding that after that incident
        relations between the Club and the Police were not very
        good. Do you know anything about that? - A. I have no
        knowledge of that.  I am coming back, I was still head
        of Operations Division and I remained there until the
        end of that year and as such had involvement with all
        the Clubs in South Yorkshire.  If it was a personal
        deterioration between personalities I know not but my
        relationship with the Club was unaltered really.

     Q. I was going to say, did you know that relations did not
        improve until Mr. Lock was appointed to the Club? That
        is when things really started to get better? - A. I
        certainly do not know that, no.

     Q.    Do you know that because of the 1981 incident radial
          fences were installed as a result of a request made by
          the Police? - A. Yes.

     Q.    That was to give the Police more control on the
          terrace? - A. I think it was to prevent the type of
          incident which had taken place in 1981. That was my
          understanding.    It was the answer to what the cause of
          the problem was rather than to give us more control.

     Q. It would prevent lateral movement, wouldn't it? - A.
        Pressure, that is right.
You told us that at smaller games you always had Police
Officers positioned at the radial gates but you saw no
necessity to position Officers there at the larger
matches when the whole terrace would be used and the
radial gates would be just in the locked position but
no Police would be controlling them? - A. In the locked
open position, that is the difference. When I am
controlling it for a small match then the radial gate
is locked closed. Therefore, there is a risk to safety
if nobody is in a position to unlock it if the need
arises.  Therefore, they are always manned. When they
are opened back there is no need to do anything.

I realise the system did work but I am just thinking of
the possibility of a different line if I may be allowed
to develop this. The capacity was the same in 1981 as
in 1989, wasn't it, for the terrace? - A. In honesty I
have known the capacity always to be 10,100 and if that
was the capacity in 1981, I assume it was, and as far
as I am aware there was no change to capacity and so I
presume that figure is 10,100.

That is for the West and the North West, isn't it? - A.
That is the whole terrace.

Crushing had occurred when the whole terrace was used
and it seemed the crushing occurred then because that
was the most popular part of the terrace.   That seemed
to be the reason. Would you agree with that? - A. I
don't think I can really answer, sir. I was not there.
I would be speculating.  I think I would be
speculating.

There was nothing to stop fans doing exactly the same
thing as in 1981 at any Semi Final really, was there,
if they felt they would like to go to the centre if the
gates were open for them? - A. I do not think there was
the same ease of movement that there was in 1981. As I
have said, I think my understanding was that the
Working Party, that is everybody, were agreed that the
introduction of the radial fences had resolved the
problem of 1981.  I must say I have operated
Hillsborough from that base line as a knowledge of
understanding that it is safe.  I have had to operate
within that base.

After the introduction of the radial fences they were
penned in apart from the fact that there was a gate,
weren't they? - A. They were in pens, yes.

Unless someone was supervising or monitoring those
pens, at the radial gates, the point of access, it
could be difficult for the fans to know there was a
point of access there at all, wouldn't it? If the
crowd got quite large in the centre, that access point
could become obscure. They would not know it was
there? - A. I think in response, sir, there are two or
three questions in there. Monitoring was mentioned.
There was monitoring which I have described. So far as
the radial fences are concerned and the gates I have
agreed that they could probably not be seen when the
pens were full. The other point I made was that the
vast majority, or certainly a very large majority, were
regular attenders at Sheffield Wednesday and used that
end of the ground and had an intimate knowledge of the
terraces. So there are three aspects.   I do agree that
once it is full you cannot see whether the gates are
there or not.

I agree that under normal circumstances when the
density is not too great they would probably find their
way out either through the tunnel or to the side but in
the event of it becoming very crowded, as it did in
1989, the side gates could become blocked unless
somebody was preventing them from becoming blocked,
somebody in authority I mean.

     THE CORONER:  I think what Mrs. McBrien is
asking - and he has already agreed with you so that you
are in danger now of him changing his mind.

What I think she is trying to say is that if the centre
pens are full and you do not have anybody at the radial
gates then people who might be wanting to come in from
the edges, if you like, like in 1981, in other words a
central movement? - A. Yes.

Would be able to do so through those gates. Would it,
therefore, not be wiser in order to prevent ingress
through the radial gates to have somebody there?

     THE CORONER:    That is right, isn’t it?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes.

     THE CORONER: You are not talking about people
getting out of the centre pens but you are really
talking about people coming in through the radial
gates. Have I understood you?

     MRS. McBRIEN:  If there was control at the radial
gates I think the Police Officers would ensure there
was no congestion at that point because any point of
access needs a uncongested area near it otherwise you
would not be able to use it. “ A. I think there are
two issues really.  I do not agree because, as I said
earlier, the presence of an Officer, a steward or
anybody at that place I think would become ineffectual.
In practical terms once you have a mass of people of
10,000 to try and say, "You can come in" or "You can't
go out" or "That is two in and three out so that I can
let another two in" and whatever, is a very impractical
situation. What I think I tried to explain last week
in answer to the Coroner was that if overcrowding, if a
problem was seen, there would be ways of me dealing
with it. I think the ways, and I say if it was seen,
are the way of dealing with.  I have talked about the
serial coming down the tunnel, the encouragement and
the pushing out the sides, coming from the wings and
doing the same, and from my experience that is the way
rather than losing the services of three Officers or
whatever who could do very little in real terms of the
movement. That is how I see it.

I have got other questions relating to this and we will
probably be going over a little of that ground as we go
along. You would agree the reason the radial fences
and gates were put there was for greater control?

     THE CORONER:  I think Mr. Mole has answered the
question several times. Mind you, you are not the only
one who keeps on repeating the question in fairness to
you.




                      /Q.   MRS. McBRIEN:   We know
                                             B. L. MOLE


     MRS. McBRIEN:   We know find your own level worked
in 1987 and '88? - A. Yes, ma'am.

And that was without the assistance of Police Officers
on Leppings Lane terrace, but the system as I
understood was not meant to be operated in that way,
according to Dr. Eastwood? - A. I really can't comment
about Dr. Eastwood. He is not a practical deployment
operational commander.

He did say that he understood that there was going to
be Police control at the gates and that was in
documentation? - A. Yes.

So he said. - A. I think that, as I understood it, and
we have been referred to it, is when the gates are
locked they will be controlled, and I think the
difference is as I have described.

As he said that, this is how I understood it, I may be
wrong, but I presumed that Police control at the radial
gates was (1) to draw attention to the fact that the
access point was there at all, (2) to make sure that
the area round that gate did not become blocked at any
tlID6 • • • •

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I am very sorry, you
are making a speech, it is patently obvious. This
Officer has already given you an answer three minutes
ago as to why he didn't think he wanted a Police
Officer at that gate. You may think he is talking
rubbish, I don't know. That is a matter for you. The
Jury will make up their mind whether they think he is
right or wrong, but what you think the purpose of that
Officer is, is neither here nor there. He has told you
fairly simply why he had Officers there when it was
sequential filling, why he did not have Officers there
when it was not sequentially filled, and why he did not
think he wanted Officers there in that situation. That
is all you need and whether that is right or wrong is
another matter.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Would you say the main task of the
Police is to protect persons, that is the first
priority? - A. Preservation of life and property, yes.

And by having an Officer positioned in that point, if
there was a minor incident on the terrace he would be
there^right at hand to deal with it, wouldn't he? - A.
I can't agree with that, because he would be right at
hand to deal with those within about a yard of him. He
would not be right on hand to deal with those within
three yards, five yards or ten yards. He would be
ineffectual, that is my view.
                                              B. L. MOLE


When people are in control it is easier to control
those that you are trying to control if you are there,
rather than if you are in the next field, for instance,
with a fence between you, aren't you? It is easier,
the closer you are to them the easier to control them?
- A. I can't add anything.  I can't add to the
explanation I have already given.

All right. Do you know how many Police Officers
policed the 1988 semi-final? - A. At the Stadium or
overall? Something in the region of 900 overall, I
think, and it is a long time ago, I am guessing.  I
always work between, pushing up to the 1,000 is the
kind of number of Officers all together involved in the
semi-final, so I would have thought in the 900 mark,
and I can't be sure.

Out of that number are you saying that not one of them
was, if I can use the word, brave enough to go ....

     THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien.   Are you back on
the radial gates?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   No, I am talking about the terrace
as a whole, to position Officers on the terrace ....

     THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien, I won't allow
that question.  It is totally improper.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   But you told me, Chief
Superintendent, that you did position two serials on
the Spion Kop, which is a standing area which takes
double the number that was on the Leppings Lane
terrace? - A. Yes.

Am I right in saying this, that you did say you felt it
was dangerous for Police Officers to go onto the
Leppings Lane terrace? - A. Entirely different areas,
and I think I gave you the description of saying at the
back, which is an open area of the tunnel - it is now
closed because it has got a covered top to it - and at
the entrances.  It is difficult to describe because the
picture is not there but they are enormously wide
entrances, the top of stairs, which is the same as
being stood at the top of the tunnel on the Leppings
Lane, or at the top of the tunnel on the two wings.
They are the same positions but superimposed on the Kop
so there is no difference in the deployment. The two
serials 14 and 15 on Leppings Lane carry out that
function and from the Order, as I recall it, in phase 2
they move to the tunnel or move to the wings, and it is
exactly the same position that they occupy on the Kop,
in real terms. They are not actually amongst the crowd
on the Kop, and the over-view, if I can draw an analogy
                                              B. L. MOLE


with the West Stand Officersj are those at the back of
the Kop, who are looking down on the Kop as those on
the West Stand are looking down on the terrace, but
they are not amongst the crowd.  I don't know if I make
myself clear?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I have understood you
perfectly and I am sure the Jury have.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I am not absolutely clear.  I
understood that they were on that terrace. That is
what I understood this morning, that they were at the
back of the crowds? - A. Right at the top of the Kop
and they are in position so they have got an over-view,
the same as the West Stand Officers have an over-view,
and in the entrances. There are about three through
the middle of the Kop.

Could there have been a possibility of putting more
than one, a few Officers, at the points on the terrace?

     THE CORONER:   Don't answer that one either.   Next
question, Mrs. McBrien.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   As the radial gates were left open
and nobody was there controlling them, there was
nothing to stop fans using pen 5, the corridor, was
there? - A. That is correct.

Do you know if that was used?

     THE CORONER:    Which year.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    1988. - A. I think some fans were
in there in 1988.

So it could be used? - A. I would think so.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    I think I am getting abit muddled
at the moment? Could I just sit down for a moment,
please, to try and sort ....

     THE CORONER:   Of course you can, yes. Do you
want Mr. Russell to go while you are sorting out your
papers?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, please.

           Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

Chief Superintendent, could you help me with this,
please? What was the experience of the Sheffield
Wednesday Football Club and the South Yorkshire Police
in policing semi-finals when compared to other venues
                                             B. L. MOLE


in England? - A. I think from memory we have policed
some 13 semi-finals over the last 20 years, and are
probably ahead of any other ground within the country
in that kind of numbers.  I might be slightly out but
certainly we at Sheffield Wednesday, when I say we,
Sheffield Wednesday have staged far more semi-finals, I
think, than most clubs.

And as a result of that experience the organisation of
the operation had evolved through those 13 semi-finals
in the preceding 20 years? - A. That is correct, sir.




                       /Q. It is right .
                                                           66


                                    B.L. MOLE



Q. It is right, isn't it, that there was a special Police
   operation engaged for semi-finals? - A. Indeed there
   was, yes.

Q. Can I deal for a moment with the hierarchy of the senior
   Police Officers comparing semi-finals to other matches.

         It is right, isn't it, that the role of a Super­
   intendent as the Ground Commander is unique to semi­
   finals? - A. It is sir, yes.

Q. At ordinary games you will have a Superintendent doing
   the same job as the Ground Controller sitting in the
   chair occupied by Superintendent Murray? - A. That is
   correct sir, yes.

Q. In the Police Box and you will have a Chief Inspector
   outside the Leppings Lane terraces doing the job carried
   out by Superintendent Marshall? - A. That is correct
   sir.

Q. And you will have a Chief Inspector outside the Penistone
   Road turnstiles doing the same job that was on the day
   carried out by Superintendent Chapman? - A. That is
   correct sir, yes.

Q. And there is no role of Ground Commander as fulfilled
   by Superintendent Marshall in 1988 or Superintendent
   Greenwood in 1989 at ordinary matches? - A. That is
   correct sir, yes.

Q. So is the system this that the system worked satis­
   factorily at big matches which were not semi-finals
   without someone doing the job that Superintendent Marshall
   did in 1988 and Superintendent Greenwood did in 1989?
   - A. That is correct sir, the only addition would be
   if I or my Deputy took overall command and would be
   outside and inside superimposed upon the Chief
   Inspectors referred to.

Q. So the effect of a semi-final fixture is to up the
   rank of the Officers in command at each end outside
   the ground and to create a new role also discharged
   by a Superintendent? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

Q. Would it be fair to say that you interpreted your role
   as overall Commander as something of a roving brief?
   - A. That is correct sir, yes.

Q. And is this also right, that the role of Ground
   Commander on semi-final days was also something of
   a roving commission within the stadium? - A. Everything
   within the confines of the stadium sir, yes.
                                                            67


                                     B.L. MOLE



Q. But not a role that is linked to one particular area
   of concern but I use the phrase a "roving commission"
   within the stadium? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

Q. The Operational Order which is in that black bundle,
   if I can ask you to turn to it, 285 is the number. Do
   you have it Chief Superintendent? - A. Yes, I have.

Q. Could you please turn to page 15 in it? - A. Yes.

Q. It is "Appendix 'A(i)' and it is headed:   "SENIOR
   OFFICERS DUTIES". That page identifies the dramatis
   personae of the senior Officers in the Operational
   Order for 1989*, doesn't it? - A. Yes sir.

Q. We can see in overall command Chief Superintendent
   Duckenfield; Ground Controller Superintendent Murray
   and the Commander of Sector 1, which is the ground.
   Superintendent Greenwood? - A. That is correct sir,
   yes.
Q. Notionally according to the Operational Order under
   Superintendent Greenwood there are 21 Serials? - A.
   Yes sir.
Q. Two Chief Inspectors, one in command of Section 1A,
   Serials 1-10? - A. Yes sir.

Q. One in command of Sector IB, Serials 11-21 inclusive?
   - A. Well Serials 11-19 and then two reserves.

Q. I will come to reserves in a moment.  If you turn over
   the page on page 16 one can see how under each of
   the two Chief Inspectors there are a total I think
   of 9 Inspectors, leaving aside for the moment the
   Inspectors in charge of the reserve Serials? - A. That
   is correct sir, yes.
Q. And under them the Sergeants and under them the Constables
   constituting the members of the Serials? - A. Yes sir.

Q. Now I hope we can do this without going to the details
   of the Serials in the body of the Operational Order,
   but it is right, isn't it, that Serials 16-19 during
   Phase 1 had duties that were outside the turnstiles?
   - A. Control of turnstiles sir, yes, that is correct.

Q. And the turnstile area? - A. And the area outside, yes,
   that is the area.

Q. Now, Chief Superintendent, all Officers who have been
   asked about this, about the answerability of those
   Serials during Phase 1, have agreed that while the
   Serials were outside or doing turnstile duty, they
   were in practice answerable to Superintendent Marshall
                                                            68


                                     B.L. MOLE



  although the Operational Order puts them under the
  notional control of Superintendent Greenwood? - A.
  Yes sir.

Q. Indeed Superintendent Marshall told us that that was
   the practice in 1988 when he was Ground Commander
   as much as in 1989 when he was outside the turnstiles?
   - A. Absolutely right sir, yes.

Q. Is that your experience and your expectation of how
   the reality of command is applied notwithstanding
   the terms of the Operational Order? - A. Yes it is sir.

Q. Dealing briefly with the reserve Serials, they are
   listed under Sector 1, the Ground Commander's Sector
   on page 15 of the Operational Order? - A. Yes sir.

Q. But in reality and in fact they were at the disposal
   of Ground Control? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

Q. The job of Ground Commander takes into account areas
   within the stadium behind the South Stand; behind and
   under the North Stand; the concourse area behind the
   West Stand; a number of areas all of which cannot be
   seen from any one place at any one time. Is that
   right? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

Q. And so would you agree that communications between
   the Ground Commander and the men under him is an
   important element if the operation is going to work
   smoothly? - A. It is indeed sir, yes.

Q. Now you have had large chunks of Chief Inspector
   Creaser's evidence recited to you while you have
   given evidence. I am not going to do that but I am
   going to seek to summarise his understanding of the
   situation of communication and ask you whether you
   aqree or disaqree with it.

         Now Chief Inspector Creaser told us that if
   he considered that he had adequate resources to deal
   with the situation and was able to deal with the
   situation, he would deal with that situation without
   referring upwards to his immediate superior who
   according to the Operational Order was Superintendent
   Greenwood? - A. That would be in accordance with my
   policy sir and I would expect it.

Q. If the Sector Commander is not referred to he is
   entitled to assume, is he not, that those under
   him are able to discharge their duties and have
   sufficient resources with which to do so? - A. If they
   had not they would come back to him.
                                                           69

                                     B.L. MOLE



Q. But equally if reference has to be made because there
   are insufficient resources or more help is needed,
   then that reference is made at least in the first
   instance to Ground Control? - A. That is correct sir,
   yes.
Q. The organ that you described as being, I think, the
   "hub of operations"? - A. That is right sir, yes.

Q. And you agree with the events in which reference would
   be made to Ground Control? - A. Absolutely sir, yes.

Q. The means of communication, if communication is to
   be made to the Ground Commander is by radio, is it not? .
   - a . Yes sir.
Q. Unless of course the Ground Commander happens to be in
   a particular place at a particular time to enable
   face-to-face personal contact? - A. He would occasionally
   visit the Control Room or other places but normally
   it would be by radio.
Q. You have described to us the system of radio communication
   in operation at that date, that of talk-through? - A.
   Yes sir.
Q. I think that system depends upon someone who is seeking
   to make a communication continuing to speak and the
   situation neither breaking down nor someone else jumping
   in when that person who is making the communication
   draws breath in which event the communication can become
   lost? - A. It can sir, yes.

Q. Can you help us with this. I don't think we have had
   this evidence before. What was the system of call signs
   adopted for senior Police Officers? - A. I think we
   discussed it last week to say that I gave my call sign
   but they changed to names on this operation.

Q. I apologise.  I could not remember whether I had read
   it here or elsewhere.
         So Superintendent Greenwood for the 1989 or even
   the 1988 semi-final would he have been referred to by
   name or by a particular call sign? - A. Can I first of
   all say all Chief Superintendents have a yankie call
   sign. All Superintendents have an x-ray call sign so
   there could be some confusion when you have a number of
   Superintendents, albeit it we utilised x-ray 1; x-ray 2;
   x-ray 3 for the three sectors, i.e. Sector 1, 2 and 3
   which in 1988 would have been Marshall, Greenwood and
   Chapman, but that found also some confusion because
   if you missed off the number or got confused so the name
                                                       70

                                  B.L. MOLE



I think was introduced in 1989 which made it crystal
clear as to who you were speaking to or trying to
contact.




                        Q. So if it was ....
                                                             71

                                                    B. L; MOLE


Q. So if it was important for contact to be made with
   Superintendent Greenwood in 1989 it would have been
   necessary for the person seeking to make that contact to
   use his name rather than any call sign? - A. That is as I
   understand it.

Q. Now we have heard evidence of the radio communications
   being impeded by some technical problems on the day. I
   just want to consider with you for the moment any other
   matters that might affect efficient radio communication.
   Now you won't have been here but you may have heard that
   the linesman who was in the first half to run the South
   Stand touchline gave evidence.   He described the noise
   within the stadium as being a greater volume of noise
   than he had ever experienced outside Greece at a football
   match.   Now against that background, does that degree of
   noise in the build-up to a match such as this, help or
   hinder the use of personal radios? - A. It certainly
   hinders it.   We have tried to address it with earpieces,
   but even then it is difficult sometimes to pick up calls.

Q. You have been asked by two or three advocates about the
   changes made between 1988 and 1989, and in particular the
   swop of Superintendent Marshall for Superintendent
   Greenwood.   A few moments ago Mrs. McBrien asked you
   whether it stemmed from a request by Superintendent
   Marshall that he be changed.   Do you remember whether
   that is right or whether it stems from an initiative
   begun by you that there should be a change? - A. My
   recollection is that it was my intention to change them
   because of the reason I gave last week, that
   Mr. Marshall's recent experience was greater than
   Mr. Greenwood's with regard to Leppings Lane.
   Mr. Greenwood's knowledge of the ground was extensive.
   He had worked there for some seasons before but the
   up-to-date situation outside was something he had not
   been in touch with in recent times so I felt it better.

   I think Mrs. McBrien said   I asked Mr. Marshall which he
   would like to do.   I may   well have done.   In order that
   he would respond with his   decision which coincidentally
   coincided with mine, that   I felt he would be better
   outside.

Q. Can I clarify this so this is absolutely crystal clear?
   We know in terms of the previous semi-final experience,
   it was Superintendent Greenwood who had done
   Superintendent Marshall's job both in 1987 and 1988? - A.
   That is correct.

Q. Had there been anything about the way in which
   Superintendent Greenwood had discharged those duties as
   the Superintendent outside the Leppings Lane end which
   prompted the change? - A. Nothing at all.   I think I
                                                              72

                                                     B. L.' MOLE


     have said a number of times that each and every one of my
     Sector Commanders I value their experience, their
     professionalism and I had every confidence in their
     carrying out the roles I gave them.

Q. It was Superintendent Marshall's local knowledge, the
   factors such as roadworks and transient matters within
   the area outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles which
   prompted the change? - A. Absolutely.   There are such
   things as licensed premises and whether they are full,
   empty.   Whether or not the beer-offs are selling or not
   selling.   The roadworks, all the little things that go
   into day to day policing, it is important that an Officer
   commanding an outside area is aware and fully up to date .
   with attitudes and various aspects that are taking place,
   that is the whole and sole reason why I thought it was
   much better for Mr. Marshall to look after the outside
   with a year's experience behind him of recent matches.

0. Can I briefly return to your roving role and then perhaps
   we can move  on to the Ground Commanders's roving role in
   the context  of the semi-final?    You have told us that it
   was your practice to walk about - to use the phrase you
   have used - to "feel the air"? - A. Yes.

Q. Prior to the game starting.    You told us it was your
   practice to   end up at the players' tunnel before the
   kick-off some several minutes before the kick-off, before
   the teams came out? - A. That is right.    About ten
   minutes before ten to.

Q. From about ten minutes before the kick-off?    - A. Yes.

Q.    Once again in order to feel the air within the stadium? -
     A. That is correct, sir.

0.   No doubt as part of the process of becoming acquainted
     with the air in the stadium you have in the past done a
     circumnavigation of the perimeter track before ending up
     at the players' tunnel? - A. I have indeed, sir, many
     times.

Q. Would you consider it natural or unnatural for a Ground
   Commander at a semi-final, especially in circumstances
   where the overall Commander has sited himself in the
   Control Box, to do just that?   Namely, make a
   circumnavigation of the perimeter track during the half
   hour prior to the kick-off and end up at the players'
   tunnel in time for the emergence of the players before
   the match? - A. I would expect that of any Ground
   Commander but knowing Mr. Greenwood I know he would do it
   because he too would get the flavour and feel of the air,
   as I have said.
                                                B. L.- MOLE


If, in making such a tour of the ground, he would for
much of that tour be in view of the Control Box, even if
there were difficulties in making radio contact? - A.
Indeed he would, sir, yes.

The Control Box would be able to see him walking round
the perimeter track? - A. Absolutely, sir, yes.

In making that tour he would be in contact with a large
number of his Sergeants and the members of those Serials
to whom they could refer any problems they had if they
felt it was necessary to do so? - A. That is an
additional purpose of the tour, sir, to relate to the
Officers, to see if they are all right.   Anything they
recognise they would relate to him, etc.

In seeking to get a feel of the air within the stadium he
would be in a position to observe the signs of normality
or abnormality being displayed by the crowd? - A.
Absolutely, sir, yes.

The signs of normality being singing, chanting? - A. Yes,
sir.

Clapping? - A. Yes.

Saluting the names of teams being read out? - A. That is
correct, sir, yes.

Playing with inflatable objects? - A. Indeed yes, sir.

I wonder if I could invite you to look at a photograph
and invite you to consider whether it shows a scene of
normality for the position fourteen minutes before a
kick-off, or abnormality?   It is C.477. - A. I would see
that as normality.

That is, as I am sure you can appreciate, taken from the
right hand side of the goal at   the Leppings Lane end. -
A. The mouth of the tunnel.

Pen 3 and the front of pen 4? - A. Yes, sir.

One can see, that in the front of pen 4 there is a
considerable degree of space in particular? - A. Indeed,
sir, yes.

C.478, which is the next photograph in the bundle. - A.
Yes, sir.   Again normality, sir.

The timing on both these photographs is a corrected time
of fourteen minutes to three and the third photograph in
the sequence taken at the same time is C.344, if I can
               *   ♦
                                                  B. L.' MOLE


ask you to turn to that briefly. - A. Yes, sir.      I would
say that is normality again.

Nothing in those photographs of the scene of the centre
pens of the Leppings Lane terraces at fourteen minutes to
three which would prompt the Ground Commander to contact
the Control Box or institute any of the measures you have
identified if you observed overcrowding? - A. Those views
would certainly not activate my mind to any course of
action.   I would think things were going well, sir.

In your experience you have known a large number of
supporters arrive in the last few minutes or arrive
shortly before kick-off, is that right? - A. Yes, sir.

Is it right that at about quarter of an hour before kick-
off you would expect to see on the terraces disparity
between the centre behind the goal and the position in
the wing pens? - A. Yes, sir.

We have heard that in particular the front of the wing
pens tend to be the last places to fill up, is that
right? - A. That's right, sir.

At about quarter to three one would expect to see
disparity between the pens and in particular the front of
the wing pens? - A. Yes, sir.

Perhaps I can illustrate that in the photograph which was
taken when you were last in control, C.490? - A. Yes,
sir.

That is a photograph taken, it would appear, from
approximately the steps of the Police Control Box looking
north over the Leppings Lane terraces.   Can you
orientate yourself? - A. Yes, sir.

You can appreciate where it was taken from? - A. Yes.

It shows a lesser density in the foreground in pens 1 and
2, particularly down at the front, than appears to be the
case in the centre section? - A. Yes, sir.

That is no more than you would expect, in your
experience, knowing the propensities for there being
local differences in densities between the front of the
wing pens and the centre section? - A. I would see
nothing wrong in that, sir.

You have agreed that it would be natural for the Ground
Commander to situate himself at about the players' tunnel
before the teams came on to the pitch? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                B. L. MOLE


Having made a circumnavigation of the ground in ordinary
circumstances.   Can I put to you two further factors and
ask you whether in the light of these factors you would
expect the Ground Commander to be somewhere else?    First
of all, in relation to the Spion Kop you have told us
there was an area - and we have heard from other
witnesses - reserved for Liverpool supporters in the
Spion Kop? - A. Yes, sir.




        Q. Who had tickets
Q. Who had tickets for what was ostensibly the Nottingham
   Forrest end? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Had you heard of the trouble that there was with the
   demarcation between supporters at the 1988 Semi
   Final? - A. It was extremely difficult, sir, yes.

Q. In 1989 would that be a natural source of concern for
   the Ground Commander? - A. I would expect him to brief
   the Sector Commander about it and I would expect him to
   address his mind to it very positively because it was
   an area of confrontation which we had been alerted to
   and would be expected to respond to.

Q. I think from the players' tunnel one would have a good
   view across that goal towards that area of possible
   friction? - A. Would indeed, sir, yes.

Q. The second factor I invite you to consider is the
   considerable media interest that we have heard about
   that surrounded the manager of Nottingham Forrest, Mr.
   Clough, who at the time was subject to a touch line
   ban? - A. Yes, sir.

Q* It had attracted media interest.     Is that something you
   knew about? - A. I did, sir, yes.

Q.    We have heard there was a considerable number of
     cameras and newsmen attending the players' tunnel
     waiting for the teams and in particular Mr. Clough to
     come out? - A. It is always very difficult. Some can
     be extremely obstructive unless controlled.

Q. Again a factor that would prompt the Ground Commander
   in such a situation to situate himself by the players'
   tunnel? - A. Yes, sir, indeed.

Q.    Just four more matters; first of   all, can Iinvite you
     to look at a black and    white photograph taken in1988?
     It is C.491? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. We have established with another witness that that was
   a photograph taken during the first half of the 1988
   Semi Final? - a . Yes, sir.

Q. It shows the Leppings Lane terraces and what has been
   pointed out is the presence of Police Officers in the
   mouth of the tunnel at the back of pen 3. Can you  see
   them? - A. I can indeed, sir, yes.

Q. It was suggested to another witness that those Police
   Officers were clearly stationed at the back of the pens
   as part of their duties as Police Officers during phase
                                                               77

                                                        B. L. MOLE


   2. I want you to consider whether that is right in
   view of the direction given to Serials 14 and 17 in
   1989 and I think we can deal with the relevant serial
   in 1988. Were there not two serials situated in the
   central tunnel during phase 2 in 1988? - A. That is
   correct. That is the deployment place for them, sir.

Q. So we have that extract from the Operational Order for
   1988 but I am afraid I have not got a copy and cannot
   remember it? - A. The normal deployment would be that
   they go to tunnels at phase 2 and stand in the tunnels
   and on the wings the other serials go to the far wings.

Q. The purpose of their being in the tunnels is to respond
   to situations where they might be needed? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. If there were no alarms or reasons for   them to carry
   out a particular duty, would you agree   it would be
   natural for those Officers to take the   advantage of
   watching a game of football such as an   FA Cup Semi
   Final? - A. I am sure they would, sir,   yes.

Q. In your view is that what those Officers are doing? -
   A. Looking at the photograph it looks as if they are
   sometimes straining to look at the match, sir, yes.

Q. Chief Superintendent, you have told us that when you
   have been dealing with capacity games it was your
   experience and your practise for the radial gates to be
   locked in an open position? - A. Yes, sir.

Q . For the supporters on the Leppings Lane terraces to
    find their own level? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. In your experience this had worked? - A. Extremely
   well, sir, yes.

Q. Moreover if difficulties were perceived by Officers who
   were in position or expected to perceive them then a
   report would be passed to Control or action taken? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. You have identified some of those Officers who might be
   in a position to so react the Officers in the West
   Stand? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. In 1989 the Inspector in charge of the West Stand was
   an Inspector David Bullas? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Is he an Officer who is known to you? - A. He is
   indeed, sir, yes.
Had he done a similar duty before 1989 so far as you
can recall? - A. He has certainly worked for me in the
past at football matches.  I could not tell you which
matches but I do know Mr. Bullas.

In relation to your expectation of Officers who were in
a position to monitor, perceiving difficulties and then
reacting to them, can I outline the evidence of
Inspector Bullas to you and ask you whether that is the
sort of thing you would expect from such an Officer? -
A. Yes, sir.

First of all, if Sergeant Griffiths could put up C.459.
(photograph put on screen) Inspector Bullas has
identified himself on the right hand side of that
photograph above the E for engineering? - A. That is
Inspector Bullas, sir, yes.

That photograph we know was taken at about 14 minutes
to 3? - A. Yes, sir.

He told us at that stage all was in order. He told us
that he had to go away and deal with another matter up
in the West Stand. He returned to approximately that
position very shortly before the kick-off and observed
what he described as a river of people pouring into the
centre pens below him. He made an attempt to contact
the Control Box by means of his radio but was unable to
do so. He attempted to gesticulate to attract the
attention of the track Officers and then left that
position in order to go down to the concourse area at
the point where he left the West Stand or, the sight of
the pitch from the West Stand, he saw that the gate had
been opened and within two minutes was down in the
concourse area and began a process of his own
initiative of helping people out from the back of pens
3 and 4 down through the tunnel? - A. I would expect
everything he did there to be the kind of action Mr.
Bullas would take, sir.

Can I return to something that Mr. Catchpole touched
upon this morning? Again taking as a starting point
something Mr. King dealt with on Friday; you described
it as a possible option for supporters coming in
through gates A to G or gate C to go down the tunnel? -
A. Yes, sir.

If I can just put the piece of evidence that I believe
Mr. Catchpole was referring to, I would suggest you
would not be surprised by the finding or calculation of
Dr. Nicholson, or the calculation derived from the
finding of Dr. Nicholson, that more than two thirds of
the total people who went through both gates A to G and
gate C ended up elsewhere than in pens 3 and 4? - A. I
would not be surprised, sir.

Finally Chief Superintendent, can I turn to the
question of planning? It is a matter of common sense,
is it not that planning is founded upon experience from
the past and intelligence as to what one might expect
for which the plan is being made? - A. Indeed it is,
sir, yes.

Those include all facets of the fixture that is to be
played, the ground, the Nottingham supporters on a game
such as this, Liverpool supporters and so on? - A. It
does, sir, yes.

You were asked earlier today to look at an Operational
Order for the match between Sheffield Wednesday and
Liverpool in January 1989 which was given the reference
C.515. Do you have that, Chief Superintendent? - A.
Yes, sir.

That would have been a League game. The match category
is B plus. What does that mean? - A. That is top of
the range for public order, for size of crowd and one
which I might well have commanded.

We see at item 1.2.4 information regarding away fans:

    "Liverpool fans have caused little trouble this
    season. However, it is well known from the
    past that many could arrive at the ground the
    worst for drink."

A. Yes, sir.

Is that the sort of example of intelligence that helps
you plan for the future of a particular fixture? - A.
It is indeed, sir, yes.

I want to ask a question which may seem a little
convoluted and maybe I will have to ask it more •M i**"
once for it to be understood. Have you come across any
matters of intelligence or behaviour, or propensity to
behave, by Liverpool supporters which, although it had
occurred before April 1989, only came to your attention
after April 1989 which could have affected your
approach to the planning of this fixture and in
particular to the forces deployed outside the Leppings
Lane end? - A. I have, sir, yes.

What sorts of information or intelligence has come to
hand? - A. I am conscious that intelligence has been
gathered which shows that an element of supporters
                                                                       80

                                                                B. L. MOLE

             following Liverpool have on a number of occasions at
             various grounds throughout the country have come late
    H |      in fair numbers and tried - I think probably the word
      '      would best be blackmail - to blackmail their way into
             the stadium either under the threat of causing damage
             or destruction in various areas around the Club or on
             pressurising the staff to admit them in. This was
             brought to my attention, the latest one, was in fact
             the Final where that happened exactly at Wembley
             shortly after this disaster.

          Q. No, I was concerned with before. You have
             misunderstood the question.  I was only concerned with
             behaviour or a propensity to behave which had occurred
             before April 1989 but only came to your knowledge after
             1989.  In other words... - A. That is correct. A
             similar example was the one I have just referred to as
             well which was a continuance of it.

          Q. It may be asked, why if you were able to discover these
|%|          things after 1989, why you were not able to discover
             them before that? - A. I think the only answer I can
             give is what I gave the other day with regard to the
             closing of the tunnel when I said that people often
             recognise a problem and through experience and
             knowledge rectify it and deal with it and it is no
             longer a problem.  I would venture to suggest that
             human failure has failed to bring forward an
             intelligence aspect which might have been of benefit
             and I can only suggest, and it is purely conjecture,
             that having had the event happen, having dealt with it,
             dispersed it, absorbed it or whatever, then the problem
             was not a problem and in isolation it would only be one
             instance. Having made enquiries numbers of similar
             occurrences have been identified which in themselves
             would then have led me to a different course of action.

          Q. What effect would you having that information when you
             were preparing the plan for the 1989 SEmi Final have
             had? - A. Contingency plans would have had to have been
             drawn to deal with that type of activity ie the
             expectancy of a number, whatever that number might be,
             of individuals intent on gaining entry to the ground
             whether it be with payment or without, or trying to
             blackmail into some other course of action by
             threatening to rampage through towns and I would have
             had to have been looking at how I would deal with that.

                 MR. RUSSELL:   Thank you very much.

                 THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, how many more
            questions have you got or perhaps you have not got any,
            I do not know?



H
     MRS. McBRIEN: Not many really.   I am not even
sure whether I will be allowed to ask what I want to
ask and so I may have none.

     THE CORONER: Shall we pause for a few minutes for
just a very quick break and then allow Mrs. McBrien to
ask her questions and then we will start on Mr.
Jackson.  I will try not to be too late but we will
overshoot the four o'clock mark.  I think you ought to
plan to expect that we will go on a little bit longer
because we have got to bring the evidence to a close.
You should assume that I will be aiming at 4.30, not
necessarily today but as from now. Some days we may
not have to but you can plan on that basis.

                  (Short Adjournment)
                                                  B. L. MOLE


         Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I am not sure if these are going
to be questions but they are things that I think about.

       THE CORONER:      Yes, go on and I will listen to
you.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Perhaps you could help, Chief
Superintendent. You said when you have a crowd of
50,000 or thereabouts that you need to monitor
carefully, the bigger the crowd the more monitoring you
would need? - A. I think that is right in any
situation, yes.

That would mean taking action if there was marked
disparity on the Leppings Lane terrace, wouldn't it? -
A. Not necessarily.  I tried to explain, I think, the
other day that marked disparity does not always equate
with problematic disparity.  If there was a problem and
I recognised it then I would have to take action.  If
it was not a problem then no, I would not.

I know you were not there in 1989 but there was marked
disparity that year, wasn't there? - A. Well, the
photographs I have just examined did not give me that
impression, not a marked disparity that I would have to
react to. I found those photographs, and they are the
only ones I have looked at here today, as being normal,
in my experience.

     MR. KING:   I don't think the Witness, to be fair
to both Mrs. McBrien and the Witness, has been shown
any photographs ....

       THE CORONER:      He has only been shown a particular


     MR. KING:   He has not been shown any photographs
of 1989 showing centre pens and wing pens, he has only
been shown the centre pens.

     THE CORONER:        No, that is quite true, but it is a
fair answer.

     MR. KING:   Absolutely, sir, but he may be at
cross purposes with Mrs. McBrien.

     THE CORONER:   Do you know the number of the
photograph because that might help Mrs. McBrien.

       MR. KING:      There is C509, C511 and C326A, sir.

       THE CORONER:      We will put them up.
                                                  B. L. MOLE


     MR. GRIFFITHS:      C509, sir.

     MR. KING:      I think that is 14.52, sir.

     THE CORONER:     Can you see that one? - A. 509 I
have, yes.

That is 14.52. You can see the clock. - A. Once again,
I think, in response, I would take into account all the
many factors I have mentioned, and there are such
things as people punching the air, there is movement.
There is nothing for me to say I have got a problem.
The disparity is there but it is not something, and I
did say also I think some people would be offended if I
moved them, having obtained the better positions in the
Stadium to be very unceremoniously removed, so there
are many considerations, but looking at that photograph
that would not say to me I had got a problem.

     MRS. McBRIEN:     Is that 1988 or 1989?

     THE CORONER:     It is 1989, Mrs. McBrien.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   That is at 14.52 - it looks as
though it is evenly spread to me. Maybe it is my eyes.

     THE CORONER:   Do you want the Witness to have a
look at the other photographs?

     MRS. McBRIEN:     Yes, please.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     511, sir, 14.54.

     THE CORONER:   That is 6-minutes-to. - A. Looking
at the copy I have exactly the same applies, there are
arms in the air, there are the normal activity I would
expect from a crowd waiting, the expectancy of the
match to begin. Whilst I can see in the bottom right
hand corner there is space, it does not necessarily
dictate that I would move people.  I think that looks
fairly normal.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   That is at 14.54 and it is still
quite normal to you? - A. Well, I am only looking at a
photograph and it is quite clear that people can move
their arms in the air, they are shouting and moving
about and it looks quite normal.

     THE CORONER:     What is the next one?

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     The next one, sir, is C326A,
taken at 14.59.

     THE WITNESS:     It is not a good copy I have here.
                                              B. L. MOLE


     THE CORONER:   They are all bad. - A. Quite
clearly the front part of the pens looks very
congested, and quite clearly there is activity on the
pitch. My mind would be saying something is happening,
what I don't know, it depends where I was.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   You personally would have said
something needs to be done at 14.59? - A. Quite clearly
I would be saying something is happening there, at
whatever time that is, looking at that picture. There
are people on the track, there is quite a density in
the middle there, something, and it could be many
things, I have to say - it could be crowding as was the
case, it could be all sorts of things but quite clearly
my mind would say something is happening, and that word
I have used, I have got a problem, whatever it might be
it needs addressing.

Would it be obvious to you that looked like
overcrowding? - A. Not necessarily. That is a better
picture than the one I have here, sir (indicating the
screen). I would be surprised at the very great gap at
that time, on the right, and quite clearly the front of
the pens looks heavily congested, but I would need an
update from somebody who was really on top of it. I
would need either to look at it myself, but the thing
is my mind would be flagged to say, "I need to give it
some attention".

So at that point would you rely on the Officers on the
track and in the West Terrace to give you information?
- A . I would expect them to be recognising much the
same as I am recognising.   I am presuming I am looking
from this viewpoint, and if that is alerting my mind,
and quite clearly the activity on the track tells me
something, I am sure they must have also been alerted
at that point.

Now, if I could turn to the Officers on the track, they
are the main Officers to monitor the pens, are they? -
A. Indeed, yes.  I think I discussed that they were
selected because of their knowledge of the Ground and
their intimacy with people as they come in and their
awareness, yes.

So we could say that we would be relying mainly on what
they saw at that point? - A. I would not say mainly
because their view is not necessarily the best view,
and really looking at that I think it is a composite
picture. There is Mr. Bullas in the West Stand who has
a view, there is the Control Room who have a view, and
there are those who are immediately in front of it, and
quite clearly looking at some of the photographs, you
can see activity behind, actually on the terraces, who
                                             B. L. MOLE


aren't aware, or in my view don't look aware, so it is
not probably the best view but it is one of the views
and I would expect some comment from them.

If I could just concentrate on the Officers who would
be on the perimeter track, first of all they would have
to look at the pens anyway, wouldn't they? - A. Indeed.

It would be no use if they were looking at the pitch to
see the players on the pitch or something, they would
have to be facing the people in the pens? - A. At any
time, the beginning of matches, penalties, stoppage of
play, the brief is for Officers to stand up and face
the crowd. At this stage they are stood up in any
case, but during play they sit down and at a given
signal from the sector Sergeant, the serial Sergeant,
they stand up and face the crowd. That is their
function.

So at that time, let's say 14.59, Officers on the track
could notice that there was overcrowding and do you
think it would be possible that they would just motion
to people to go back? That would be their way of
dealing with what they saw there? - A. I have
difficulty in answering that and putting myself in
their minds.  I can't really speak for them. The best
I can do is to say if they saw that, their mind was
alerted, then they would do something.  If they felt
that the way to deal with it was to ask people to move
back, maybe that was the action that was needed.
Sometimes that is all that is needed.  If they felt it
was to open one of the gates and bring people out, that
may be the course of action, whatever, but I can't put
myself in their minds.

It would be a possibility, definitely, wouldn't it,
that they would do that? - A. Oh, yes.

But don't you think there would be difficulty for the
people to do just that, to move back, because of the
noise and the size of the crowd at a semi-final, that
they may not even know what the Officer means when he
is making movement with his arms? They may not
understand what he wants them to do? - A. I think there
is an element of that. There is an element of not
wanting to do it in any case because of the position we
are in. I can look at many options, sir, and I can't
really come hard and fast.  I have to agree they may
not understand; some may, some may understand and may
not react.

     THE CORONER:   And some presumably may understand
and be unable to react? - A. Absolutely, sir, yes.
                                             B. L. MOLE


     MRS. McBRIEN:   Do you agree that the Officers on
the track could risk opening the perimeter gate, but
that is a risk because more people might get out - in
normal circumstances, I am talking about, on a normal
day - if they did that more people than they wanted to
get out could get out, couldn't they? - A. I think in
normal circumstances you wold have a controlled opening
of the gates and a controlled movement of people.   If I
give an example, if we had a scene where young children
had got themselves to the front, their parents were
fearful and they wanted them moving to a different
place, and this happens on occasions when they become
overshadowed by people, then that would be an approach
to the Officer, he would seek assistance and advice and
do it in a controlled way, i.e., make the comments to
people, "We are going to move these children out now",
and move them to "a". That is a controlled movement.
Any sudden rush at doing something can in itself create
confusion and danger, and to understand people, some
will take advantage of a situation, some will need the
situation to relieve them but you have got to find a
balance between those who think, "If I get out as well,
I can find somewhere better to stand", so there is
always a difficult area, and of course we cannot forget
that some people like to get on the pitch, for reasons
best known to themselves, so there are many things to
take into account.

In 1988 did you discourage the Officers who would be on
the track from opening the perimeter gate, or would you
say you can do that if you feel it is necessary? r A. I
try to emphasise here that the discretion of a Police
Officer is of paramount importance. Being a Police
Constable is the most important facet that Officer has
to --- whatever I say to him never overrides his office
of Constable, and he has a responsibility to the
community he serves, for the protection of life and
property.  If I say the gates should not be opened that
is an absolute fact, but his office of Constable can
override that if the circumstances activate upon his
mind that a course of action is necessary. That is
what I believe and I am sure Officers who work to me
understand that, but they do it with a caveat of
knowledge that normally we would not just open the
gates.

I was just wondering if it was instilled into them that
only in very extreme circumstances would that line be
taken? - A. I think in general it is not instilled, it
is a consideration and it is a policy that is made, the
gates will not normally be opened.   If they are faced
with something which they have to do, I am quite
confident, and they would have my support, to take
                                             B. L. MOLE


positive action in the interests of the protection of
life and property, which is their main function.

So they could have taken their own initiative? - A.
Yes.

If they did not take that course of action and they
decided the best thing to do was to go around - that is
where the problem is, we want to move the people who
are at the back - would they have to go all the way
around, may be past the Control Box, into that
concourse area, down the tunnel, before they could move
the people back? It is quite a long route.    - A. They
wouldn't, ma'am, no.  I think one of the things I said
last week was that the whole concept of the plan was
that everybody had a place and nobody moved from it.
When I say moved from it, I mean nobody left their
duty.  If they felt that the answer to whatever they
had seen was the course of action you have described,
then I would expect that to go through the chain of
command, to alert Control of the problem, and for
Control to do something, similar to what I described,
using serials 14 and 15 to ease the back of the
terraces - that is an option, but they would not
physically leave their post and go and do it.

Some have told us that they did when they knew things
were very bad. They used their own initiative, so they
told us, to go round and go down the tunnel. - A. I
think once the magnitude of the tunnel was known then a
lot of people took independent action, reverting to
being a Police Constable, totally, and I think that is
what they would do..




           Q.   Normally you would expect
                                                      88


                                     B.L. MOLE



Q. But normally you would expect them to get in touch
   with Ground Control? - A. Yes.

Q. I think we heard earlier that Officers would be
   positioned in the tunnel in Phase 2 anyway and would
   go and stand on the terrace, wouldn't they?- A. The
   difference is they are not standing on the terrace.
   They are standing at the bottom of the tunnel.   14 and
   15 Serial, I don't know the numbers now, but certainly
   14 and 15 would take up that position.  It is to
   recognise where they are; to give them an additional
   overview and an ability for Ground Control to direct
   them to certain locations.

Q. About how men is that please? - A. A Serial is a
   Sergeant and 10.

Q. And there were two Serials? - A. Two Sergeants and
   20 .
Q. So they would just come down the tunnel and be mainly
   near the tunnel? - A. Stand in the tunnel.

Q. I know you have decided you did not need them at the
   radial gates. I am going to leave that point. Do
   you find in general if the Police are standing at
   the back of the terrace that is the best place to
   control those on the terrace, they are behind them
   and they can see exactly what is happening, who is
   coming into that terrace. It is a good position to be
   in if you are in control? - A. No, I can't agree with
   that because I think they are ineffectual, which I have
   said on a number of occasions.

Q. The Police are ineffectual? - A. If they are at the
   back of the terrace.

Q. But what about the Serials who come down the tunnel?
   - A. If a Serial came down the tunnel there are many
   tactics open. There is such a thing known as a wedge,
   for want of a better description could, I would not
   want to use it because it is not an easy manoeuvre
   but it is a manoeuvre that could be used in public order
   terns to achieve entry to a location and that is to
   physically wedge open with Officers in a 'V' formation
   into a crowd to get to a point. That kind of action
   could be, I am not saying it would be, but it is a
   tactical option that is open, so as a body they may
   be able to do more but one Officer stood at the top
   of each gate would be ineffectual. He would be lost
   to my use as a resource and the same function would
   be carried out by the man above who can observe.
                                                           89


                                         B.L. MOLE



Q. Do you think fans generally like to look to a Policeman
   for assistance at any time?

           THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I think we have gone
     far enough down this avenue.

           MRS. McBRIEN: What about the leadership qualities
     of the Police, in a crowd a good leader should be able
     to stand no matter what the crowd is, and be able to
     be ....

Q.         THE CORONER: I think Mr. Mole has told you that he
     thinks putting a man on the radial gate is a waste of
     that Officer. That is what you are saying, isn't it?
     - A. That is right sir.

           THE CORONER: That is not to say people don't
     look up to respect, take notice of Police Officers. I
     don't know, they may not, or they may, but his view
     that that man in that position isn't any use to him.

          THE WITNESS:     That is right sir, yes.

           MRS. McBRIEN:    I was wondering why Mr. Mole said
     it was "dangerous"?

           THE CORONER: He didn't, or he may have done
     but that is not in fact what you say. You said he would
     be "wasted".

           THE WITNESS: It is a resource which is in­
     effectual.  I can do little with it.

           THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I am going to ask you
     to draw it to a close. We have spent almost three days
     now with Mr. Mole and I intend to bring the questioning
     to an end now, so if you have got any more relevant
     questions I will allow you to ask them, of course, but
     I don't think we are going to go into any more hypothetical
     discussions.

           MRS. McBRIEN: Right. Just one more question
     please. This is the final one.

Q. Do you believe, Mr. Mole, that any part of spectator
   accommodation should be properly managed by the Police
   no matter where it is?

           THE CORONER: I don't think that is a question
     you can answer.  I am sorry, don't attempt to answer
     it. It is not a proper question. Sorry, Mrs. McBrien.

           MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes, thank you.
                                                            90

                                     B .L » MOLE



                   Further bv THE CORONER:

Q. Now I have got a few myself, three from thejury,   but
   one I think we have actually dealt with.

         The question was, C491, do you remember that was
   the photograph with the Policeman at the back? - A. In
   the tunnel sir.

Q. Yes, in the tunnel and they wanted to know what your
   explanation was but I think you have given it to us.
   Was it clear? Do you want Mr. Mole to repeat it or
   have you understood? And it was a Phase 2 situation
   on that particular photograph? - A. Phase 2 situation,
   yes.
Q. You have I think partly answered this question really
   but I will just re-put it to you.

         Would you ever have considered delaying akick-off
   if the players were on the pitch warming up prior to
   the kick-off, not warming up half-an-hour before but
   having come out and getting ready for the kick-off?
   - A. I think there is no limitations to the time when
   delayed kick-off can take place.  It is a very difficult
   one when they have come out actually to play. I think
   I have described where the expectations of the crowd are
   involved. The players' attitude is a minor matter
   which you can overcome, but I think in all honesty
   depending what you are faced with, depending what the
   problem is, it is one that can be addressed. Whether
   it is right to delay is a matter for the individual
   taking into account all the circumstances.

Q. Now the other half of this question I don't know
   whether we can really ask because it is a hypothetical
   question and one would have to take every single factor
   into account.

         The question is, and I will tell you what the
   jury were asking, is if given the circumstances and
   situation present in 1989 that you know now, would
   you have delayed the kick-off.  I think on reflection
   we won't, no, it is too risky. It is too hypothetical
   and it is too much hindsight.

         One more, and I think you have already dealt
   with this question as well, but what the jury were
   enquiring about was whether given the monitors and
   various other aids which were available in the Control
   Room, would it have been noticed that this crowd
   dispersal was not even across the terraces in 1989
   and I suppose we ought to say at the three times at
   which you looked at photographs, 8-minutes-to ....
   Do you remember the photographs? - A. Yes, I do sir.
                                                               91

                                       B.L. MOLE



Q.      6-minutes-to and 1-minute-to? - A. I can answer
     that quite positively sir. I think it would be
     recognised from the Control Box it was not evenly
     distributed.   I think as I have said a number of
     times, that to me is not a problem in itself the
     uneven distribution, it is recognising any problems
     that are being caused by it.

           I have often looked at the layout of the terrace
     and the configuration and the way people are and have
     not identified a problem but have seen quite clearly
     that it is not spread out evenly.  It is once the
     recognition of a problem comes to attention that
     action is required.

Q. There is another little bit here about numbers but
   I don't think that would be appropriate to ask so
   I am going to leave that.

           I just want to ask you one question really. I
     havegot one or twb others but this is the main one.

           You have clearly told us that as far as your
     experience is concerned you never had occasion to close
     off the tunnel either by using the gates or by putting
     temporary barriers across? - A. In no way sir.

Q. Can you recollect whether or not first of all when
   Mr. Murray joined you in 1988, I think, either then,
   or at any subsequent time while you were still
   Commander, you discussed with him any issues as to
   whether or not the tunnel should be sealed off? - A.
   Not at all sir. I think during the course of my
   evidence I have said that most of the Officers are
   trained at certain levels to implement various tactics.
   I quite happily would accept that Mr. Murray would
   have a commonsense approach to that and see that that
   was a tactic if he needed it.

           I have said once or twice that all the Officers
     had tremendous experience, tremendous professionalism
     sir and I know that they would have that as an option
     in their mind.

           Likewise they might not even use that action,
     they might use the 1415 Serial that I talked about,
     physically filling the tunnel which would have the
     same effect and help to distribute people on the
     terraces. There are options open to them that I
     would not necessarily go in detail to discuss but
     would have an expectancy that they would know how to
     do such things because of their experience in the
     general field.
                                                              92


                                           B.L. MOLE



Q. What I am trying to say is you would not have given
   him any specific instructions? - A. Not at all.

Q.   Not to? - A. Not at all sir.

Q.    I take it by the same token this would apply in any
     conversation which you had with Chief Superintendent
     Duckenfield? - A. That is right sir.

Q. One very minor point but I would just like to ask you:
   it was put to you that the blue gates in the tunnel
   were padlocked back. In fact I think the evidence we
   have heard from other people is those gates were not
   padlocked but bolted down, that they had bolts down?
   - A. Yes, that is right.

Q.    It makes no difference, they are open, but did you
     have any awareness as to how they were open or not
     when you were in command? - A. How they were open sir?

Q. Yes, how they were held open? - A. At this moment in
   time I don't recall. I know I have looked at the gates
   because I think I mentioned in evidence I would never
   have thought of using either the front or the back
   gates and particularly the back gates because they
   opened against the crowd, so my mind is firmly geared
   to those gates remaining open at all times. The only
   time I would use the gates, and I think I said this
   as well, is if I wasn't using the terrace or the pens
   and then I would firmly have them bolted, locked,
   padlocked.

           THE CORONER: Mr. Mole, thank you very much
     indeed. I am most grateful to you.     I am sorry it
     has taken   quite as long as it has but there you are.

           THE   WITNESS: Thank you sir.

           THE   CORONER: Now I did say we were going to
     start on Mr. Jackson but I don't think anybody is
     going to thank me for doing it today so I will eat
     my words and say no to Mr. Jackson today but tomorrow
     morning at 10, God willing, we start with Mr. Jackson,
     so 10 o'clock.

           Please make provisional arrangements on the
     assumption as from tomorrow we are going on till 4.30.
     It may not be necessary.  It depends how many witnesses
     we have got and how it goes but time is beginning to
     run out, I am afraid, and we really must bring it
     to a close. Okay, thank you.

                   (In the absence of the jury)
                                                        93




      THE CORONER: Is there anything we need to
discuss?  (No response)

      The only thing I want to say is that tomorrow,
as you know, we have got Mr. Jackson.

      It would be child's play to go over the ground
that we have covered with Mr. Mole and spending three
days covering the same ground and I am absolutely
determined that we will not, so forgive me if I am
going to be rude and nasty to you tomorrow you will
understand.

      There may well be matters which his experience,
expertise, knowledge is totally different to Mr. Mole's.
By all means we will deal with that where it is relevant
but I am not going to go over the same ground because
we have got to bring the evidential stage of this
Inquest to a conclusion.




                   The other thing
     The other thing I wanted to say, tomorrow it will be
Mr. Jackson.   On Wednesday we are going to have - I
can't remember the names of all the people - but there is
Mr. Thomas and we are trying to get Mr. Case to come
along.   Mr. Case is the father of the lad who came out
of Gate 3.   We have got some hearsay evidence as to what
he said, but I thought if we could get him I would prefer
to hear him viva voce on that particular point.   There
are a few others - Sergeant Higgins - not ex-
Sergeant Higgins, but the Sergeant Higgins who was near
Gate A.

     Now it is possible, of course, that we may finish
with Mr. Jackson hopefully in a more realistic time.    If
that happens and that I why I was looking at you,
Mr. Russell, I would want to start with
Superintendent Greenwood tomorrow.   We would pause in
his evidence and take these other people on Wednesday and
then proceed.   If we don't, of course, get through
Mr. Jackson then that would not arise.   We would start
with Superintendent Greenwood immediately after we had
finished the other people on Wednesday.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, that is a proposed course of
action that does concern me somewhat.
Superintendent Greenwood is and has been considered all
along as one of the principal players in these Inquests
and it does seem a rather unusual course to take to start
him possibly at about three o'clock tomorrow afternoon
when the jury will be tired having listened to some
considerable detailed evidence from the Assistant Chief
Constable.   Then break off, perhaps trying to sit late,
sitting on until half past four, breaking off and then
the jury's minds being replaced with other evidence from
people whom you have perhaps charitably called fillers in
the past on Wednesday, and then returning to
Superintendent Greenwood perhaps on Wednesday afternoon
for an hour or an hour and a half in a similar situation
when the jury will not be coming fresh to this evidence.
Then continuing again on Thursday and Friday.

     In my opinion it is extremely unfair to
Superintendent Greenwood.   It is unfair to the jury and
it is not going to enable the jury to assess
Superintendent Greenwood's evidence with the degree of
care that they have been able to contribute to...

     THE CORONER:   Yes, you have got a good point.    I
have thought of an alternative which we will do and that
is we will deal with some of the documentary evidence.
I have already indicated to you that one of the people
whose evidence we are going to read is PC Smith's.   That
is probably what we will do.
     I have taken your point.    When we start with
Superintendent Greenwood we will start him and we will
proceed but   I hope not for the length of time which you
have indicated in your response!

     MR. RUSSELL:    Sir, my only concern was that if we
had an hour   on Tuesday afternoon or Wednesday afternoon,
we wouldn't   finish him before Thursday.

     Is it your intention then to have the witnesses
which you have identified on Wednesday and then start
with Superintendent Greenwood, or have
Superintendent Greenwood starting on Wednesday morning,
come what may, as you indicated last week?

     THE CORONER:    I don't think I did indicate that
Superintendent Greenwood would start Wednesday morning,
come what may.    If I did I never meant to do that.

      We will start with Superintendent Greenwood when we
finish with, if you like, the fillers, that we are having
on Wednesday.    I will hopefully use a little bit of
commonsense.    There is no point in starting with
Superintendent Greenwood if we are virtually at the end
of the day, despite what I have told the jury about going
on.    This is really just so they should make plans at
home.    If we have sufficient time to make a meaningful
start then we will, but if it is clear there just isn't
sufficient time then I will adjourn and we will all have
an early afternoon if it be so, and we will start
Thursday morning.

     There is documentary evidence.   There is PC Smith.
There is someone called Mr. Boam, whose evidence I can't
recollect at the moment, but he is in Australia,    He was
one of the people associated with a particular deceased
and so I thought it would be nice to read his evidence.
We might do that.   It depends.   I will have a look
because if we haven't given the family warning - we
usually like to alert the family when we do that, so it
may not be practical.

     However, I have taken your point.    There is nothing
else I hope?   Good.

     (The Inquests were adjourned until 10*00 am
                the following morning)
