                                                                                      MIR.15


OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised                CLj          Number


ritie                              "•                                  ^                            O lA Q ^ tn
                          document number if relevant)


Receivfer's ipstructions - urgent action - Yes/No
                                                                                                             Receiver




                                                                                                             Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                         Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                             Indexer
Indexed as indicated                                             o<^   .

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                               SIO




                                                                                                             Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




          CONCLUDING PROCEEDINGS




                      Before

DR. S.L. POPPER,   LL.B, B.MED.Sci,   BM, B S , MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                        At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                        On

                        May 1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd,
          Official Shorthand Wr.iters,
      55, Queen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX
                    A
                                             CONCLUDING PROCEEDINGS

                                              FRIDAY,    4th MAY,   1990


                          THE CORONER:   I want to say something to the press
                    B4gain.   This is in a slightly different vein but it is on
                     the same topic that I usually have to address you on.

                              Somebody has drawn my attention to the "Liverpool
                        l$cho" and they have got a big article about Hillsborough,
                         uite properly in a sense.    They have written about one
                        particular case.    It is Philip Hammond.   This was a case
                        vfhere the alcohol level was less than 10 mg/100 ml.
                         here were two cases where this arose.    It was not the
                        (lost recent one.   It was the previous one where the
                        lamily were very distressed about this because this was a
                        )oung lad.    It was a question of whether or not he had
                         runk a shandy or whatever.

                                 Now the "Liverpool Echo" has dealt with this and has
                        Said that Philip's blood alcohol level was declared less
                    D   than 120 rng.             Now you can imagine what that has done to
                        the family.              They were upset enough with less than 10 mg.
                            am not saying this has been done deliberately,
                        m a l i c i o u s l y , you know, "Let's get at the Hammonds", or
                        anything like that.              It is a mistake and I have no doubt
                        vrhatever that the paper will publish a correction.

                    Edoing Mysomething
                               complaint is not that
                                       wrong but the
                                                       there is somebody who is
                                                       point I want to make is that
                        i t is essential that we get it right.   Anything you
                        publish has got to be right because whatever retractions
                        are published and however hard the paper now tries, the
                        carnage, in a sense, has been done, and particularly with
                         :hat family who were already so upset.

                            This afternoon you have heard some terribly
                      omplicated stuff, if I can use that word.     Please make
                      ure that if you are going to put it out and want it
                     published in your paper, get it right, because if you
                      on't get it right first of all you are not reporting,
                     \|/hich is what you are supposed to be doing, and secondly,
                       ou will be upsetting people.    Please make sure that the
                     Reporting is accurate.     I used that word, if I remember,
                    Gon the first day when I spoke to you.     I said, "Get the
                     reports accurate."

                              May I stress that again.  As it happens it is
                        convenient I can remind you of it, but if you don't get
                        your reporting accurate it is hurtful, upsetting, painful
                        and wrong.    Please do your best and please tell your
                         iditors to make sure they do their best.   I am not
                    H
                                                     -   1 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        suggesting this is deliberate with intent or anything of
                        that nature.   I am sure it is a mistake, but it is a very
                        painful one.

                              MR. FRASER:   Sir, I only rise because I act for the
                        llammond family and I have also had the benefit of a
                        conversation this morning with a representative of the
                    B   Echo.     I have no instructions directly from them but as
                        a result of a conversation with the young lady in court to
                        whom your comments were address e d , I know that she deeply
                        regrets the mistake, for it is a mistake.      They realise
                        the seriousness of the mistake and they are very, very
                        sorry.    Mrs. Hammond is to be contacted by the editor of
                        the Echo.    I have no brief for the Echo to say that but I
                        feel I cannot let at least the views of the Echo, for
                        those that I know, go unsaid on their behalf, sir.

                             Mrs. Hammond telephoned me last night.  She was very
                        upset and immediately wheels were put into motion to
                        correct the mistake.   I accept, of course, the damage has
                        been done, but it was certainly, as I understand it from
                        the Echo, wholly unintentional and very much regretted.

                    D        THE CORONER:   I am glad you have said that.   I am
                        sure that was so, but in a sense the point I am making is
                        that what we have dealt with this afternoon is even more
                        potentially upsetting if you get it wrong, so please be
                        careful.

                             We will just rise for a few minutes.
                    E                       (Short a d j o u rnment )

                             THE CORONER:   Can I just come back to the press for
                        one more moment?   I just want to make it quite clear.
                        I used the word "reporter" and the implication of that is
                        that of course the error was made here and correctly
                        transcribed at the other end.   In fact I understand that
                        is probably wrong.   That the report was absolutely right
                        and that somebody made an error at the other end.    I
                        understand errors being made.  After all, I have made
                        dozens myself, it is just that it is so unlucky, if you
                        like, that it happened in this particular case.   I want
                        to make it clear that the mistake which I was talking
                        about wasn't made here.

                    G        Now, ladies and gentlemen, we are not taking any more
                        evidence on any Hillsborough cases and we have heard
                        evidence of ninety-five.   All that remains to be done,
                        and I will be as brief as I can, there are one or two
                        things I feel I have to do and say.

                             The first is to say this:      I have not given you any
                        directions at all on verdicts,       That is deliberate
                H
                                                 - 2 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        because there is no point in my directing you on that.  We
                        lave not reached that stage.   If and when we come to that
                        stage I will give you as much guidance as I am able and as
                        Ls appropriate but I just wanted you to know I had not
                        forgotten it.

                              The second thing is I have already indicated to you
                    B   :hat what will happen depends very much on what other
                        people decide and that is still the case.      I don't know
                        tfhat the DPP will do and when I do know I will then have
                        to decide what to do next.      You have all very kindly
                        filled out a form which you were given where you have
                        written your name and address and telephone number.      We
                        leed that so that we can contact you.      If you move house
                        Dr anything like that, please make sure you let us know so
                        ve don't lose you.      Probably atsome point or other we
                        vill need you back.     We will try and take your holiday
                        commitments and so on into account and do what we can.        I
                        vill also try and indicate to you how much time we
                        estimate we are going to need.      We will keep you
                        informed, but if you do move     please let us know and ditto
                        if you decide with holidays.       You are entirely free to
                        iave your holidays whenever you like, but tell us so that
                    D   we can keep a log and then if we do have to resume if
                        possible we will do it when you are here rather than when
                        you are not.      If you do tell us when you are going on
                        loliday also tell    us where you are going, particularly if
                        you are staying in England if you can give us an address.

                             However, as I say, I don't intend    to call you back if
                        I can possibly avoid it.
                    E
                             The third thing is, and     this is difficult, try not to
                        discuss these cases.    There is going to be a long gap now
                        so in a sense    you ought to go back to the situation as if
                        none of this had ever been, because you are still the
                        Jury, you are still sworn and we still haven't finished.
                        These are still current inquests and until we terminate
                        them in some way or another you are part of them.

                             The fourth thing I want to say at this point, in case
                        I forget it later, I want to say when I eventually rise
                        now all the inquests are going to be adjourned to a date
                        to be fixed.   I hope that phraseology is satisfactory to
                        you.   It does seem to me the most sensible way of putting
                        it because I cannot give you a firm date.   Is everybody
                    G   content with that?

                             I say it now in case I forget right at the end.   It
                        shall be deemed to be effective as of the end of this
                        session this afternoon and that is in respect of all the
                        ninety-five people whom we have thought about.


                H
                                                  - 3 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                              Now you know, because you have been here, we have
                        done ninety-five inquests and as far as possible we have
                        tried to think of each one as    being unique, important,
                        special, and I    think that was right and I hope you feel
                        that way too.      I want to say again that although it is a
                        lot of cases, that is in fact the truth.      If there had
                        just been one death it would have been just as big a
                    B   tragedy for that one family as the ninety-five have been
                        for ninety-five families.     We must never, ever forget
                        that.

                             Coroners, of course, only deal with dead people, as
                        you have already discovered, but I want to say that I do
                        recognise there were a lot of injured people there as
                        well, people who suffered;   some with trivial injuries,
                        some more serious.   I think a lot of these injured people
                        have recovered and that is good.     I am pleased but there
                        are still some who may   be, to a greater or a lesser
                        extent, affected from injuries which they received at
                        Hillsborough.   Insofar as I am able to say anything I
                        would like to say to all these people that I do hope they
                        will get better and make as good a recovery as it is
                        possible to do.
                    D
                             There are others who weren't injured at Hillsborough
                        at all, but who have been very grievously affected by the
                        events.   That is, may be family members, professionals,
                        police officers, people who in some way got involved or
                        were impacted by the event.    I also want to remember
                        those and say that yes, this has been a very big disaster.
                        It is bigger than just the ninety-five, although, of
                    E   course, the ninety-five are the ones who have lost their
                        lives.   We must always remember that because although our
                        sympathy has to be with the bereaved and with the
                        families, other people   are or may also be suffering.  It
                        is no use saying these   are the only ones that matter.
                        Everybody matters.

                             Now I cannot possibly name all the injured people.
                        First, because there are too many.   Secondly, I don't
                        know them.   However, I want to mention two people because
                        these are two boys.   One is called Tony Bland and the
                        other one is called Andrew Devine.   These two lads, and I
                        think probably Dr. Gumpert knows these, these two boys
                        unfortunately suffered the most horrific insult to their
                        brain but did not die in this technical sense which we
                    G   have been talking about - brain stem death.   They are for
                        all practical purposes comatose and I want their families
                        to know that in many ways I feel very much for them
                        because not only do they have children who are alive, but
                        in many ways they are almost dead and so they go and see
                        them and I do feel for them.   I want them to know that I
                        hope you feel with me for these families, and I want them
                        to know although they are not dead and they have got
                H
                                                 - 4 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        nothing to do with me as a Coroner, I only hope to
                        goodness they recover, at least to a certain extent.   It
                        would be wonderful to think there was some improvement in
                        their state.   I want these families to know that I am
                        conscious of them.

                              Now the next group of people I want to think about,
                    B   and in a sense I have stopped talking about the injured
                        now and the deceased and the two boys and their families,
                         Ir. Fraser on quite a lot of occasions he has risen and on
                        at least one occasion I think it was Mrs. Matthews who
                        wanted to read her thanks direct to us, but Mr. Fraser has
                        on many occasions risen and, indeed, Mrs. McBrien as well
                        she had specifically written out something which Mr.
                        Fraser read to us about - was it Mr. Gray?    I did
                        appreciate that.    Not because of me.  After all, it
                          jesn't matter to me, but it matters to them that they
                        have been recognised as people who have tried.    However,
                        we have not read everybody's name out, have we?     You know
                        better than any how many names have been mentioned in
                        these summaries - dozens and dozens.    I have not counted
                        up how many there are, but there are probably several
                        hundred different names that we have heard in this court
                    D   who have tried.    Some of them were fans, some of them
                        were off-duty police officers, some were off-duty
                        ambulance people, nurses, doctors, South Yorkshire Police
                        Officers.    Very many we heard mentioned and they too
                        tried.

                             I want now to take the opportunity of collectively
                        thanking everybody.   I don't care what badge, label or
                    E   whatever one puts on them, everybody who tried to help on
                        that day to save somebody s life or to help somebody who
                        was injured, or to get involved, we thank them.

                             Of course we thank the people who dealt with the
                        deceased.   Those are the ones we have been thinking
                        about, but we thank them all.   I hope you join me in
                        that.

                              I want to thank one other group.   There were a lot
                        of people who helped on the day you would be surprised,
                        and you will hear in a moment some of the organisations,
                        because I am going to read the organisations out, who were
                        here at this Medico Legal Centre on the Saturday, the
                        Sunday and the Monday.    However, there weren't just
                    G   organisations.    There were loads of people from all walks
                        of life, doing their best.    Now whether their best was
                        good enough, that is an arguable point, but I would like
                        to think that anybody who made an attempt to be helpful,
                        to be kind, to ease things, even if they got it wrong
                        sometimes, I want to acknowledge them as having been here
                        and as having tried to facilitate things which had to be
                        done.
                H
                                                - 5 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             I want to turn from all those people now and talk
                        about the people we have seen - the West Midlands Police
                        Officers really to a large extent, and in particular the,
                        shall we say, Coroner's Group who have been present during
                        these last two and a half weeks.  As you heard in the
                        beginning there were about 500 officers.   I don't know
                        most of them and, indeed, even if I knew them I could not
                    B   list their names.   I know quite a lot of other people who
                        I will not be mentioning who have done wonderful work, who
                        have really tried, but they were not in this group I am
                        now thinking of.   I thank all those and I don't want them
                        to feel slighted but time would not allow me to mention
                        everybody.

                             I want to thank in particular several people who were
                        involved.    The first are people whom you have not seen,
                        but without whose work we would not have succeed.      If I
                        start with Sue Harper.    She is the lady who, if you like,
                        set it up.    She organised the Memorial Hall.    She
                        organised the bookings.    She has dealt with a lot of the
                        work so that we are comfortable here and so that we can
                        manage.    She said, "I will sort it all out for you."    I
                        did not have to worry again.     I never thought about it
                    D   any further because I knew it would be done.     She did not
                        do it entirely on her own. Obviously     she had people who
                        helped and it is only fair to say that she got assistance
                        from people in Sheffield.    The City Council and in
                        particular John Batley who was the manager of the building
                        who had to co-operate with her because otherwise it would
                        not have worked at all.    I thank him and other people in
                        the City Council who have been involved in that, but I
                    E   pick her out particularly.

                             Then there are various other people.     There is
                        Detective Brian Fairfield.   He has been in this building
                        but I don't suppose any of you will have seen him.     He
                        did an awful lot of running around.    He did a lot of
                        preparatory work.   He was the chap who, if we needed
                        something doing, he could go and sort it out.

                             There were the press officers.   You had nothing to
                        do with them, but the press did I have no doubt.    I know
                        they looked after you well and I would like to thank the
                        press officers for everything they have done.    It is a
                        very important task.

                    G        How do you think you would have managed to do ninety-
                        five cases without any pathologists turning up?   The
                        families all being here?   Nobody complaining because it
                        was inconvenient.   It was done because Sergeant Treadgold
                        and in fact this young man over here, Peter Griffiths,
                        whom I will mention again in a moment, were listing
                        officers.   When we started doing the listing we realised
                        what a terrible task we had set them because I set certain
                H
                                                 - 6 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        criteria.    I said, "Look, this is what I want.   Now go
                        away and do it."    I could see poor Sergeant Treadgold,
                        vho is not here today for very proper reasons, he wilted a
                        :>it when I said it, but he went and he did it and we have
                        had unbelievably smooth running and it is entirely due to
                        the fantastic work which was done by the listing officers,
                        Sergeant Treadgold and Peter Griffiths.
                    B
                             Perhaps I should also mention all the secretaries,
                        )iane and various other people - Vicky - who did typing
                        and who kept us going really.

                             Peter Griffiths you have met.   I remember when we
                        chose him we were in this room and I think it was Mr.
                        Jones who looked up and said, "You can do it", and he did,
                        and he has been a fantastic choice, hasn't he?    We are
                        very, very grateful to you for the way you have looked
                        after the Jury.   That was the primary task.   The way you
                        have looked after me and Mr. Jones and the way you have
                        looked after the court.   You could not have done better.
                        I think you would agree with that, wouldn't you and I am
                        very, very happy to be able to acknowledge that.

                    D        Over there, you may have seen those two gentlemen who
                        have been sitting there on and off most of the time, doing
                        nothing!   This one over there I demoted on the first day
                        I am afraid and I apologise now.    I called him Inspector,
                        but I do know that you are a Chief Inspector.    Chief
                        Inspector Tope has been an absolute lynchpin in the whole
                        of this organisation.    You have probably seen him walk in
                        with these books.    It was his task to make sure they were
                    E   prepared and that was not a minor undertaking either,
                        ninety-five volumes and I don't know how many copies so
                        that we all had sufficient.   They had to be right.  They
                        had all to be checked.    They had all to be read and then
                        they all came to me and I read them because, Mr. Fraser,
                        you may remember I did say I would read the statements and
                        look at the summaries so you would have an assurance so
                        that if possible we would get the summaries as accurate as
                        we could.   I will come to the summaries again in a
                        moment.

                              It was Chief Inspector Tope and Superintendent
                        Beechey who had an awful lot to do with that and with many
                        other things.    Poor Superintendent Beechey and Chief
                        Inspector Tope when they sent them out I then sent them
                    G   back with dozens of comments and everybody had to go back
                        and re-check.    Very often it was making sure I had
                        understood it correctly, but there was still a lot of work
                        I gave you and I am very grateful for everything you have
                        done.

                             That was in the preparation, but throughout these two
                        and a half weeks that we have been here they have been
                H
                                                - 7 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        making sure that things were going smoothly, doing the
                        back-up, watching, undertaking anything that needed
                        checking. , Thank you very much indeed.  We could not have
                        managed without you and I do appreciate it.

                             Now we come to the presenting officers and these you
                        lave met.   We know them quite well.     This is not in any
                    B   order.    There is Graham McCombie, John Killock, Geraldine
                        Evans, Gillian Parks, Julie Appleton, Matthew Sewers and
                        Peter Gadsby.     They were the presenting officers.      I
                        tave already mentioned these summaries and I think this is
                          good opportunity to say what I want to say.       They had
                        seen prepared, they had been checked, I had read them
                        through.    If you like, I had approved them, in a sense.
                        The number of times the presenting officers came to me and
                        said, "I have read them through.      I want to change it.
                        I am not happy with the tone."      Or, "We want to change
                        the words.    We want to improve them."     That is why the
                        poor lawyers sometimes had a tough time because they
                        looked at the drafts which were prepared and what they
                        heard was something totally different, not because we were
                        trying to trap you, I assure you, but because we were
                        trying (a) to get it righter, if one can use that work and
                    D   (b) because we wanted to make the very best job we could.
                        And they did.     May I say to you that not only am I proud
                        of you, I am exceedingly proud for you and I am
                        privileged to have had a group of     officers like you to
                        work with.     It has been a privilege and a pleasure and I
                        would like to thank you very, very much indeed for all you
                        lave done.
                    E        I know for many of you it has been hard because these
                        officers, a lot of them knew the families.    I am
                        shielded.   I don't know the families.    There are very
                        few people whom I know.   However, they have been to see
                        them, they have spent time with them, they have talked to
                        them and for them some of these people were friends.     So
                        you have done wonderfully well.    Thank you.   I cannot
                        tell you how grateful I am to you.

                             We have forgotten him!    This young man here, Michael
                        Layton.   He presented the visual evidence at every single
                        inquest.   I think I can say that   from the first to the
                        last one the quality of his presentation was excellent.
                        There is no other word for it.    Not only was it excellent
                        in the technical sense, it was excellent in the humane and
                    G   human way in which he dealt with the evidence and with his
                        thoroughness in trying to make sure that we knew the times
                        correctly, that we knew exactly where it was on these
                        plans.   Michael Layton, I don't think we could have had
                        anybody better.   Thank you very, very much indeed.

                             Sitting next to me here, this gentleman, the
                        Assistant Chief Constable of West Midlands Police.    Very
                H
                                                - 8 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        few Coroners have had the privilege of having the
                        Assistant Chief Constable sitting next to them for two and
                        half weeks, watching, making sure I did not make too many
                        mistakes.   Not only did he do that for two and a half
                        weeks, for a year now he has been working not only, of
                        course, for the Coroner, but for various other activities
                        connected and involved with Hillsborough.   I have praised
                    B   the officers and I meant every single word I said, but
                        there is no doubt whatever in my mind that this inquiry
                        and these inquests at this stage could not have been
                                                                        — v... done
                        without the leadership and the guidance from Mr. Jones.
                        He must take a very, very large responsibility for the
                        success of the inquests.

                             I don't want you to think I look at the inquests as a
                        success, but they have gone relatively smoothly.    We have
                        had the information.    It has been presented in an
                        intelligible form.   A lot of work has been done and he has
                        encouraged and made sure that all this was done.    I also
                        want to thank Mr. Jones personally because he has been to
                        me of enormous personal support.    I would like you to
                        know that, Mr. Jones, as indeed you have heard on other
                        occasions, but it is absolutely true and I wanted to say
                    D   it publicly how very, very grateful I am to you, not only
                        operationally for your acting as Coroner's Officers, but
                        for your very real support to me as a person.    Thank you
                        very much indeed.

                             However, there have been other people in this court
                        as well.   Nearly every family came with some social
                        worker.   Now those social workers, on the whole I don't
                    E   know them, but they have done a fantastic job and they too
                        have carried this very heavy burden of being close to the
                        families.    It is not as easy as all that to be with
                        people who are upset, grieving, who need support.     You
                        can t break down.    You have got to stay up otherwise you
                        are not helping them much, are you?    So, social workers,
                        I haven't said anything to you before, you have done a
                        good job, well done, and I am very, very grateful for
                        everything you have done for everybody who has been in
                        this court room.    Thank you very much indeed.

                             Within this building, as I said to you on day 1,
                        other work goes on.   Unfortunately people are dying and
                        many, many of the cases get reported to me.  The only
                        reason why the system has not broken down is because my
                        deputies and assistant deputies have been holding the fort
                        in the coronal capacity and my officers and my other staff
                        have made sure that things have worked properly.    Not
                        only my staff but the receptionists downstairs.   All of
                        you will probably know them, Linda and Doris, and the
                        people whom you don't know in the mortuary and so on, all
                        these people have continued to work and have been
                        supportive and helpful and I want them to know that I do
                H
                                                - 9 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        acknowledge   their contribution as well, not directly to
                        Hillsborough, but without them it could not have taken
                        place.   We  would have been ina terrible mess.

                             We are    very, very grateful to the WRVS who fed us and
                        who made our teas and our coffees and every time I saw
                        them they seemed to be smiling.      I thank them on my
                    B   behalf and on everybody else's behalf for coming in during
                        these hearings and also last year.      They were here
                        quietly.    Thank you.

                             I want to read a list of people, of organisations,
                        basically, who were here last year and who were helping,
                        rhis seems such a good opportunity to acknowledge these
                        activities.   There were people here from the British Red
                        Cross.   There were people here from the WRVS, from Cruse
                        in Sheffield, from Cruse in Rotherham.   There were people
                        from Sheffield Victim Support Scheme.   The Church Council
                        for Community Care.   Family and Community Services
                        Department.   Social workers and others - psychologists,
                        community nurses, a nurse, a volunteer helper, the staff
                        of the Medico Legal Centre, of course, and a lot of police
                        officers, in the first instance South Yorkshire police
                    D   officers and then the West Midland police officers.    They
                        too did a tremendous job and all of these people helped
                        and I am thankful to them for the time and effort which
                        they put into it.

                             May I say I would like to thank the shorthand
                        writers.  They just sit there and write and write, but I
                        am very impressed with the quality of the transcripts.
                    E   You have not seen them but I have seen some of them,
                        certainly, and I am very, very grateful to all of you for
                        the quality of your work and the way you have helped with
                        these inquests.   Thank you very much.

                             I want to thank the legal representatives too.   I
                        usually do that in inquests but we have got Miss Addleman.
                        I have been a bit worried about you from time to time
                        because I thought you were lonely over there, but at least
                        you had space which I suppose is something.

                             MISS ADDLEMAN:   Sir, I am obliged.   My colleagues
                        have made sure I have not been lonely during the breaks.

                             THE CORONER:   That's good!    Mr. Patrick Limb and
                        your predecessor, Mrs. Norcliffe, and Mr. Catchpole and,
                        of course, Mr. Fraser, and you Mr. Wood too.

                             Lady and gentlemen, I don't think you could have
                        conducted yourselves any better than you have done with
                        regard to these inquests.  Quite apart from the fact you
                        only asked questions when it was appropriate, which of
                        course is exceedingly helpful, your questioning was
                H
                                                 - 10 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                      sensitive and correct.  Also you showed great sensitivity,
                      if I may say so, when you raised - and the illustration we
                      pad was what we did this afternoon, because you could have
                      stood up and asked a question there and then with possibly
                      great upset to the family and I atn very, very grateful to
                      you for the way you have, if you like, responded to me and
                      to the situation.   Mr. Fraser, of course, particularly to
                    B /ou, you have been more on your feet than your colleagues,
                      inevitably so, but may I say how pleased I am, from tny
                      point of view, I had the privilege of having you before me
                      over these last two and a half weeks.

                             It has been quite hard for the legal representatives
                        as well because I don't suppose for a minute they knocked
                        off when we went home.   They had to do some work and
                        prepare and be ready so thank you all very much indeed.

                             Finally, ladies and gentleman, I want to thank you.
                        You have been a wonderful Jury.   You have been cheerful.
                        You have been attentive.   You have been present, the most
                        important thing, and you have listened for two and a half
                        weeks to some very touching cases sometimes.   Thank you
                        very much indeed.   You are not discharged, of course.
                    D   As I have already explained to you we will need you back
                        but I take this opportunity of saying how fortunate - you
                        were chosen at random so I did not pick you.   In fact, I
                        still don't know any of your names, but I think we have
                        been very fortunate in having you as a Jury and thank you
                        very much indeed.

                             What I want to say now is I want to adjourn these
                    E   inquests to a date to be fixed in respect of each and
                        every one of the ninety-five cases.    However, before I
                        stand up I want to read you something.    It is a passage
                        from the Bible and it has a relevance to these inquests, I
                        think.   I am not making any comment on it, I am not
                        preaching a sermon or anything like that, I just want to
                        read it.  This is II Samuel, Chapter 12, Verse 15:

                             "15. And Nathan departed unto his house.  And the
                             Lord struck the child that Uriah's wife bore unto
                             David and it was very sick.

                             16. David therefore besought God for the child;  and
                             David fasted, and went in, and lay all night upon the
                             earth.

                             17. And the elders of his house arose, and went to
                             him, to raise him up from the earth:  but he would
                             not, neither did he eat bread with them.

                             18. And it came to pass on the seventh day, that the
                             child died.   And the servants of David feared to
                             tell him that the child was dead:  for they said,
                    H
                                                - 11 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
Behold, while the child was yet alive, we spake unto
him, and he would not hearken unto our voice:  how
will he then vex himself, if we tell him that the
child is dead?

19. But when David saw that his servants whispered,
David perceived that the child was dead;   therefore
David said unto his servants, Is the child dead?
And they said, He is dead.

20. Then David arose from the earth, and washed, and
anointed himself, and changed his apparel, and came
into the house of the Lord, and worshipped:   then he
came to his own house;  and when he required, they
set bread before him, and he did eat.

21. Then said his servants unto him, What thing is
this that thou hast done?   thou didst fast and weep
for the child while it was alive;  but when the child
was dead, thou didst rise and eat bread.

22. And he said, While the child was yet alive, I
fasted and wept:  for I said, Who can tell whether
God will be gracious to me, that the child may live?

23. But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast? can
I bring him back again?   I shall go to him, but he
shall not return to me."




                   - 12 -
