HER MAJESTY *S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
              (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                  Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Ma.iestv’s Coroner)




                    At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                    On

          13th December, 1990




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
•   "                                                             t

                                INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                           Page

        STATEMENT BY THE CORONER                             1

             S.M. COPELAND Sworn

                  By The Coroner                             2
                  Cross-Examined by   Mr. Payne             12
                  Cross-Examined by Mr. Isaacs              13
                  Cross-Examined by Mr. King                16
                  Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien            22
                  Further Cross-Examined by Mr.King         26
                  Further by The Coroner                    27
                  Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole           28
                  Cross-Examined by Mr. Hale                28
                  Further by The Coroner                    30

        SUBMISSION BY MR. ISAACS                            31

        RULING BY THE CORONER                               34

             S.M. COPELAND Recalled

                  Further Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien    35

             C. MILTON Sworn

                  By The Coroner                            35
                  Cross-Examined by   Mr. Payne             43
                  Cross-Examined by   Mr. King              44
                  Cross-Examined by   Mr. Catchpole         45
                  Cross-Examined by   Mrs. McBrien          45

            M. BUXTON Sworn

                  By The Coroner                           46
                  Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne              60
                  Cross-Examined by Mr. Isaacs             63
                  Cross-Examined by Mr. King               64
                  Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien           74
                  Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell            75
                  Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Isaacs     83
                  Further by The Coroner                   84
                  Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Isaacs     85
                  Further by The Coroner                   86

            G. WRIGHT Sworn

                 By The   Coroner                           87
                 Cross-Examined by Mr. Hale                 98
                 Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne                99
                 Cross-Examined by Mr. Isaacs              101
           INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT (Cont)



WRIGHT

  Cross-Examined by Mr. King
  Cross-Examined by .Mrs. McBrien
  Further by The Coroner
  Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King
                                                                1
                                                                « -,f ?




                 lilliE T E E -i-r a D A Y 'S   PROCEEDINGS

                 THURSDAY          13th DECEMBER 1990
B         THE CORONER: ■ . Good norriing. .A couple of non-
    controversial domestic natters - the first one is the
    room.   ife are giving. ’
                            Jp. the Mandela I!oon but we have
    found an alternative roosn vou can so in and I think
    those of you who may wish to use it, it is on the
    ground floor soraewhere.     I am not quite sure where it
    is but Sergeant Griffiths will be able to point you in
    the right direction.      That applies, of course, to all
    of vou who need a little space to write and so on.

         HR.   RUSSELL:        Sir,     I am very grateful.

         THE CORONER:   It will be as frora Hondav.  I think
    we have got the use of the Mandela Roon today and
    tomorrow and then thev will take it back.   Tnat is the
    first thing.

         The second thing is transcripts.   Ouite a lot of
D   people not surprisingly find it is a jolly expensive
    business getting the transcripts, and I have been
    looking at the regulations, I have been thinking about
    it, and so have the dispensers of them, so to speai;,
    and what we have decided as being perhaps a fair way of
    dealing with ttie matter is this - it breaches the rules
    by the way, but we think it is still a fair way of
    doing it.  Wnat
               What we intend to do is that those of you
    the legal representatives, if you like, each individual
    party, if you wish to have a copy then your copy conies
    at whatever the standard rate is per photocopied sneet.
    Once any party, so to speak, and by that, fir. King, I
    take it that vou represent all - I know you don't
    represent all bereaved, but nevertheless I treat vou
    for this purpose as if you do - once any section, so to
    speak, has taken one set, we will then supply anybody
    behind you who wants a personal set for whatever reason
    - at least I won't do it but the Local Authority whicn
    is doing the duplicating - it will still cost so^e
    money, because it is an expensive business, as you
    appreciate, photocopying the thing but it will be
    considerably less, and I think it will actually be less
    than if you took it round the corner and photocopied it
    in the shop round the corner.

         It won't be done on a daily basis because we won't
    be able to do that, but as near as possible on a weekly
    basis, so if there is anybody behind you, so to speak,
    wno says, "I want oiy own set", then Sergeant Griffiths
    is the nan, speak to nint, indicate what you want, he
    will then point you in the right direction in order to
    make the appropriate arrangements.




H
                                                                        .2
                                                                             «* *




               The only other thing I ought to say because I
         think it is onlv fair, l5rs. HcBrien of course is
                         ’              '■
         sitting in the front row, isn t s‘ie, so one could say
         she has got to have it at full waacs, but I think for
B        the purposes of this -I will treat you just like every
         other member of the bereaved fanilies, and pretend, if
         I can use that word, that you $re actually behind Hr.
         King.   You don't riind that, do you?

              I iR •   Tv X i   «   Not at all.

              THE CORONER:   Have you understood what we are
         trying to do?  I think that is fair.

              MR. KING:   Sir, can I say on behalf of those I
         represent that we are very grateful for the
         consideration you have given,  As you know, sir, it has
         beea a great burden, the cost of duplication and
         copies, and the anxiety of the families, however, has
         been to have access to the inforraation. I a® sure they
         will be very grateful to you.

D             TiiE CORONER:   He think that balances it
         relatively well.   Okay, we will start with our first
         witness.   If there are any difficulties on that bv the
         way, it is just a matter of speaking to Sergeant
         Griffiths, and letting hin know.   There may be a few
         administrative hiccups, but there should not be any
         problems in principle.

                  SIEPHEM HICrfAEL COPELAND Called (Sworn)

                                      By THE CORONER

    0. Now, what is your name? - A. Stephen Copeland.

    0. It is Stephen Michael Copeland actually,        isn't it? - A.
       Yes.

    0. Are you still at                             m
       Sheffield? - A. I an not now, I have got siy own house
       now.

    Q. what is your address? - A. It is                           at


    0.   And I think you are in the engineering trade,       is that
         right? - A . No longer, no.

    0.    ito longer - it doesn't matter. That was your
         occupation, I think, in 1989, is that right? - A. Tnat
         is correct, yes.




H
                                                                          .3


                                                    S.. i'i. GOft£LA;.D




    o.    In addition to that, since 1984 you were a part-tirae
         .turnstile operator at Sheffield Wednesday, is that
          right? - A . That is correct, yes.
B   0. You did not receive any formal training, but you were
       shown how to operate a turnstile? - A. That is correct,
       ves.                 '

    0 . Would vou agree, as indeed most of your colleagues
         have, that once you know how to do it, it is not that
         difficult? - A. No, it is not difficult at all.

    O. You have got to be able to press a pedal and you have
       got to be able to take the money or a ticket, as the
       case may be? - A. Yes.

    0. Tnat assumes that everything is going smoothly, of
       course.  uow, did you usually work at the Leppings Lane
       end or not? - A. No, I were posted anywhere within the
       ground.

    Q. but on 15th April 1989 you were actually at the
       Leppings Lane end, is tnat right? - A. That is correct,
       yes.

    Q. Can you recollect which turnstile you were at? - A. It
       was turnstile F.

    Q. F, that is right, so that was the section which dealt
       with people who nad tickets to go onto the terracing,
       is that right? - A. I believe so, yes.

    0 . Were you operating turnstiles in 1988? - A. I was, yes.
    Q. Were you at the Leppings Lane end that year or were you
       somewhere else that year? - A. I would possibly nave
       been at Leppings Lane at a certain time, yes.

    Q. When you    say possibly, does that mean you can't
       remember    whether you were or not? - A. Only raatcti I can
       remember    working at that ti;ne I think were an Everton
       raatch or   a Liverpool match.

    0   . We will forget that then.  If you don't remember there
          is no point in going back - stick to 1989. - A. Right.

    0. You I think got to your turnstile at about noon, is
          that right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

    Q. Having opened up and got yourself in position did
       spectators begin to corae tnrough? - A. Only spectators
       that seemed to come through were kids and families.
       There weren't groups of people, there were just odd few
       trickling through.




H
                                           S. M. COPELAND


So not very many at that stage? - A. No.

I do not know whether you remember but do you
recollect whether there were any Police Officers
outside your turnstile? - A. There was. There were
two outside my turnstile and also two outside and two
inside the ground.' .
At that stage in the early hours what were those
officers doing with regard to the spectators, do you
remember that? - A. Trying to check tickets, and the
one inside the ground, if anybody did get through
without a ticket or without the means to be in the
ground to eject them from the ground.

Was that the one on the outside or inside or did they
both do it? - A. They were both doing it. The ones
outside were trying to stop people coming into the
ground without tickets and the ones inside were
checking the people to see if they got through with
tickets.
If you thought that somebody came through without a
ticket, did you shout at the Police on the inside,
"Watch him" or what did you do? - A. There wasn't a
verbal reply between me and the Officer but we did
have a sort of thing where I would give a nod or even
just look at him. He would know somebody had got
through without the proper thing.

It was not too difficult because there were not many
people going through at that time? - A. No.

Having said that, were there in fact any significant
numbers of people to whom you had to nod to the
Officer about? - A. At the early stages it was no
different to any other match.

So no problems? - A. No, none at all.

When you say early stages what time would you say the
early stages finished? - A. The early stages would be
from midday when it opened until about two or quarter
past two.
At that time then what happened? How did it alter so
far as you were concerned? - A. As from the slackness
to the rush?

Yes? - A. It was just one big rush. The only way I
can explain it is that on opening match day you get a
                                           S. M. COPELAND


rush hour or a rush half hour where it starts
building up and it didn't do that. It just started.
It went from empty to one big crowd. There was no
build-up to it.
Are you saying this was very sudden? - A. It was very
sudden, yes.

That was the difference you observed as compared with
normal matches? - A. Yes.

What you are trying to say I think is that at a
normal match you do expect a build-up? - A. Yes, it
builds up and then it fades out just as it built up.

It suddenly backed up? - A. It did, yes.

The people who were coming through this, what did
they look like to you? What was their appearance
like? - A. In the early stages or the late stages?

The early stages you have said were completely
normal? - A. Yes.

I am interested in the late stages, if you like, from
quarter past two onwards to three o'clock and if
there were changes then I want to you to tell me
about those as well? - A. There again I am only
comparing it to another match and there were a lot of
people that obviously knew each other that was
together, a lot of males, who weren't as orderly as a
lot of kids or a lot of women coming through.

Not a lot did you say? - A. As soon as it built up
there weren't a great deal, no.

Did they look distressed in any way? - A. They did,
yes.

How did you deduce that? What made you think they
were distressed? - A. I could hear the banging
against the turnstiles which is something I had never
come across before and also they were telling me that
they were getting squashed. At first I thought they
were messing about and were pushing each other in the
back and they were trying to explain there was a
crush outside.

You could not really see the crush very well from
where you were, could you? - A. No, you only want a
dozen people outside your turnstile and then you
                                                 S. M. COPELAND


       don't know how many is out there,   All you can see is
       the first dozen people.

    Q. In other words, what you are saying is that once you
B      have got a group outside, even a relatively small
       group outside, you cannot.see further back? - A. No.

    Q . Did    anyof them mention any concerns about getting
        hurt? - A. Yes, a lot of them mentioned that there
        were people getting hurt outside and said that people
        were going to get killed if we didn't let them in as
        fast as we could. We couldn't let them in no faster
        and then in the later stages, I can't remember the
        time, people were coming through telling me that
        people had died outside.

    Q. They actually said that people had died to you? - A.
       Yes, and the figure that was used most was three.

    Q. That was the message you were getting from the fans
       who were coming through? - A. Yes.

D   Q. Did    youget the impression that as the fans were
       coming through at this time that they were being
       still able to come through the turnstiles, so to
       speak, up to the turnstiles, stop, through, or were
       they being in a sense in a column being pushed
       forward by people from behind? - A. The thing about
       the turnstiles is that if somebody pushes the
       turnstile before you press the pedal mechanism down
       it makes it very hard to push the pedal down and that
       is what actually happened. I found I was standing on
       top of the pedal to push it down to let people
       through.

    Q. So in fact the pressure on the turnstile, you are
       saying, was actually slowing the mechanism? - A.
       Because of the people pushing. I mean, it is only a
       few seconds but it is slowing things down.

    Q. It makes a difference? - A. Yes.

    Q. At this point at say between quarter past two and
       three o'clock which is the time that you have in
       mind, is that right? - A. Yes.

    Q. On the whole most of the people who came through, did
       they proffer tickets to you? - A. Did they give me
       tickets?




H
                                                                   ■f   9

                                                  S. M. COPELAND


    Q. They did? -   A. Yes. A lot gave tickets. Some were
       for the Kop   which we had been instructed to let
       through and   some didn't have tickets at all, or a lot
       didn't have   tickets at all.
B
         MR. ISAACS:   I am sorry, sir, did he say a lot did
    not have tickets at all?

    Q.        THE CORONER:   Did you say a lot did not have
         tickets? - A. A lot didn't have tickets.

    Q. Let us deal with a lot did not have tickets at all
       first of all? - A. Yes.

    Q. It is very difficult to estimate this? - A. Yes.

    Q. But in very round terms what would you say were the
       numbers who did not have tickets who came through
       your turnstiles? - A. As a rule the people were
       either offering money or were coming over the
       turnstiles one way or the other. It could be in the
       region of 150 to 200 people.
D
    Q. You have very kindly split it for me. Can you think
       back to the ones who were offering money? - A. Yes.

    Q. How many would you say were actually offering you
       money? I am not asking you whether you took the
       money. I am just asking you how many you think
       offered money? - A. I would say in the region of 30
       to 50 people.

    Q. 30 to 50 offered you money? - A. Yes.

    Q. The rest of them who you mentioned, the rest of them,
       and it depends which figure you take between 100 and
       150 people, they did not offer you any money, is that
       right? - A. They either offered me money, they didn't
       have any tickets, or they were just jumping over the
       turnstile.

    Q. That is what I am trying to find out because if you
       are being squashed outside, you are uncomfortable,
       you are red in the face and you cannot breathe and so
       on you might decide you will jump over the turnstile
       even if you have a ticket? - A. Yes.

    Q. Do you understand what I am saying? - A. Yes.

    Q. What I want to try and find out, simply so that we
       can get the picture, is that apart from the fact they




H
                                                 S. M. COPELAND


      were jumping over the turnstiles, was there anything
      else which gave you a clue that they might not have a
      ticket? - A. Earlier I explained that the turnstile
      was very hard to press down but it is still a lot
B     quicker to go through the turnstile than it is to go
      over the top of it. I    me^n, on a ticket there is two
      pieces. There is sjtub that you keep and there is a
      bit that you give them   back. If I saw a ticket Ilet
      them through. If they gave me the full ticket I
      didn't rip it in half. If I saw a ticket, whether
      they gave it me or not, I was letting them through
      the turnstile.

    Q. You have mentioned the term, jumping over the
       turnstile. What actually do you mean by that? What
       does a person do when he jumps over a turnstile as
       you have used the words? - A. On the actual
       turnstiles where you give them the money there is a
       ledge and a ledge to the right of them, putting hands
       on there and just lifting their legs over the
       turnstile.

D   Q. Are you   saying what you do is just like going over in
       PE over   a horse. You press down and press your legs
       through   either forward or backward? - A. You swing
       them up   and over, yes.




                           /Q. You would estimate.




H
                                                               "   V?   f

                                                    S. M. COPELAND .



    Q. You would estimate it could have been anything up to 100
       or so, maybe even a few more people, who were actually
       doing that? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you have any people going through two at a time? - A.
B      Yes, I did.   X had quite a few people going through two
       at a time.        •

    Q. Was it possible that - it sounds to me as if in some of
       these cases, two at a time, they may well have had
       tickets, but they may just have presented themselves
       together into one quadrant, would that be right? - A. It
       is still quicker to go through one at a time, to go^
       through two at a time or go over the top, and even if I
       had seen the tickets, that would have been fair enough if
       they want to go through two at a time, there would be one
       producing a ticket and the other one squeezing through.

    Q. So you are saying that on the whole you would estimate
       that the ones who went through two at a time, one of them
       is likely not to have had a ticket, as far as you
       remember? - A. That's correct.

    Q. However, the overall figure you have given me of people
D      you have let through without tickets, either jumping over
       the turnstiles or going through two at a time, or
       offering you money is in the region of what? - A. Between
       150 to 200 people.

    Q.   The other thing I want to deal with is these people who
         had Kop tickets.   I want to split this into two
         sections, before the sudden inrush and after.    Before
         the inrush did you have people with Kop tickets who came
         through? - A. Yes.    I can't remember whether it was
         myself or another turnstile operator had said to a police
         officer that people - Liverpool-ites - were wanting to
         come through with Kop tickets and I don't know how it got
         about but a police officer did tell us to let them
         through.

    Q. You don't know who that officer was? - A. Only by his
       looks.   I don't know what his name is.

    Q. I don't want you to give me a graphic description, but
       what distinguished him so you could say you knew him by
       his looks? - A. By his looks?   Big build, beard.

    Q.   You don't remember the officer saying that to you
         personally? - A. No.    I don't know who had said to an
         officer that people wanted to get through, but the police
         officer, if I remember rightly, he stood in tny turnstile
         and shouted it to the group of turnstile operators.




H
                                                                    ,10
                                                                               f
                                                          S.M.   COPELAND .


    Q. Did this happen you say in the early part before the rush
       came through? - A. Yes.

    Q. You are absolutely sure about that? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Had that sort of thing ever happened before as far        as you
B        know? - A. As far as I know, no.

    Q.   How many people would you -say you let through with Kop
         tickets up to the beginning"of the rush? - A.  Half a
         dozen, a dozen, it wasn't a great deal.

    Q.   It wasn't a big problem at that stage? -A. No.

    Q.    Can you estimate how many came through after     the rush? -
         A. I have no idea, I don't know.

    Q. Would I be right in saying that once the rush had started
       there wasn't any option, you had to let them through
       because you could not send them out again? - A. Yes.   It
       doesn't matter what they come through with, offering
       money, or whatever, they had to go through the turnstile.
       They couldn't go backwards.

    Q.   They couldn't go backwards? - A. No.
D
    Q. So It was Hobson's choice?      - A. Yes.

    Q. They had to go ahead? - A.      They had to go in, they had        no
       option.

    Q. You have mentioned that the people coming through were
       telling you about people dying outside? - A. Yes.

    Q.   You said they wanted to get in faster, which is
         understandable? - A. Yes.

    Q. Apart from saying, "Get a move on, operate this turnstile
       faster," did they have any other ideas how they might get
       in?   Did anybody tell you what other alternative there
       was other than turnstiles? - A. No, I had got no other
       option.

    Q. I think you have a view of one of the big concertina
       gates, is that right, from your turnstile? - A. Yes.

    Q.   That is Gate C? - A.   Yes,   that is correct.

    Q.   Did you actually see   that open at any point? - A. I did
         on numerous occasions.

    Q. It is common practice for that gate to open and shut? -A.
       Yes.




H
                                                            .11
                                                               v   V?   f

                                                  S.M.   COPELAND .


    Q. During matches? - A. Yes.

    Q. So initially that didn't surprise you, is that right? -
       A. It is open to let officers in or out of the ground, to
       eject people from the ground.   It is not a big surprise.

B   Q. Did it on
       you could
                   this occasion open in a different way as far as
                   see? - A„ No.   It opened more, obviously.
       There were more pe<?ple being ejected from the ground than
       what there would normally be.

    Q. Did you see any group of people coming in through the
       gate? - A. Only on the mad rush, I did, yes.

    Q. Tell me a little bit about that? - A. All I can remember
       about that is - I mean, I wasn't constantly looking at
       the gate.You glance and you look away, but as far    as I
       can remember a police officer - I can't remember how     he
       got in but somebody jumped over my turnstile or went
       through by the wrong means.   I nodded to the police
       officer who got hold of him and he walked towards the
       gate.   I can't remember the next bit but when I looked
       back again the gate was open and there were people
       rushing through.
D   Q. Did you see the gate shut again? - A. I did see the gate
       shut again, yes.

    Q. How long was it before it shut, can you recollect that?
       If you cannot do not guess. - A. All I can recollect is
       what I have read in my statement which is thirty seconds
       to a minute.

    Q. Did you see it open again after that? - A. I did, yes.

    Q. This time did it stay open any longer? - A. I am not sure
       but I think it stayed open permanently after that.

    Q. I just want to go back over one thing with you and this
       is these people with the Spion Kop tickets. - A. Yes.

    Q. How many did you say you admitted before the rush
       started? - A. Perhaps six or twelve, somewhere in that
       region.

    0. The reason why I ask you is because in your statement you
       actually said there were rather more than that.  You
       have put in excess of 50 people with a Spion Kop ticket.
       As I have said to other witnesses, I am not trying to
       catch you or anything like that, all I am trying to
       establish are the facts. - A. I would say that perhaps on
       the day there might have been up to fifty people with
       Spion Kop tickets.   At the early stages it is only a




H
                                                                  .12
                                                                   - v? f
                                                         S. M. COPELAND.


         number of probably six to twelve, but during the day like
         I have said in my statement there might have been...

    Q. I see, throughout the period? - A. Throughout the period
       of opening to closing.

B   Q. Including the period when there was obviously a large
       number of people coming through which you couldn't
       control because of.the crush outside? - A. That is
       correct.

    Q.   Just to get this quite clear, initially you could see up
         to the perimeter gates down to Leppings Lane, but once
         you get even a relatively small crowd outside the
         turnstile your vision is obstructed by other people, is
         that right? - A. Yes.   It is the same when you work on
         the Kop, the only idea you have got of the number of
         people outside is by the noise.   That is the only way
         you can tell there is a large number of people outside.

    Q.   Was there noise? - A. Oh, yes, yes.

                      Cross-Examined by MR. PA Y N E :

    Q. Did you say you had two policemen stationed outside your
D      turnstile? - A. That is correct.

    Q. Also    two inside? - A. That is correct.

    Q. Was this helpful to you as the turnstile operator? - A.
       Yes.      Imean, on ordinary match days it is helpful to
       have them there.If you are working on      a juvenile
       stand, people over sixteen are more inclined not to go
       through there because the police officer is there.

    Q. Just talk to this particular match.  Why is it necessary
       to have two policeman outside and two policemen inside? -
       A. Because they are double turnstiles.   There is
       yourself and one officer here.

    Q. Why do you need policemen to help you? - A. Well, it is
       not as much to help us, it is to help the fans.   I mean,
       it doesn't matter to me who wants to have a go at me.    I
       am in a box, they can't get to me, but they are there to
       help people through the turnstiles and make sure people
       aren't carrying things such as knives, bottles, glasses
       or anything like that through the turnstiles.

    Q. So from your point of view as the turnstile operator, are
       they doing a useful job? - A. Yes.




H
                                                             .13.



                                           S. M. COPELAND'


         The next question:  the sudden arrival is the big
         point in your mind which you have been telling the
         Jury about.  Can you put a time to that approximately?
         - A. The only time I can put to it is between quarter-
         past 2 to half-past 2.
B
         I just want to 'go over the arithmetic again.  During
         the rush it is -150 to 2Q0 people without tickets? - A.
         Yes, in one way and another.

         Plus, for the Spion Kop, about another 40? - A. I
         would class the people with Spion Kop tickets without
         tickets.

              MR. PAYNE:   Right,   thank you.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

         Mr. Copeland, normally when you are a turnstile
         operator and people are coming through, don't they
         usually take out their ticket before they get facing
         opposite you?  Do you see what I mean by that? - A.
         Yes.  On a ticket, the people have generally got them
D        in their hand.

         Yes, they are not looking into their pockets to get
         their tickets out before they get there? - A. You do
         get the odd person who has just run off from the bus
         station to the turnstile looking for his ticket.

    Q.   That is very unusual,   is it not? - A. It is an unusual
         thing, yes.

    Q.   People know they are going to be coming to the
         turnstile? - A. That is correct, yes.  I am generally
         on a match usually in a queue where they have had time
         to take it out of their pocket.

    Q.   Even before they join the queue they would take their
         ticket out? - A. Possibly they would, yes.

    Q.   Before the rush there may have been some people who
         did not have tickets who tried to get in, you have
         told us that? - A. Yes.

         In those circumstances you would give a nod to one or
         other of the police officers who were standing inside?
         - A. Yes.  I mean, at the very early stages it was not
         even necessary to do that because if they had got no
         ticket you told them no, and they turned round, they
         were able to walk out of the turnstile.




H
                                                              14


                                           S. M. COPELAND


    Q.   Did there come a time when you actually said to
         somebody, "No, you can't come, in", and he didn't move?
         - A. That is correct, yes.

    Q.   What happened then? - A. That is up to the police
B        officer then to see that he does not come into the
         ground to watch' the match.

    Q.   So you would nocF to the police officer? - A. Yes,    the
         police officer would be informed.

    Q.   Let us say the first occasion that that happened, what
         happened?  You nodded to the police officer.- A. If
         nobody had come through, if somebody was stood at the.
         turnstile, if he had stood there for three or four
         seconds longer than what he should have, the police
         officer would automatically have walked towards me
         anyway.

    Q.   Very well. - A.  If I had turned round and nodded to
         the officer he would walk towards me and ask what the
         problem was.

D   Q.   Did that happen on any occasion that afternoon? - A.
         At the early stages, yes.

    Q.   What happened when that took place?  The police
         officer came along and the fan had to move away? - A.
         That is correct, yes.

    Q.   Let us move on a bit.  Did there come a time when you
         asked a fan to move away, he did not move away but no
         police officer came? - A. No.  Up until the mad rush
         there was always a police officer there.

    Q.   So what happened at the mad rush?  So many people were
         coming without tickets you had to let them through? -
         A. There were so many people there that were coming
         through without tickets that if I had kept nodding to
         the policeman I would have fallen over dizzy.

    Q.   He was overwhelmed? - A.   Yes.

    Q.   They couldn't just cope with it? - A.    No.

    Q.   If you had said to any of those people at that stage,
         knowing that the police officers were overwhelmed,
         "You can't come through" - did you do that at all? -
         A. On the later stages?

    Q.   Yes. - A.  I couldn't tell them they couldn't come
         through.  I had no option but to let them through.




H
(/ i
                                                                    15



                                                 S. M. COPELAND


           Q.   Why was that? - A. Because they could not go back.
                There was no way they could go back through the crowd.

           Q.   On any occasion when you told somebody, once the crowd
                had built up, they did not have a ticket, let us say
       B        the early stages of the mad rush where it had not
                really got as b'ad as it was to get. - A. Yes.

           Q.   Did anybody become abusive towards you? - A. Not until
                the later stages.

           Q.   But later on? - A. Later on they did, yes.

           Q.   I am not talking now about people saying, "It's
                terrible out there", but in terms of actually getting
                in and desperate to get in without a ticket? - A. At
                the early stages it was just a normal match.   There
                wasn't a general lot of people who were coming without
                tickets.  There were people but there wasn't a number
                that you wouldn't expect, but later on people were
                saying that if they couldn't get through they were
                going to get hurt.  It is as simple as that.

       D   Q.   Apart from that, you have told us about that, people
                 who were desperate to get in without tickets and were
                 using the situation to get in without tickets? - A.
                 There possibly was, yes.

                     THE CORONER: I do not think this witness can
                answer that question.

                     MR. ISAACS:   It was not, in fact,  a question that
                was designed to elicit any answer;    it was to try and
                set a scene to see if there was, in fact, any abusive
                remark at that stage.

                     THE CORONER: I think that is fair enough.  You
                can say, "Was there an abusive remark?" but you cannot
                actually ask him to comment on whether people were
                manipulating the situation.

                     MR. ISAACS:  The Jury will make up their minds
                about that for themselves.

                     THE CORONER:   You cannot ask that question.

                     MR. ISAACS:   Of course.
           Q.   The point I was seeking to make, Mr. Copeland, or to
                ask you about, was in those circumstances, people
                coming through, were they abusive towards you when you
                said, "You can't go through"? - A. Yes, they were very
                abusive.  That is the worst match I have ever worked
                on for abuse.




       H
V f
                                                           16




                                         S. M. COPELAND


          Forgetting for a moment the problems that were going
          on behind because people were possibly getting hurt? -
          A. Yes.

          Actual abuse directed towards you because you did not
      B   want to let them in? - A. Yas, that is correct.

                      Cross-Examined by MR. KING

          Mr. Copeland, is it right that when people were coming
          through in the big numbers as you have described,
          clearly they were in a considerable amount of
          distress, the people going through? - A. The people
          that were coming through were in a lot of distress,
          yes.

          In those circumstances, it is very difficult to know,
          is it not, whether, for example, they have never had a
          ticket, or whether they have had it in their pocket
          and they did not want to produce it until the very
          last moment for fear of losing it, or someone
          snatching it, but getting to the turnstile and being
          so desperate to get through they just want to get
      D   through?  You could have that possibility, could you
          not? - A. Yes, there is not a match goes by without
          somebody says, "It's in my pocket, let me through,
          I'll give it you when I get through", but there are
          one or two people, not the amount of people that there
          were on that match day.

          All I am trying to discover from you is this.  It is
          very difficult, is it not, in your situation to know
          whether or not somebody who has come through without
          giving you a ticket is somebody who has never had a
          ticket at all? You cannot know that, can you? - A.
          No, you cannot know that, but by the number of people
          that were coming through without tickets, you can have
          a good guess at that fact.

          I agree you can if they are coming through in twos,
          because you can say to yourself, 'Why are they coming
          through in twos?' and I agree you can say to yourself
          if someone jumps over or attempts to jump over the
          turnstile, 'He's obviously trying to get through
          without a ticket', but were there people who you let
          through apparently without a ticket who did not come
          through in twos and who did not jump over? - A. No,
          not at all.  The only people who came through on their
          own were the people who were offering money, which I
          was trying to tell the police officer, which I did on
          a number of occasions, to eject them from the ground.

          So are you saying that the people who you have
          estimated who did not have tickets were the people who




      H
p. ■
                                                                    17
                                                                         .? 9

                                                S. M. COPELAND


                either jumped over or came through in twos? - A. That
                is correct, yes.

                Dealing with that then, because that is very helpful -

       B
                     THE CORONER: Excuse me, and I think he also said
                the ones who were offering money.

                     MR. KING:  Yes.
           Q.   I am now talking about the big numbers of people from
                2.15/2.30 onwards. - A. Yes.

           Q.   You have estimated the number of people who came
                through at that stage, from that time onwards, without
                tickets at how many? - A. I am not on about that time,
                I am on about during the day.

           Q.   I am sorry, during the day. - A. I mean from   2.15 to 3
                 o'clock, I wouldn't put an estimate on whatever people
                 came through without a ticket or with the wrong
                 ticket, but during the day from when I opened I
                 estimated that 150 to 200 people.
       D   Q.   Does that include everybody who had either a wrong
                 ticket who had a ticket, people who offered you money,
                 people who jumped over and people who went through in
                 twos - all those categories? - A. That would include
                 all them, yes.

           Q.   So dealing with that 150 to 200,    that included people
                 who produced a Spion Kop ticket?   - A. That is correct,
                 yes.

           Q.   And you had been told to let them through? - A. That
                is correct, yes.

           Q.   It also included people who, before the big numbers
                arrived, you were able to nod to the Police who dealt
                with it? - A. That is correct, yes.

           Q.   Can you help us with this.   When the big numbers came
                 were the majority of people who you have described as
                 not having a ticket people who jumped over, came
                 through in twos, or offered you money?   Can you tell
                 us which fell into which category?   How many fell into
                 which? - A.   Is there one particular category which
                 was more than others? - A. You mean within either sex
                 or an age, or something like that?

           Q.   No.  When the big numbers came, the people who you say
                were coming in without tickets, for the most part what
                were they doing?  Were they people who were offering
                you money, or were they people who were jumping over,




       H
JAC



                                                                      •f *

                                               S. M. COPELAND


               or were they people who were coming through in twos?
               What was the most prevalent way of getting in? - A. I
               would say coming through in twos.

          Q.   So the numbers who were jumping over, would you say,
      B        were not very many of the nujnbers you are talking
               about? - A. Well, I haye said there were quite a few
               people jumping 'oyer. There were people falling over
               the turnstile rather than as much as jumping over the
               turnstile.

          Q.   Dealing with the people who were, you say, jumping
               over, you had a mechanism in your turnstile, did you
               not, an electric eye, a sensor? - A. Yes.

          Q.   And anybody who jumped over the turnstile without
               operating the turnstile, they would break the beam,
               would they not, on the sensor? - A. That is correct,
               if they climbed high enough over the turnstiles.

          Q.   Was your understanding that if they did break the
               beam, that would be recorded somewhere, did you know
               that? - A. It wasn't on that turnstile I worked on
      D        because the wires were cut.

          Q.   The wires were cut on your turnstile? - A. Yes.

          Q.   Which turnstile were you at? - A.   Turnstile F.

          Q.   As far as people who were coming through in this mad
               crush, if I could put it that way, who were coming
               through however you say in twos - right? - A. Yes.

          Q.   They would have to emerge onto the concourse, wouldn't
               they? - A. Yes.

          Q.   They would have to come out into that big concourse? -
               A. Yes.

          Q.   Standing on that concourse were police officers, were
               there not? - A. That is correct.

          Q.   Those police officers were in a position, if they
               wanted to, to stand looking straight into your
               turnstile area, weren't they? - A. That is correct,
               yes.

          Q.   If they did stand there right outside they would be
               able to see people coming through in twos? - A. I
               would say not.

               You do not think so? - A. No.




      H
0*7
                                                                    19
                                                                    • ',f f
      A
                                              S. M. COPELAND'


          Q.   Why not? - A. Well, apart from them having to eject
               other people, two just don't come through.  There are
               people that are stood in front of them that have come
               through before them.  They can't see through the other
               people.
      B
          Q.   I understand that problem.   A. You wouldn't be able
               to see people coming through two at a time unless you
               could see the turnstile going round.

          Q.   You would be able to stand in such a position close to
               your turnstile at the concourse, would you not?  It
               leads right down to the concourse? - A. You would have
               to stand in the middle of the two turnstiles to see
      C        it.

                    MR. KING:  Sir, I was not necessarily going to do
               this, but I am interested in this.  I have a
               photograph of the very turnstile this man was
               operating on viewed from the concourse.  Can I just
               show it to you, sir.


      D




      E




      F



                                        /THE CORONER:   I can see




      H
                                             S. M. COPELAND




     THE CORONER:      I can see it actually from here.

     MR. KING:      Can I show it to the witness?

     THE CORONER:      Yes, pass it round the Jury first.

     MR. KING:      To be fair I will pass   it along the
bench also.

     THE CORONER:      What is the reference on it?

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   The only thing I have got is
"West Midlands Police, Print No. 8".

     THE CORONER:   Okay, that will do, and we will
give it a "C" number.

     HR. JONES:       C322.

     THE CORONER:   We will take a copy      of it later.
We don't need to do it now.

     MR. KING:   I just want to ask you this, Mr.
Copeland. Did you ever see a Police Officer standing
in the area where you can see on that photograph? - A.
The Officer stood perhaps three feet away from the
turnstile.

I won't take that any further because I can ask
individual Officer where they were standing. You
confirm that that is a picture of the view into your
turnstiles from the concourse? - A. That is correct,
yes.

And you confirm that there were Police Officers on the
concourse? - A. Yes.

I won't take that any further with you. Now that you
have told us that you thought that the main way of
people getting through, apparently without tickets you
say, were coming in in twos, that is what you said to
us? - A. Yes.

And people were also jumping over, and I accept what
the learned Coroner said about monies and so forth, but
nevertheless you said the main numbers coming through
in twos. I just want to investigate a little about
your estimates, because estimates are very difficult,
aren't they? - A. They are, yes.

I accept that you have told us today up to 200? - A.
Yes.
                                         S. M. GOBELAND




And I will accept, and you can take it from me, that in
a written statement you said about 200, being fair to
you on that, but would you also agree with me that when
you have actually had to make another estimate on
another occasion - and sir, I am looking to what he
said at the Taylor Inquiry on. estimates - if I am being
unfair I will be stopped, but I will quicken things
slightly, would you agree with me that you were asked
as to how many were going through at two at a time and
jumping over and you said this:

     "I would say that going through two at a time and
     jumping over, once again probably about 100
     people' .
Would you accept that you may have said that? - A.
Combined together going over, climbing over, or going
through two at a time?

Going through two at a time or jumping over, combined
together you said on another occasion about 100. - A. A
minimum of 100, I would say, yes.

1 only say that to you because estimates are very
difficult, aren't they? - A. They are, yes.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, my learned friend puts to this
witness that he was therefore inaccurate, but I ask the
question where is the inaccuracy there in what has been
said today and what has been said to Taylor?

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Isaacs, I have heard your
point, I have also heard what Mr. King has said, I have
also heard what the Witness has said, and I can add up
as well, and so can the Jury. Carry on, Mr. King.

     MR. KING:   All I am putting at the moment is a
very simple point, that estimates are always very
difficult? - A. Estimates are always difficult, yes.

Would you also accept from me this point, that jumping
over a turnstile is not easy is it? You have got to
lift yourself up? - A. In the position that people were
you can do a lot of things when you are in danger. I
mean, you could go down now and try itand find it very
difficult, but when you have got a lotof people behind
you and you know your life is in difficulty you can do
a lot of things.

So do you think it is a possibility that some of the
people who were jumping over were jumping over to save
themselves? - A. Possibly, yes. Like I said before, it
is still quicker to give me a ticket and let me let you
through than it is to jump over.
                                              S. M. GORELAND




But there you are, there is another possibility which
you have put forward, that people who jumped over were
jumping over because there was danger behind them and
they were trying to get out of danger? - A. That is
correct, yes.

So it is another example, being very fair, of how it is
very difficult to know why people are acting in the way
you have described. It is always very difficult, isn't
it? - A. That is correct, yes.

Can I just ask you something totally different now.
You had a briefing and instructions before you set out
on that day? - A. Yes.

And those instructions, I assume, included if there was
an emergency in the ground? - A. That is right, yes.

And did you know that there was a special message which
could be broadcast to indicate that there was an
emergency? - A. I knew that on the match day. I knew
it before the match day.

Did you ever hear that special message being broadcast
on this day of the 15th April? - A. I didn't, no. I
didn't hear nothing by the tannoy because of the noise
of the people.

There may be many reasons, I am just asking whether you
ever heard at any stage the special message? - A. Not
on that day I didn't, no.

Including the time when everybody has disappeared from
your turnstiles and there is no one around you. You
didn't hear anything like that? - A. No.
Thank you.

             Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEH

Mr. Copeland, the things you have described this
morning, does this usually happen at an ordinary match?
Do you see people normally jumping over your turnstile
or going in by twos and things like that? - A. It is a
very few number of people, under an amount of five
people per match. It is something that you don't
expect. You might not even get it at all and you might
get ten at the match after, but it is not expected at
all.

So it seems to me that you had a great deal of
responsibility at the turnstiles. Although your job
was described as a very simple job, once you had been
shown the basic mechanism of the thing, it was a simple
                                              S. M. COPELAND




procedure and you had always found that to be the case,
had you? - A. Yes, it is a simple procedure. At times
you have got to be fast at it. It is not that it is
hard, it is just a fast job, on match days, giving
money out and receiving money.

Would you have expected, somebody to have helped with
this problem at the perimeter gate, rather than
everybody leaving the responsibility to you? I have
heard a number of Officers saying in this Court that
nobody could stop people for tickets or check them for
alcohol, it was all to be done at the turnstiles. Now
that to me seems an enormous task for you, a young
person, and the other people I have seen here in the
Court giving evidence, that they had an enormous task
that day. Would you agree?

     THE CORONER:   Just a minute. I don't think you
can ask this witness about the management or the
planning. What you can ask him I think, and it goes
part of the way, is whether he felt overwhelmed by the
situation, and whether he would have been helped if
somebody else had been checking further out. I think
those two questions are fair, but I don't think you can
ask him in the way that you have put it, namely what is
his view or his opinion on the management of the
arrangements. Do you see what I am saying?

        MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes.

        THE CORONER:    Shall I ask the question?

        HRS. McBRIEN:    Please, yes.

     THE CORONER:   What Mrs. McBrien is interested in
is this, firstly were you overwhelmed by the people who
came through? - A. I was, yes.

Secondly, would you have found it helpful if people had
been screened out further back? - A. That is correct,
yes.

You would have found that helpful? - A. Yes.

        THE CORONER:    Does that help you?

        MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, it does.   Thank you very
much.

     THE CORONER:   I think that is what you are trying
to find out, isn't it?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes. I just thought it seemed an
enormous task for somebody ....
                                          S. M. CORELAND




     THE WITNESS:   On a normal match day you have got
two Officers outside. I think they are just checking
really for things like bottles and knives. It is not a
big task for them to do that, there is no great deal of
a rush, but on the day that we are talking about it was
too much for two Officers, one Officer outside my
turnstile, one Officer at the side of me, to check
people as they came through.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes. You were saying that people
were jumping over the turnstiles. It seemed to me a
very easy thing for people to jump over a turnstile,
rather than an enormous perimeter gate which surrounds
the football ground, manned by Police Officers. To let
them go that far, ticketless fans ....

     THE CORONER:    No,   Mrs. McBrien. We are not going
down that road.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I   am sorry, sir. I just got
carried away on that theme that time.

     THE CORONER:   I know. Just recover yourself and
take your time, and ask the next question.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  I think emotion got the better of
me then. Sorry for the delay - I have lost my place
now.

     THE CORONER:   I don't want you to feel rushed. I
will stop you when I think it is necessary, and that I
know does tend to throw you - it would throw me. That
is why I want you not to feel inhibited. Just take
your time and think of your next question and then ask
it when you have got your mind sorted out. I am not
rushing you.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Thank you:

On a normal match day are you saying that fans are
usually ejected through Gate C? - A. On a normal match
day, not only Gate C that are used round the ground,
people would be ejected from them gates, yes.

     THE CORONER:   I am wondering, may I refer to the
transcript from the Taylor Inquiry? It is the
transcript of Superintendent Roger Marshall ....

     THE CORONER:   No, I don't think you can do that.
If you can formulate a question out of it which this
man can answer, which is very doubtful but if you can
that is all right. You can't refer that transcript to
him.
                                              S. M. COPELAND




      MRS. McBRIEN:   I have got a difficult one now. I
.am not sure how to put this one. I would not be able
 to read what Mr. Collins says in it, would I?

     THE CORONER:     No^ I don't t h i n k ___

     MR. KING:   Would .it be of help if Mrs. McBrien
explained to me very quietly what the point was, and I
might be able to help her.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, if somebody could help Mrs.
McBrien on this point.

     MRS. McBRIEN:      I do need help on this, yes,
please.

     MR. KING:      Could I have a few seconds?

     THE CORONER:     Yes.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, I don't know whether this
would be helpful to you, but there is a record of
tickets that were handed in by the turnstile operators,
which were counted by someone at Sheffield Wednesday.
I have a manuscript record of the numbers of Spion Kop
tickets taken at different turnstiles. I can't say it
is 100 per cent accurate - I am not actually sure of
the identity of the person who compiled it. I am
trying to find out, although I have got a very good
idea. I can hand up the copy I have here and see
whether it would be useful. For the Jury's benefit, I
must stress that I can't guarantee it is accurate.




      THE CORONER:           I think .
                                              S. M. COPELAND


      THE CORONER:   I think rather than introduce it in
.this form we will have a look. I am sure that later on
 this is going to come out anyway.
      MR. CATCHPOLE:   This is in the Sheffield Wednesday
 bundle.
      THE CORONER:   I think at this stage it does not
 matter as we are taking this witness' evidence. When we
 come to collect it all up in summary, in so far as it is
 relevant, we can line the things up for the Jury, so to
 speak. That is quite helpful, thank you.

      MR. KING: Sir, it is my fault. I was not necessarily
 concentrating on everything which Mrs. McBrien had been
 asking the witness. I was looking at something else and so
 perhaps I can just take it in stages.

      THE CORONER:     Yes, please.
             Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

 Q. You saw Gate C opened and you saw an Officer eject a
    fan? - A. I didn't see him eject a fan. I just saw
    the gate opened.
 Q. You have known, have you, of fans being ejected in
    that way in the past? - A. Yes.

 Q. Have you known any other way of dealing with ejected
    fans? I am sorry, of dealing with fans who should
    not be in the ground? - A. I know of no other way,
    no.
 Q. You do not know of any other way and so you are not
    in a position to help us on what instructions may or
    may not have been given to Police Officers to deal
    with fans who came through? - A. All I can tell you
    is that that is the only way I would know.

 Q. If Mrs. McBrien has some questions on what was the
    right way, what was the better way, you are not the
    person to ask? - A. I wouldn't know. All that time
    for nowt!
      MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you, Mr. King. I have just been
 referring to the Operational Order but I do realise I will
 not be able to ask this witness that question. Thank you
 very much.
                                              S. M. COPELAND


     MR. PAYNE: In answer to Mr.King,     Mr. Copeland
mentioned something about damage   to the sensor inside his
turnstile which was not followed   upand I was wondering
whether you were going to ask about that.
                    Further bv THE CORONER:

Q. Can we just get this right? What you are saying is
   that there is a sensor in your turnstile? - A. That
   is correct, yes.
Q. There is a counting mechanism     onthe turnstiles as
   well? - A. Yes.
Q. And you collect the tickets? - A. Yes.

Q. Which you then hand on at the end of the day? - A.
   Yes.
Q. You might count them yourself but eventually you give
   them to somebody in the office? - A. Yes.

Q. This sensor is wired electrically, is it? - A. Yes.

Q. It is high up, is it? - A. Yes.

Q. You say that on the day the wire was cut? - A. I
   believe so, yes.
Q. Are you sure or not? - A. On the day on the block of
   turnstiles there was mine cut and I believe somebody
   else's cut as well.

Q.   You are not saying they were all cut? - A. No.

Q.   So far as you remember yours was cut? - A. Yes.

Q. if it had been cut then anybody who broke the beam,
   of course, would not be counted? - A. No.

Q.    Because there would not be abeam? - A. But saying
     that you would have to climb up on to the turnstile
     to get sensored anyway. What I am saying is that
     people weren't climbing on to the turnstile. They
     were climbing over the turnstile. By putting your
     arms on the side and lifting your legs over the
     turnstile your head doesn't go very far up, if you
     know what I mean.
Q. How high up was the sensor? - A. I don't know.
                                                S. M. COPELAND


Q. Can you remember where it was in relation to you
   standing up? Was it above your head or below your
   head? - A. As I look at the opposite turnstile
   operator it is above me and slightly to the left.

Q. I do not want to look at the picture. I think it is
   sufficient if we just get a-description. What you
   are saying is that in order to break the beam (a) it
   has to be working? - A. Yes.

Q. And (b) you have got to get a part of your body high
   enough up? - A. Yes.
Q. Your description on this occasion of the people who
   were coming through was that you did not think they
   were high enough to break the beam anyway? - A. No,
   you would have to actually step up on to the
   turnstile and climb over and they weren't doing that.
   They were lifting their bodies over the turnstile.

           Further Cross-examined bv MR. CATCHPOLE:

Q. If a beam is broken, do you know that it records or
   flashes somewhere else in the ground? - A. It does a
   recording to the office or wherever it goes to, yes.

Q. It is right to say that the turnstile operator
   himself cannot tell when the beam has been broken.
   There is no means for you to know? - A. No.

Q.        THE CORONER:   What you are saying is that it
     does not ring a bell, or flashing lights do not
     flash? Is that right? - A. I just thought it had a
     red light that flashed on but I don't think it has.

     MR. HALE:   May I just ask a supplementary question
out of the question that Mrs. McBrien asked him about the
perimeter gates?

       THE CORONER:   Yes.

                  Cross-Examined bv MR. HALE:

Q. You said in your evidence that when you are operating
   the turnstile they cannot get at you because you are
   in a box? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. Do you know the perimeter gates? Have you seen them
   from time to time? - A. The perimeter gates that come
   into the ground?
                                                              29.
                                                               - «f ?
A
                                                S. M. COPELAND


    Q. Yes. - A. Yes, I have.

    'Q. Is there any protection at those gates for somebody
H       trying to hold them against the crowd wanting to come
        through? - A. I don't understand your question.

    Q. Is there a box, a sentry box, or any sort of shelter
       for anybody holding those gates similar to the box
       that you were in at the turnstiles? Do you follow
       me? - A. No, I still don't.

    Q. If you were holding the gates instead of operating
       the turnstiles, would you have any protection from
       people who wanted to get at you? - A. No, no
       protection at all.

         THE CORONER:   Was there something else, Mr. King?

         MR. KING: Sir, once the witness said that his sensor
    was cut I did not pursue that any further because that is
    his evidence. I did not investigate any matters about the
    sensor but there are a number of matters which I would have
    investigated about the sensor, especially in the light of
    the evidence which has come through this witness that his
    opinion is that they have to go high enough in order to
    break the beam. I do not want to pursue it with this
    witness if I know that it will be dealt with at a later
    stage.
         THE CORONER:   I must say that I am not very impressed
    with the necessity for investigating this aspect of the
    matter in too great a detail because it does not seem to me
    it is going to get us very far forward with regard to the
    object of this Inquest as to whether or not the sensor was
    cut, whether the beam was broken and whether we have 150 or
    200 people coming through without tickets. I think if I
    may put it bluntly the only significant figure which occurs
    to me is one which we can bite on, if I can use that word,
    are the ones who he estimated proffered him money because
    you can make a pretty good deduction that somebody who
    proffers money in an all-ticket match hasn't got one. All
    the rest one has to take with an element of caution and so
    I am inclined not to wish to pursue this because I do not
    think it is going to get us anywhere.

         MR. KING: Sir, I am happy but can I just ever so
    gently - because I do not want to give evidence as I get
    into trouble for it - ask you to look at page 16 of Mr.
    Copeland's evidence to the Taylor Inquiry.




H
                                               S. M- COPELAND


     MR. CATCHPOLE: Sir, perhaps before you look at page
16 I do not think the questions that are put out on that
page are entirelyaccurate because I took further
instructions yesterday from the person who installed the
system. If you want- me to go through it with this witness
I am quite happy to but I woyld not be led by the questions
that appear on that page of the transcript.
     THE CORONER:   Can you just tell me the number so that
I can see where it is?
      MR. KING:   Sir, page 16, letters E-F.

     THE CORONER:   I agree but the trouble is that we are
going into technicalities.
     MR. KING: That is why I stopped, sir, the moment I
heard it coming. All I am anxious about is that having
been developed one could get a false picture on that
particular point.
     THE CORONER:   Can I just ask a supplemental of him to
try and clarify it?
                    Further bv THE CORONER:

Q.    We have talked about these sensors and what have you.
     That had nothing whatsoever to do with your work in
     the turnstiles? - A. That is right.

Q.    Your job is simply - it may not be easy - to take the
     money if it is a cash paying match and press the
     pedal? - A. Yes.

Q. Take the ticket if it is an all-ticket match? - A.
   Yes.
Q. And to communicate with Officers when people come
   through who you do not think should come through if
   you feel you are able to do? - A. That is correct,
   yes.
Q. The heart of your evidence, is it not, that on this
   particular day at about quarter past two everything
   was working according to plan and then you had a
   sudden rush, the whole thing fell apart because you
   could no longer stop people coming through who
   shouldn't come through? - A. That is correct.

Q. In your judgement various people came through in an
   unauthorised way? - A. Yes.
r fc
                                                                            31
•      :                                                                          vf f
           A
                                                                 S. M. COPELAND



               -         Q. The only thing that I want you to repeat for me now
                     is how many do you now, in the light of all the
           n         questioning and everything we have done, say actually
                     proffered money? '* I am not saying whether you took
                     it. I am not interested in that in the least bit.
                     What I am interested in is -how many, in your
                     judgement, to the best of your ability proffered you
                     money? - A. To try and give me money, between 30 to
                     50 people.
                        THE CORONER:     Are you content with that?

                        MR. KING:     I am content.
                        MR. ISAACS:    Sir, perhaps this does raise a matter
                   which could properly be dealt with in the absence of the
                   Jury at this stage. It is certainly an important matter
                   perhaps.
                        THE CORONER:   What we will do, ladies and gentlemen,
                   we were going to break for coffee anyway. You break for
                   coffee and we will carry on working. We will have coffee
                   as well which means you are just going to have a longer
                   break. Shall we get thewitness out as well?

                        MR. ISAACS:        No, sir.
                        THE CORONER:    In fact, there are no further questions
                   of this witness. You can stay or go whichever you prefer.

                        MRS. McBRIEN:      Excuse me, sir, could I just ask the
                   witness something?
                        THE CORONER:   No, you cannot because the Jury are
                   just going out. Leave the room if you would and I think
                   there is another witness here. In fact, would all the
                   witnesses go out.
                          (in the absence of the Jury and the witnesses)

                        MR. ISAACS:   I ask this question of you, sir, with
                   the greatest respect, that this witness has given evidence,
                   as have other witnesses, of ways in which people gained
                   entry into the ground in anunauthorised manner.   You, sir,
                   whilst this witness has been giving evidence, have so far
                   as I am aware for the first time come to the conclusion,
                   and certainly expressed the view in the presence of the
                   Jury, that it is only those who offered money who are in
                   some way relevant and I ask the question of you, sir, why?
                   That I would respectfully submit, sir, is a matter for the




           H
  Jury having assessed the witness' evidence as to whether
  those who come into the ground in twos are those who did
  not have ticket, those who got over did not have tickets.
  Certainly this witness was of the view that those who came
-.into the ground in twos were likely not to have tickets and
  those who jumped over, certainly some of them were likely
  not to have had tickets. You, sir, with respect, seem to
  have been saying to the Jury they should disregard those as
  people who did not have tickets and only concentrate on
  those who proffered money. I would submit certainly that
  that should be a matter for the Jury.

      THE CORONER:     You are quite right, of course. It is
 a question of fact and it will be for the Jury to assess
 the facts and wh en jI come to direct them, as indeed I will,
 it is part of my task to sum up. It is also part of my
 task to guide them. I can give you the reference for that.
 When I come to give my direction I will no doubt deal with
 the issue of what I think about ticketless fans and what I
 consider we have heard in summary. I will no doubt make it
 quite clear to the Jury that in the final analysis what I
 think, and I did say I think, in my judgment I thought that
 that was the kernel of his evidence.




                               /If the Jury in their
     If the jury in their wisdom take the view that
either I am wrong or right, they are perfectly entitled
to do so, or that they wish to put relevance or greater
relevance on a piece of evidence, then you are quite
correct, they are entitled so to do and I don't disagree
with you for a moment.

     MR. ISAACS:   .Sir, we may be getting to the stage of
evidence of those matters which you at this stage did not
consider to be relevant, would not even be given and that
was something that did concern me and secondly that
although at the end of the day when you come to direct
the jury you may, and no doubt will say to them, "Well,
you can either regard or disregard my view," and unless
they are aware of that at this stage they may already
have formed an opinion as to how they should consider the
evidence that they hear without having been warned at
this present time.

     THE CORONER: I am quite happy to make   it quite
clear to the jury in case I have misled them on this
point, that questions of fact are for them, and I am
prepared to do that if you feel that maybe what I have
said at this stage may possibly prejudice them in this
regard.

     Secondly, I do not accept the proposition that
because I exclude a particular topic, that is something
which inevitably has to be included.    I intend to, and I
will, exclude a great deal of evidence which is
exceedingly interesting and which is fascinating^ but
which is not relevant to the Inquests, and I don t
suppose for a minute you are asking me to include that.

     MR. ISSACS:   Not for a moment.

     THE CORONER:   So the fact that   I exclude orsay I
do not consider evidence with regard to the sensor as
being relevant, I don't think is reprehensible.

     MR. ISAACS:   I am not for a moment suggesting, sir,
that you don't have the right to exclude certain non-
relevant evidence.   That would be foolish.   What I was
trying to submit to you, sir, was that in relation to the
numbers going through the turnstile, then that evidence
should certainly go in.   Sensors I make no point about
at all, but I was concerned that in the view you
expressed at this stage without the jury being fully
aware that of course it is their view that counts and not
necessarily yours, it would be very surprising, sir, that
if this jury did not look to you as being a guide as to
what they consider or should consider be relevant or not.
     Quite often when you get an Inquest of this length
you will have a situation where it may be that they are
told at the end of the day. "Of course, matters of fact
are for you, Members of the Jury, you can regard or
disregard my view as you feel fit, ' but there may already
have been a number of occasions when guided by you, sir,
they come to a conclusion which relies very heavily on
the view you are expressing.

     THE CORONER: ' -This is’ always the danger, of course,
isn't it, and at the end of the day I have to do my best
to make things as clear as I can, to give them whatever
guidance I think is appropriate, but to try and impress
upon them the necessity of understanding the difference
between directions on points of law which they have to
accept and opinions which I might express on matters of
fact, which they are entirely free to reject or adopt, as
the case may be.    It is a difficult problem as you say
with a long Inquest.

     What I will do in order to make sure they are not
prejudiced, I will make it quite clear after our coffee
break that issues of fact are for them and opinions by me
are opinions, just as any other opinion, although, of
course, what they think of them is a matter for them.

     MR. ISAACS:    I am greatly obliged, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Shall we have coffee and then we will
call the witness back and let you ask your supplemental
question.

                   (Short adjournment)

             (The Jury returned to court)

     THE CORONER:   Members of the Jury, referring back
to the discussion which had taken place shortly before
you left, namely, when we were talking about the sensor
within the turnstile area and I had expressed an opinion
that in my judgment the crucial evidence which this
witness was giving was the number of people who were
proffering money and that was the strongest evidence I
had heard with regard to the people who came through
without.

     Now the point about that is, and I will give you
this in greater detail when we come to the summing-up,
that issues of fact are matters for you.   They are not
for me.   Questions of law I can direct you on.    I can
express views, I can sum-up, I can give you some
guidance, but in the final analysis, whether you accept
my guidance, whether you put the same value on the
evidence as I have done, whether you in fact say, "Well,
                                                               35




         he didn't mention that in his summing-up, but we remember
         it and we think this is important," those are entirely
         matters for you.   You are perfectly entitled to disagree
         on questions of fact with anything I say, that the most
         it can be said is guidance.   It is your decision, not
         mine.
B             In case there is some misunderstanding that you may
         feel that because I have expressed an opinion on this
         witness's evidence,-you can- ignore it, discount it,
         forget it, you probably will because of the length of
         time between now and the summing-up, but you certainly
         should not allow yourself to be trapped by saying, "Dr.
         Popper has said this, therefore it must be so," not on
         questions of fact.   That is why you are sitting here for
         weeks and weeks so you can decide what you think about
         the facts.

              Questions of law are different.   When I direct you
         as to what the law is you must accept it.    If the other
         people don't accept it they can go to appeal if they want
         to, but you have to accept what I say on that, but on
         questions of fact that is entirely for you.    That
         applies not only to this comment but my objective was to
         explain why I didn't think it was necessary to proceed
         with the sensors.   Perhaps I shouldn't have expressed it
         in that form, but it is neither here nor there.     It is a
         golden opportunity for me to make this point clear to you
         that you are the judges of the facts, not I.

              Now is our witness still here because Mrs. McBrien
         had a supplemental question?

                    STEPHEN MICHAEL COPELAND Recalled

                Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

    Q. Are you quite sure of the time you mentioned when the
       serious build-up occurred? - A. Yes.

              MRS. McBRIEN:     Thank you.

              THE CORONER:     Now Mr. Milton.

                              COLIN MILTON Sworn

                               By THE CORONER;

    Q. Colin Milton, is your address                      - A. Yes,
       that is correct.

    Q.              Sheffield? - A. Yes.




H
                                                              36
                                                               v vf f
                                                       C. MILTON .



    Q. In 1989 you had six years' experience as a turnstile
       operator for Sheffield Wednesday? - A. Yes.

    Q. On the 15th of April, 1989, you were actually operating
       the turnstile G, is that right? - A. Yes.
B   Q. I think you started at about 12*30? - A. Yes.

    Q. Would that be right? - A. About right.

    Q. Am I right in saying that initially things were fairly
       quiet? - A. Yes, very quiet at first.

    Q. What time would you say things began to liven up, if I
       can use that word? - A. I should say roundabout quarter
       past two, half past two.

    Q. Let's take it from the time you opened until quarter past
       or half past two when it began to liven up, so we are
       dealing with that first period.   During that period was
       the through-put, behaviour, the actions of the fans in
       any way unusual as far as you were concerned? - A. No.
       Well no, not really.   There were one or two the police
       brought round and asked me to let them in because they
       had Kop tickets.   That was the only unusual thing at
       that particular time.

    Q. How many would you say came through with Kop tickets in
       that early period? -A. Do you mean to getting busy?

    0. Yes. - A. About nine or ten.

    Q. I am not trying to catch you out at all on this, but are
       you saying that in each case an officer came to you and
       said,  Let these people through," or how are you saying
       that was communicated? - A. Well, the first one came and
       I said, "I'm sorry, I can't let you through here, it's a
       Kop ticket.    I'm sorry about that, you'll have to go on
       the Kop."    The police officer at the front of the gate
       came up to me and said, "They can't let them on the Kop,
       they will get killed on there.    They are Liverpool
       supporters."    He said, "You'll have to let them through
       here," so I let them through there from then onwards.

    Q. In other words, what you are saying is - the reason why I
       am asking you is because we have heard from two young
       people who came through the turnstiles.   We know that
       because that is what they told us.    They went through
       on Kop tickets but their story was they just presented
       themselves and you let them through.    I am not
       complaining nor am I criticising you on this, but what I
       am trying to sort out is whether or not you, having heard
       that from that officer, took it that you ought to do that




H
                                                             .37.

                                                         C. MILTON .


       in every case when a Kop ticket was being presented? - A.
       Yes, that's right.

     Q. So what you are saying is you did it because you thought
        that is what you should be doing? - A. Well, in my own
        eyes I didn't think I should be letting them through but
|J      the police had already told me I had got to let them
        through.         ',

     Q. But the total numbers up to- the time when it got busy
        were only about ten to twelve, I think you said? - A.
        Yes.

     Q. Are you pretty sure about that number? - A. I wouldn't be
        certain, no.

     Q. I am not asking you whether it is thirteen or so, but are
        you pretty confident you are in the right bracket? - A.
        Yes.




D




E




F




                  Q. What happened when it.




H
                             G. MILTON


What happened when it got a bit busier? - A. As it got
busier, you know, coming through the gates, as I say,
they were still getting Kop tickets as well at the
same time and it just got heavier and heavier all the
time.

Did you notice a gradual build-up? - A. Yes.

At what time would you say it crescendo-ed?  In other
words, what time would you put it that it came to its
peak? - A. Its peak, about quarter to three.

Then how long did it stay at that level before it sort
of abated again? - A. Not until they had opened the
gate.

We are talking about Gate C, are we? - A. Yes.

I want to make it quite clear I am going to be asking
you questions about whether people offered you money.
I ara not interested - listen carefully - as to x?hat
happened to any money which might have been offered.
I am only interested in what you can tell me as to
whether money was offered to you - all right?   Have
you understood that quite clearly? - A. Yes.

Were you, in fact, in the early period, before it
started getting busy, offered money by people? - A.
Yes, a couple in the early stages, which I turned
away.

When you say "a couple", do you literally mean two? -
A. Yes.

Or is that just a phrase? - A. A couple,   two.

In the busier period were you offered money by people?
- A. Yes.

How many would you say offered you money in the busier
period, between quarter-past 2 and 3 o'clock say? - A.
Quite a few.

I am not asking you whether you took it, I ara not
asking you whether you returned it, and I am not even
asking you what you did with them.  All I want to know
is how many people offered you money? - A. About 20.

In addition to these people whom we have now
identified as 20, how many people in your estimation
came through your turnstile in a busy period with Kop
tickets - again no criticism - or who offered you Kop
tickets? - A. I didn't really take a lot of notice
                                                          39
                                                          *■ v» f

                                     G. MILTON


     when it got really busy.     I was just taking the
     tickets, whatever.

Q.   Whatever it was? - A. Yes, so I couldn't really say on
     that figure, you know.   I was told to take the Kop
     tickets so I w,asn't bothering looking what they were.

          THE CORONER: Mr. Catchpole, I take it this
     turnstile has also got a Kop ticket count somewhere,
     has it not?

          MR. CATCHPOLE:   Yes.

          THE CORONER: So we will be able to work that out.
Q.   In addition to that, was there anybody else whom you
     judged was coming through your turnstile in this busy
     period who did not have a ticket? - A. Yes, there were
     quite a few jumping over the gate.

Q.   You say they were jumping over the gate.   How do they
      do that, in very simple terms? - A. Well, they just
      put their hands on the piece of wood that is supposed
      to stop the two coming through together, but it
      doesn't, and on the turnstile and just swing up to get
      their legs through.

Q.   In addition to those, did you have any coming through
     in pairs?  You have already said it does not stop two
     coming through. - A. Yes.

Q.   Are you able to say how many people came through in
     pairs? - A. Not really.  I wasn't taking a lot of
     notice because it was that busy.

Q.   Are you able to say how many people jumped in the way
      you have described? - A. About 50 or so, that is all.

Q.   Would you say that more people jumped the turnstiles
      than came through in pairs, as far as you know? - A.
      Yes.

Q.   You said you were not taking much   notice because it
     was pretty hectic, is that right?   - A. That is right,
     yes.

Q.   Were the people who were coming through your turnstile
     under any pressure? - A. Well, yes, because they were
     pushing up against the turnstile and they were even
     getting their flies caught in the turnstile, you know,
     and I had to ask one of the policemen to release one
     of them because the turnstile had turned so far and he
     couldn't go back or forward, and the police officer
     had to come and release him.
                               G. MILTON


Did the police officer who came in - we will not go
into too much detail about that - come in from the
concourse area or from the Leppings Lane side? - A.
The concourse area.

I see, so you called the one, who was on the inside? -
A. Yes, the one from outside couldn't have helped
anyway.

Why was that? - A. Because he wouldn't be able to get
anywhere near.

This was because there were so many people? - A.
Crushed up, yes, and the chap that was trapped, he
couldn't move back  because there were that many people
pushing up against  him all the time.

This is, in fact, the point I was coming to.    What
method, if that is the right word, did the policeman
use?  Did he push him back in order to release the
turnstile a little  bit, or did he pull him forward, or
did he lift him up, or what did he do?   How did he try
and help? - A. He just pushed his fly over the ---

I see.  I never thought of that.  That released him? -
A. That released the turnstile then.

I understand, okay.  It is simple when you know how!
The people who were coming through during the busy
period, did they make any comments to you? - A. Oh
yes, we got quite a lot of comments, abusive language
and that - "Hurry up and get through", "Let us in, you
so-and-so", things like that.

Did they express   any views as to what it was like
outside, outside   the turnstiles I mean? - A. No,
nobody said what   it was like outside.  You could tell
what it was like   because they just couldn't go back at
all.

So you are saying that the crush was so bad at your
turnstile during this time that they could not have
gone back? - A. No, impossible.

Does that mean that even if you had wanted to, you
couldn't have sent somebody back out, you had to let
them through? - A. No, no.

When you first began, you had one officer, I think,
outside your turnstile, that is right, isn't it? - A.
Two.
                                                                 41
                                                                 * vf f


                                       G. MILTON


    Q.   Did you also have a couple or one officer on the
         inside of your turnstile? - A. Yes, there was one on
         the inside.

    Q.   The officer outside, or the officers outside, were you
B        able to see them fairly clearly? - A. At first, at the
         beginning.            _      ■

    Q.   When did you lose sight of them? - A. Round about
         half-past 2.

    Q.   Why was that, why did you lose sight of them? - A.
         There were that many people there in the doorway.

    Q.   So you just couldn't see out? - A. Yes.

    Q.   So you do not actually know whether they were there or
         not? - A. That is true, yes.

    Q.   What about the officers on the inside, could you see
         those? - A. Yes, I could see those.

    Q.   Did they stay throughout, or did they go? - A. No,
D        they stayed all the time.

    Q.   Did they have occasion, as far as you were concerned,
          to escort any fans away and eject them? - A. I didn't
          see anything like that because I was that busy.

    Q.   You were busy? - A. Yes.

    Q.   You said the officers were there throughout:  does
         that mean that you actually saw them throughout, or
         you have assumed they were there throughout? - A.
         Every time I glanced round I saw that there was
         somebody there.

    Q.   Tell me, you can see Gate C from where you are, can't
         you? - A. Yes, bang opposite.

    Q.   The big concertina gate? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Did you see that open? - A. Yes,   I   saw that open.

    Q.   How many times did you see it open? - A. Just,
         w e l l ....

    Q.   I mean, I know they open frequently, but the main
         openings when people actually came in? - A. Just that
         once.

         You just saw it once? - A. Yes.
h*-

                                                                .42
                                                                        *


                                            G. MILTON


          Q.   Did it open wide or not on that occasion? - A. They
               opened it right wide on that occasion.

          Q.   Did you express any thoughts about it at the time? -
               A. Yes.
      B
          Q.   Who did you express a thought to, I think that is the
               first thing? - 'A. The police officer who was opening
               it.   I shouted, "What are you opening that for?" and
               he stated, "Somebody will get killed outside if we
               don 11 ".

          Q.   I see.  You had not realised that it was as bad as
               that? - A. No.

          Q-   When that gate was opened, what happened, first of all
               at the gate and then at the turnstile? - A. Just
               surges of people just went in through the gate because
               I am facing this way and the gate is there, and just
               surges went through, thousands went through.

          Q.   Large numbers. - A. Then it released my gate a little
               bit.
      D
          Q.   So then you were able to operate a little bit more
               effectively, is that right? - A. Yes.

          Q.   Did you find that the turnstile was operating slowly
               during this period, or not, or was it going at normal
               rate as far as you could tell? - A. I would say at
               normal rate.

          Q.   You did not find that the pressure had slowed it down
               then, the pressure from the peopla? - A. No.

          Q.   Before the gate was open, had that slowed it down at
               all? - A. Oh yes, it slowed it down because, as I say,
               the people were pushing against it and you couldn't
               press the pedal down.

          Q.   Are you saying that when you press against the
               turnstile it actually hinders the mechanism? - A. Yes.

          Q.   Were you at the Leppings Lane turnstile by chance in
               the 1988 semi-finals, that is the year before this?
               If you cannot remember --- A. I can't remember, no.

          Q.   At Gate C, the concertina gate, were there any
               stewards at that gate? - A. Yes.

          Q.   But I think you have said that the gate when you saw
               it opened was being opened by a police officer, is
               that right? - A. The gate that was coming towards me
               was a police officer and the other two were stewards.




      H
H   \S
                                                                      43
                                                                           if   f

                                               G. MILTON


                  I see, and you yelled at the officer because he was
                  nearer to you, "What on earth are you doing?" or
                  something like that? - A. Well, I didn't yell at any
                  particular person.  I just said, "What are you opening
                  them for?"
         B
                  That had never ever happened in your experience, then,
                  would that be right? - A.. No, it had never happened
                  as far as I remember.

                  Apart from that, was there anything else different
                  about this match to any other match as far as you as a
                  turnstile operator was concerned? - A. No, only that
                  there were said to be more people than ever before.

                             Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

                  Mr. Milton, you have said that there were more people
                  than ever before and I was going to ask you about
                  that.  With regard to the preparation for this event,
                  when you arrived at the ground and took up your
                  position at the turnstile, with the Police stationed
                  inside and outside your turnstile - right? - A. Yes.
         D
                  And the other preparations that you saw being made for
                  the big match, did it seem to you that those
                  preparations were being made in the normal way that
                  had gone on for other big matches that you had
                  attended? - A. Oh yes.

             Q.   How long have you been a turnstile operator? - A.
                  About 6 or 7 years or more now.

             Q.   Everything seemed to you to be all in order and quite
                  normal to prepare for the match? - A.  Yes.

             Q.   Was there anything to give you a slightest clue about
                  what was, in fact, to come? - A. No.  We expected a
                  big crowd and that is all I can say, you know.

                  Did you expect to be able to cope with it in the
                  normal way with no problems? - A. Yes.  We never
                  expected anything like that.  I mean it was a terrible
                  experience.




                                     /Cross-Examined by MR. KING




         H
1
                                                                      44
                                                                           *

                                                         G.' MiLTON




                        Cross-Examined by MR. KING

        Q. Mr. Milton, when you say people were abusive, I am sure
    H      you accept that if they themselves had been through an
    "      awful crushing experience they were, not going to be in
           the best of moods.  I am sure you would accept that? -
           A. Oh yes, I accept that.  He get it every week anyway.

        Q. But clearly there was a considerable crushing outside
           before they came into your turnstile? - A. Pardon?

        Q. There was clearly a lot of crushing of people before
           they were able to enter your turnstile? - A. Oh, yes.

        Q. The very last answer you gave the learned Coroner
           before you were asked questions along here was that you
           said there were said to be more people than ever
           before? - A. No, seemed.

        Q. I beg your pardon, that was my note.  Do you mean by
           that there seemed to be more people than ever before in
           the totality, that is throughout the whole period you
    D      were operating the turnstile or simply at a particular
           time? - A. On the whole period at a time.

        Q. Your impression was for the whole period there were
           more people coming in than you had expected? - A. Yes.

        Q. I won't take it any further.  The numbers who were to
           be expected and coming through wasn't a matter for you.
           It doesn't sound as if you were given any details
           yourself as to how many people were expected through
           turnstiles A-G? You were not given precise numbers? -
           A. No, usually they come and tell you to shut your gate
           if they think there is getting too many in sometimes.
           It hasn't always happened but they have done, and they
           do now.

        Q. So you are not in a position to tell us how many people
           were expected or how many people, in fact, went through
           your turnstile? You just don t know? - A. No. We were
           expecting a full house because all the tickets were
           sold.

        Q. Yes, the figures therefore of how many were expected
           and how many went through your turnstiles, I can't ask
           you I will have to ask somebody else about that? You
           have only just given your impression, haven't you? - A.
           Yes.

           When you saw Gate C opened, and it was to your side
           wasn't it? - A. Yes.




    H
                                                G.' MILTON




 Was it just one Policeman there or more than one
.Policeman? - A. I only noticed one Policeman. As I
 say, I was busy, I kept turning round.

How many stewards would you say there were? - A. There
were two stewards helping him. to open it.

Did you notice anybody directing the people who were
coming through Gate C as to where they should go? - A.
You had no chance of directing anybody because there
was just a mad surge.

Thank you very much.

           Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE

Mr. Milton, could you just amplify that in your own
words? You said there was a surge through, there was
no chance of directing anyone. What was it like? Was
it just like uncorking a bottle, people rushing out? -
A. That is right, yes, rushing in.

Pushing in?     Did you actually see people pushing? - A.
Rushing.

I am sorry, rushing in. They were moving more quickly
than walking? - A. Oh yes, they just charged in and
that was it.

              Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Milton, do the things you have described today
usually happen at a football match, or was this a
completely unusual situation to you? - A. It was an
unusual situation, yes.

You said people were going through your turnstile, not
through your fault, without tickets. You could not
stop them because they were being pushed so much. - A.
That's right.

But you did not see the Police Officers in the
concourse area ejecting those fans, did you? - A. No,
because it was that hectic at that time, even the
Police could not do anything about it. I did knock to
one and told him that he had not got a ticket, and he
said, "I'm sorry, I can't do nothing about it , and
that was it. There was that many.

Yes, but in the concourse area where the Police
Officers were, there was a lot of room wasn't there?
In the concourse area once people went through the
turnstiles, the Police Officers who were in the
concourse area beyond the turnstiles had plenty of room
                                                                     46
                                                                          •f *

                                                        G.‘ MILTON




          to deal with people, didn't they? - A. No, it was
         .getting congested in there as well.

    Q. In the concourse area? - A. Yes. I am talking about 5-
B      to-3 now at this time, it was packed, before they
       opened the gate actually, it yas still getting packed
       then in that area.

    0. Do you know what Officers usually do when people go in
       without tickets? Have you seen it happening before? -
       A. Yes, on a normal match they get hold of them and
       take them back outside again.

    Q. How do they do that, please? Do they take them through
       a gate? - A. Well, if they have gone through the gate
       or jumped over the gate, I bang on the window and say,
       "He hasn't paid", or whatever, Police gets hold of him
       and takes him outside again.

    Q. You don't know about a detention room, do you, in the
       ground, or two detention rooms? - A. Yes, I do know
       about a detention room. I suppose if they gave the
D      Police any abuse or something like that they would take
       them to the detention room. Normally they just kick
       them back out again.

    Q. You don't know that they take them to a detention room?
       - A. No, I don't know of that, whether they have or
       not.

    Q. What did you think might happen inside the stadium when
       you saw ....

              THE CORONER:   He is a turnstile operator. He can
         tell us about the turnstiles. You were asking whether
         he was inside the stadium at a particular point in
         time? Ask him that if you wish, whichever time you
         choose.

              MRS. McBRIEN:    No, I don't think I have any more
         questions, thank you.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   Mr. Milton, thank you very much
         indeed. - A. Thank you, sir.

                     MICHAEL BUXTOH Called (Sworn)

                             By THE CORONER

    Q. You are Michael Buxton? - A. Yes.

    Q. P.C. 1863, is that right? - A. Correct, sir.




H
                                                                 47
                                                                 v>S   *

                                                    M.' BUXTON




0.    And I think you have been a Police Officer for quite a
     .few years, haven't you? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Over 25 now, isn't it? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. On 15th April, 1989, you were in a LandRover,     I
   believe, is that right?. - A. That is correct.

Q. And this Land Rover happened to be fitted with (a) a
   multi-channel radio and also a public address system,
   is that right? - A. Correct, sir.

Q. In two sentences, what was your primary task that day?
   - A. I was accompanying Superintendent Chapman, sir, on
   Nottingham Forest supporters reception.

Q.    I see, so you were not allocated to the Leppings Lane
     end at all? That was not where you were supposed to
     be? - A. No, sir.

Q.    But at about what time did you receive a message asking
     you to move from your original location? - A. About 20-
     to-3, sir.

Q. Times are very difficult for everybody, not just you,
   so I want you to give me times as accurately as you
   can, but if you are not able to, to put a qualification
   in so that we know how strongly you feel. So the
   question I want to repeat to you now is, how confident
   are you about the timing of that message? - A. Fairly
   confident, sir.

Q. Fairly confident? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you recollect how this message came to you? - A.
   Yes, sir, it was passed by personal radio.

Q. Where would it have emanated from? - A. The Police
   Control Room inside the ground.

Q. Inside the ground. What was the subject matter of that
   message? - A. That I was to go to Leppings Lane to
   assist with crowd control.

Q. You then told your Superintendent? - A. That is
   correct, sir, yes.

Q. And said, "I am off'*, or words to that effect? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Then I take it you had to drive round to Leppings Lane?
   - A. Yes.
                                                                    48
                                                                         »

                                                       M.* BUXTON




       Which way did you decide to enter Leppings Lane? - A. I
      .went down Herries Road to the Leppings Lane roundabout
       into Leppings Lane.
B      So you were coining from the roundabout, which is
       Herries Road, Halifax Road, Penistone Road and Leppings
       Lane, and one or two others? - -A. Yes, sir.

    Q. That is the way you came through? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Are you able to estimate how long it took you, having
       got the message, said goodbye, how long it actually
       took you to get into the beginnings of Leppings Lane
       where there is, I think, a garage, isn't there - Law
       Brothers? - A. Yes, within minutes.

    Q. You then drove up Leppings Lane? - A.   Yes, sir.

    Q. We know you managed it because you got to the ground,
       but how difficult was the drive up Leppings Lane? - A.
       To the best of my recollection it was not difficult at
       all, sir.
D
    Q. So in other words the road was reasonably clear? - A.
       Reasonably.

    Q. I take it there were spectators? - A. Oh yes, sir.

    Q. But presumably you are saying they were on the
       pavements rather than ...? - A. Yes.

    Q. You were driving up - I take it you did not know what
       to expect, except that you wouldbeneeded   in some form
       of crowd control? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. As you approached the ground what, if anything, met
       your eye? - A. It was the large number of supporters
       coming down Leppings Lane to the turnstiles.

    Q. You mean from Catch Bar Lane? - A. Yes, sir, from Catch
       Bar Lane.

    Q. So you were coming up, there were people round you and
       then a large group appeared to you to be coming from
       the top? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. What did you do endeavour to do then? - A. Well, they
       were pushing forward to the turnstiles and I put the
       public address system on the Land Rover and I appealed
       to them to stop pushing forward.

      Can I ask you this, as you approached you were actually
      coming up -- let me start the question again. As you
      were approaching this crowd of people was it within the




H
                                                                      ,49
                                                                            ,? 9
                                                        M.« B.UXTON




       perimeter gates of the ground or had it spilled out
      .onto what I think the mounted Officers call the
       reception area, the paved area, or was it already onto
       the road when you got there? - A. It was right up and
B      beyond the traffic lights.

    Q. Catch Bar Lane? - A. Catch Bat-Lane, yes, sir.

    Q. And it was heavy? - A. Wall to wall, virtually.

    Q. Where did you position your Land Rover? - A. The camber
       of the road in Leppings Lane is raised just outside the
       reception area, and it then lowers down to the
       turnstiles, and I parked on the peak.

    Q. If you turn round and look at the model, you can see
       the outer perimeter gates, you can see there is a wall
       there separating 1-16 from A-G? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Obviously you were not parked in there but I want to
       use that wall as a marker. Where did you, endeavour to
       position yourself? - A. If you carry on from the wall,
D      sir, to where the colour changes, just about there.

    Q. In other words, right on the edge of roadway and paved
       area? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. And more or less central to the turnstile area? - A.
       Yes, sir, facing towards the turnstiles.

    Q. So your vehicle was facing towards the turnstiles? - A.
       Correct, sir.




                      Q. The PA system




H
sj   I




                                                              M. BUXTON


             Q. The PA system on the vehicle, how many loudspeakers
                did it have? - A. On the top of the Land Rover there
                is a Police sign and either side of the Police sign
                pointing outwards there are two speakers.

             Q. The speakers were facing one set inwards towards the
                ground as you were' facing, -is that right? - A. No,
                sir.
             Q. Perhaps I have misunderstood you. Just explain
                again? - A. The speakers are to my left and right.

             Q. So you were communicating across the reception area
                and across Leppings Lane? - A. Yes, sir.

             Q. Not directly into the turnstiles? - A. It would go
                directly. The sound would travel forwards and to the
                rear as well.
             Q. I am not disputing that. You are saying that the
                loudspeakers were pointing left and right? - A. Yes,
                sir.
         D
             Q. What impression did you form of the crowd which was
                coming down at that stage and the crowd that you
                could see? - A. They just seemed to be determined to
                get into the ground. They just paid no heed at all
                to the messages.
             Q. Did you receive an order to broadcast or did you just
                do it of your own volition as soon as you saw what
                was going on? - A. I did it of my own volition.

             Q. Can you remember what your message was? You
                presumably had several messages but can you remember
                what the first one was? - A. No, sir. I just
                appealed to them to stop crushing. I appealed to
                them. I said that there were women and children at
                the front being crushed but it was to no avail.

             Q. Could you see that there were women and children
                being crushed or did you just make that deduction? -
                A. I just said that. I couldn't see.

             Q. The people who you were appealing to, were they
                themselves being crushed at that point? - A. There
                were people at the front being crushed but the people
                I was appealing to were the people coming past the
                Land Rover.




         H
vj   JLmf-

                                                                              51




                                                                    M- BUXTON


                 0     The PA system on the vehicle, how many loudspeakers
                       did it have? - A. On the top of the Land Rover there
                       is a Police sign and either side of the Police sign
                       pointing outwards there are two speakers.
             B
                 Q. The speakers were facing one set inwards towards the
                    ground as you were' facing, ■is that right? - A. No,
                    sir.
                 Q. Perhaps I have misunderstood you. Just explain
                    again? - A. The speakers are to my left and right.

                 Q. So you were communicating across the reception area
                    and across Leppings Lane? ~ A. Yes, sir.
                 0. Not directly into the turnstiles? - A. It would go
                    directly. The sound would travel forwards and to the
                    rear as well.
                 Q. I am not disputing that. You are saying that the
                    loudspeakers were pointing left and right? - A. Yes,
                    sir.
             D
                 0. What impression did you form of the crowd which was
                    coming down at that stage and the crowd that you
                    could see? - A. They just seemed to be determined to
                    get into the ground. They just paid no heed at all
                    to the messages.
                 Q. Did you receive an order to broadcast or did you just
                    do it of your own volition as soon as you saw what
                    was going on? - A. I did it of my own volition.

                 Q. Can you remember what your message was? You
                    presumably had several messages but can you remember
                    what the first one was? - A. No, sir. I just
                    appealed to them to stop crushing. I appealed to
                    them. I said that there were women and children at
                    the front being crushed but it was to no avail.

                 Q. Could you see that there were women and children
                    being crushed or did you just make that deduction? —
                    A. I just said that. I couldn't see.

                     Q. The people who you were appealing to, were they
                        themselves being crushed at that point? - A. There
                        were people at the front being crushed but the people
                        I was appealing to were the people coming past the
                        Land Rover.




             H
                                                                .52
                                                                      vf f


                                                          M. BUXTON


    Q. That is what I am trying to find out. Were those
       people capable of stopping or were they in a position
       where they were themselves caught in a trap if you
g      like? - A. No, I think they were capable of stopping.

    Q. You are pretty sure about .that? -* A. Yes, sir.

    Q. How long would you say you kept up the appeals? I am
       not too worried about the words? - A. No, it was just
       minutes. It was no good and so it was pointless.

    Q. So what did you do then? - A. I tried to catch the
       attention of the mounted Inspector for him to form a
       line but it was very difficult because of the
       pressure on him at that time.
    Q. When you say you tried to catch his attention ~ I am
       interested in this - you mean over the PA system? -
       A. Yes, I tried that. I finally caught his attention
       and motioned to him to form a line.
    Q. So do you remember actually sending out some message
D      to the mounted? - A. Yes.
    Q. We have heard about this from other people and so you
       can confirm that you actually did do that? - A. Yes,
       sir.
    Q.   Did you know the mounted Inspector?   You may not have
         known who it was? - A. No, sir.
    Q. You may know it now but you did not know at the time?
       - A. No, sir.
    Q. Eventually you did manage to attract his attention? ■
       A. That is correct.
    Q. Can you remember whether he did form a line or not?
       A. He tried to do, sir.
    Q. We have heard from him already and so we can leave
       that at the time. What happened then so far as you
       were concerned? - A. I think at that time the gate
       opened and the crowd surged through the gate and the
       pressure was relieved.
    Q. You mean the concertina gate you are talking about?
       A. I am sorry, sir, at one stage I became so
       concerned that I asked for the kick-off to be
       delayed.




H
U   ¥ ■

                                                                          53




                                                                  M. BUXTON


              Q. How did you do that? - A. Personal radio to ground
                 control.
          H   Q. Can you remember what you actually said to them on
                 that occasion? - A. I cannot remember the actual
                 words, sir. I just asked.for the kick-off to be
                 delayed.          ‘-
              Q. Did you get a response? - A. Yes, sir.      It was too
                 late.
              Q. Can you remember whether or not this was in relation
                 to the opening of the concertina gate? - A. I think
                 it was prior to the opening of the concertina gate.

              Q. Which concertina gate did you see opened? - A. It
                 would be the gate on my right.
              Q. Can you see, was it that gate (indicating model)? -
                 A. It was that gate.
          _   Q. You think you put the message through before that
          D       gate was opened? - A. Yes, sir.
              Q.    How many times did you see the gate open? - A. I
                   didn't actually see it open. I just assumed it had
                   opened because of the reduction in the pressure.

              Q. You noticed that the crowd dissipated? - A. Yes, sir.

              Q. Or disappeared? - A. Yes.
              Q.    Then you noticed that the gate was opened but you did
                   not actually see it opened? - A. I think it was in a
                   line with where I am, sir.

              Q.   I am not complaining? - A. No, no.

              Q.    The reason why I am pressing you on this is that, of
                   course, it is relevant to the question of timing as
                   to when you put the message through. You may not
                   have seen the initial opening and you might have put
                   your message through when it was already opened but
                   before sufficient people had gone through for you to
                   notice a difference? - A. No.

              Q.   You see what I am getting at? - A. Yes.

              Q.    Just so that I have got this right in my mind, you
                   got the message to go to Leppings Lane at about
                   twenty to? - A. Yes, sir.




          H
                                                                 . 5 4;




                                                         M. BUXTON



    q   .   You arrived a few minutes after? — A. Yes, sir. I
            have seen the video and I can say that I got there
B           about 2.47.
    Q. You can judge it from the.video. ■ You are talking
       about the compilation video.? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. On the basis of that you think it was 2.47? - A. Yes,
       sir.
    Q. The first thing you did was to broadcast messages
       saying, "Don't push" or "Hold back"? - A. Correct.

    Q. That people were being squashed and that did not
       appear to you to be working? - A. It wasn't working.

    Q. The second thing you did was to call the mounted
       Officers and ask them to form a line? - A. Yes.

    Q. Eventually you did manage to communicate with them? -
       A. Yes.
D
        Q. The third thing you did so far as you remember is
           that you asked for the match to be postponed? - A.
           Yes, sir.
        Q. That was acknowledged and you were told it was too
           late. Then at around this time you also noticed that
           the crowd had disappeared and you took it that a gate
           was opened? - A. Yes.
        Q. Eventually did you see the gate opened? — A. No, sir.

        Q. You never saw it? - A. No, sir.
        Q. Because you were in the wrong position? - A. Yes.

        Q. That is a deduction you have made from the
           circumstances and from your knowledge of what
           happened which you were told about afterwards? - A.
           Yes.
        Q. Can you remember an Inspector coming to the Land
           Rover? - A. Yes, sir.
        Q. Tell me a little bit about that? - A. He tried to ask
           the fans to relieve the pressure. He climbed on to
           the Land Rover and used the public address system but
           it was no good.




H
                                             M. BUXTON


Do you recollect - and I appreciate it is very
difficult - whether this was before or after you had
called ground control and asked them to postpone the
kick-off? - A. I think it would be after I had asked
the crowd and used.the public address system and
before I asked for the kiqk-off to be delayed.

So in between? - A. Yes, sir.

So he had a go? - A. Yes.
He had a go at the crowd, is that right? - A. Yes,
sir.
I take it - and this is common sense - that you can
only use the public address system one at a time? -
A. Yes, sir.
You would defer to an Inspector if he came along and
said, "Give me that"? - A. Yes.
Apart from that message which you have already
mentioned about the kick-off, had you heard any other
messages on the radio that you can recollect? — A.
No, sir.
We have heard from a mounted Officer who was telling
us that she seemed to recollect the Land Rover
arriving and having difficulty getting through the
crowd because of its parking position. Do you
recollect any mounted Officers escorting you? - A.
No, sir.
You do not recollect that? - A. I have no
recollection at all.
Did you notice anything else about the crowd which
was different to what you would otherwise have
expected it to be? - A. I didn't expect that many
people to be there at that time. It was literally
wall to wall fans. They were just pouring down
Leppings Lane from Catch Bar Lane.
It sounds as if your impression is that the bulk of
the people at that point were coming from the top? -
A. That is right, sir, yes. I remember that I drove
with comparative ease into Leppings Lane. If I had
gone the other way I wouldn't have got through.

Do you recollect any traffic on the road other than
yourself at that time? - A. I can't remember any,
J7
                                                                     56




                                                             M. BUXTON


              sir, but I have seen the video and there is a bus
              going through.
         Q. You are right. I just wondered whether you could
     B      recollect any? - A. I have no recollection of it, no.

         Q. When the crowd had'melted away, so to speak, I take
            it that you were relieved? - A. Yes, sir. It was
            pointless staying there.

         Q. What did you decide to do? - A. I drove down the back
            of the South Stand.
         Q. Where were you intending to go? - A. I was intending
            joining Superintendent Chapman.

         Q.    The other side of Penistone Road? - A. Yes.

         Q.    You were just going through the ground in effect? -
              A. Yes, sir.
         Q. As you were driving along did you hear a message? -
     D      A. Yes, as I got to a point near the rear of the
            Police control room I heard a Police message on the
            personal radio to the effect, "Everybody on the
            pitch, everybody on the pitch". So I parked the Land
            Rover up and went into the ground and through one of
            the side gates.
         Q. Let me just ask you which side gate you entered
            through. Was it the one just below the Police
            control box or further down? - A. It was immediately
            behind the Police control box.

         Q. So between the South Stand and the West Stand.
            Sergeant Griffiths, can you just point to it? - A.
            Shall I go to the board?

         Q. Yes, it would be easier if you just walk up and show
            us? - A. There is a gate here, sir.

         Q. Where did you park the Land Rover? - A. Behind that
            gate, sir, to one side.

         Q. Having entered the ground, from that position the
            first thing you would probably see is the pitch if
            you were looking across. Is that right? - A. Yes,
            sir.




     H
v/ v6
                                                                       57
                                                                            •f *



                                                                M. BUXTON


            Q. What was happening on the pitch as you entered the
               ground so far as you can remember? - A . I thought it
               was a pitch invasion.
        B   Q. I want to know what was happening with regard to the
               players first of ail? - A t There were no players
               there, sir.       '.
            Q. You are saying there were no players? - A. No.

            Q. You are certain about that? - A. Yes, positive.

            Q. You looked up, saw no players, and you thought there
               was a pitch invasion? - A. Yes.

            Q. That was your first impression? - A. Yes.

            Q. Is that because all you could see was the pitch and
               not the terracing initially? - A. I thought it was a
               pitch invasion because of the number of spectators on
               the track.

        D   Q. On the track? - A. Yes, sir.
            Q. When you saw them were they already on the pitch? I
               am using the word "pitch" as meaning the area bounded
               by the white lines, in other words, the area in which
               the football match is played? - A. No, sir. There
               were no spectators on the actual pitch. There were
               spectators on the running track and there were
               spectators, I thought, climbing over the perimeter
               fence.
            Q. You said, "This is a pitch invasion" to yourself? -
               A. I just thought it was a pitch invasion.

            Q. You are pretty sure there were no players on the
               field? - A. I can't recall any, sir, no.

            Q. Having looked, what did you then notice or do? - A. I
               thought it was a pitch invasion and I just
               automatically went round to the playing track.

            Q. To the track? - A. On to the track.

            Q. Then you moved along which direction? - A. I moved
               behind the goal.
            Q. The Leppings Lane end? - A. The Leppings Lane goal.




        H
                                              M. BUXTON


As you were moving along what did you see or notice
there? - A. I still thought it was a pitch invasion
for minutes afterwards and then it became clear it
was more than that and then Chief Superintendent
Nesbit was trying' to form some sort of order to get
the fans who were trapped.in one of the gates. He
wasn't having much success -and so I went back to the
Land Rover and got a hand-held public PA caller.




                                  /Q. A loudhailer.
                                                                .59
                                                                  ' v» f
                                                          M. B U X T O N .



    Q.   A loud hailer? - A. Yes, and took it to him.

    Q.    What I am trying to ascertain is what time you got into
         the ground.    How long between your getting on to the
         ground and your seeing Chief Superintendent Nesbit would
B        you say? - A. I would say it would be about ten minutes
         past three by this,time.

    Q.    That is when you saw him, db you mean, or when you got
         into the ground? - A. I got into the ground I would say
         between five past and ten minutes past three.

    Q.    What was the time gap between your getting into the
         ground and your first catching sight of Chief
         Superintendent Nesbit? - A. About four or five minutes.

    Q. You say when you saw him, he appeared to you to be
       trying... - A. Yes, there were people trying to get out
       of gate 3 on to the track and they were trapped.   They
       just couldn't move.

    Q.   And you went to get the loud hailer? - A. Yes.

    Q.    Did you see any other loud hailers around apart from
         yours? - A. Yes, I think Superintendent Greenwood had
         one.

    Q. That didn't come from you? - A. No, sir.

    Q. You don't know where it came from? - A. No, sir.

    Q. I think it is right that in fact you did attempt to help
       to get people out as well before you went to get the loud
       hailer? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Then in due course you went back to Penistone Road and
       did whatever duties you had to do? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. So you really were brought into this, you passed through
       it and then you went out the other side, so to speak? -
       A. Yes, sir.

              THE CORONER:   I think rather than start with cross-
         examination now, it would probably be better if we broke
         for lunch.   Shall we say we start at five to two and
         then we will start with cross-examination?   I say this
         to witnesses before we break, I know you know it anyway,
         but remember you are on oath so don't discuss the
         evidence.

                         (Luncheon adjournment)




H
X . -i

                                                                      60
                                                                           .f *

                                              M. BUXTON



                                MICHAEL BUXTON Recalled

                        THE CORONER: I think I had more or less
                  finished, so if it all right, we will look to Mr.
         B        Hale.

                       MR. HALE: - No questions,   sir.

                             Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

             Q.   Mr. Buxton, have you any previous experience in the
                  use of the Land Rover? - A. Yes sir.

             Q.   Tell the Jury in your own words what that is, please?
                  - A. It is a Police standard Land Rover that has been
                  adapted for Police purposes.  It has got a "Police"
                  sign on the roof and it is fitted with a multi­
                  functional, multi-channel radio.

             Q.   Inside it was equipped with at least one megaphone, or
                  what was the expression you used? - A. There was a
                  hand-held loud-hailer inside the vehicle and the
                  vehicle is fitted with a public address system.

             Q.   Can you tell the Jury about your previous experience,
                  how long and doing what? - A.   I have been at
                  Hammerton Road Division for 17 years now, attending
                  football matches at all parts in South Yorkshire, but
                  in particular at Sheffield Wednesday football ground.

             Q.   Are you the driver of the Land Rover? - A. Yes sir.

             Q.   That is your job, is it? - A. Yes sir.

             Q.   How often do you attend football matches doing that
                  job? - A. At every football match.

             Q.   For 17 years? - A. I haven't been attending the
                   football matches for 17 years with the Land Rover;  I
                   have been attending the football matches for 17 years.

             Q.   It is just the idea I want you to give of how long you
                   have been working with the Land Rover? - A. Probably
                   six years.

             Q.   Has the Force got more than one? - A. Yes, each
                   Division has a Land Rover.

             Q.   How do the loudspeakers on this one measure up to the
                  other Land Rovers? - A. I don't think that all the
                  Land Rovers have got the public address system fitted,
                  but the only one I know, other than the F Division
                  Land Rover, is the one at Barnsley.




         H
                             M. BUXTON


Yes, but do they all produce the same volume of sound?
- A. I would say they are British Standard, sir.

I am sorry? - A. I would say that they are standard.

Obviously plans must have been made beforehand, before
the match, for you to attend with the Land Rover? - A.
Yes sir.       -      : .

And to be available to give instructions using the
loudspeaker equipment wherever necessary? - A. Yes
s ir.

In the course of your experience have you actually had
to address crowds before?

     THE CORONER: Excuse me, Mr. Payne, one of the
jurors is not feeling very well.  Can we just let her
go out.

     MR. PAYNE:  I am sorry, I should have stopped
before, I beg your pardon.

     THE CORONER:  If you would just like to sit down
for a moment, Mr. Payne, and we will wait until she
comes back.

     MR. PAYNE:    I should have stopped myself.

     THE CORONER:  It is all right.  I heard a cough
but it was only when I looked round that I realised
she needed a moment or two.  (Short pause).

     We will adjourn for a few minutes.   Mr.
Griffiths, you can come and tell me when she feels
better.   It probably will not be long, but I think we
need to break to give her a chance to compose herself,
so we will stand up again and go.

                  (Short adjournment)

     THE CORONER: Mr. Payne, if you would continue.

     MR. PAYNE:  Mr. Buxton, just carry on where we
got to, and I was asking you about your experience of
addressing other crowds.  Have you had to use the
loudspeaker system to address other football crowds? -
A. Yes sir.

How often have you done that? Just give us an
impression, that is all we want to know. - A.
Practically at every football match, sir.
                           M. BUXTON


Do you agree with what other witnesses have told the
Jury, that controlling a crowd depends on reasonable
co-operation between the crowd and the Police who are
asking them to do things? - A. Yes sir.

In general, what has your experience been when you
have used the loudspeaker to address crowds? - A. They
hear what they-want to'hear, sir.

Go on. - A. I have never addressed the crowd prior to
the match.  I have always addressed them after the
match and the situation has been that when the
football fans arrive at the ground they come on
coaches, and the coaches drop them off in Leppings
Lane and the fans go into the ground.  The coaches
then are parked up on Halifax Road. When the fans come
out of the ground after the match, they assume,
incorrectly, that the coaches will be waiting for them
in Leppings Lane and they have to be directed from
Leppings Lane up to Halifax Road to the coach park.

So do you give advice and directions? - A. I do, sir.

Do the crowd find that helpful? - A. Yes sir.

They follow what you have suggested? - A. Yes sir.

On this occasion, you were giving instructions to the
crowd in an emergency situation? - A. Yes sir.

You have been over all that.  What can you tell the
Court then about the reaction of this crowd to your
calls compared with the reaction of other crowds that
you have seen? - A. There was no reaction, sir, they
weren't listening.

Is this exceptional, is this normal, or what? - A. I
thought it was unusual.

If the ones at the back had wanted to stop joining the
throng, you have been asked this question before and I
apologise for repeating it, were they able to stop
themselves from joining the crowd? - A. Yes sir.   The
ones at the back were simply walking down Leppings
Lane.

This loudspeaker which is fitted onto the machine, how
loud is it? - A. I think the one that is fitted, and
that was fitted on 15th April, is the best that the
Police can come up with.  There have been other
systems fitted, but I believe that this one is the
best so far.
                           M. BUXTON


When you have used it on other occasions to direct
crowds coming out of the ground mainly, have they been
able to hear what you are saying? - A. Oh yes.

They have followed your instructions? - A. Yes sir,
they have.    ,

One last matteE about the helmets worn by the horse
mounted officers'. You at one point tried to
communicate with the Inspector of Mounted Police? - A.
Correct, sir.

You mentioned his helmet? - A. Yes.

Just explain what you were referring to. - A. The
mounted officers wear like a motorcycle crash helmet.

So when you were trying to communicate with the
Inspector did that have any effect? - A. It impeded
his hearing.

          Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

Police Constable Buxton, you have told Mr. Payne that
those whom you wanted to direct your comments to when
you were speaking through the loudspeaker could have,
had they wanted, not joined the throng? - A. Yes sir.

Could I ask you about another aspect of that.  You
took up a position really to the back of where the
real crowd was? - A. Yes sir.

People were walking down Leppings Lane and at that
stage they were not part of the crowded situation? -
A. They were part of the crowded situation but they
were not part of the massed pushing.




                            /Q. There was nobody
                                                                   .64




                                                      M.* BUXTON




    0. There was nobody pushing them in the back? - A. Oh no,
       .sir.

    Q. I am concerned with the sort of view that they would
B      have of what was going on, what they were walking into,
       do you follow me? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Those people who were level with your Land Rover were
       again those who were continuing to walk and were able
       to walk into the mass of the crowd? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Assuming if we may do for a moment that what you could
       see they could see, what could you see? - A. I could
       see that the people at the front of the crowd were more
       or less stationary. I would have a better view of it
       than the spectators would because the Land Rover would
       be higher.

    Q. Yes, but having said that, theywould see, from the
       same place, they would seea mass in  front of them,
       people being pushed forward, pushing and shoving? - A.
       Yes, sir, I would presume that.

    Q. What had you hoped to achieve by asking the crowd not
       to continue their walk forward? - A. I hoped to achieve
       some success obviously.

    Q. In doing what? - A. In stopping the crushing at the
       turnstiles.

    Q. Thank you very much indeed.

                      Cross-Examined by MR. KING

    Q.    Officer, Iam sure you want to be fair to everybody who
         was at the scene outside Leppings Lane? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. You want to give an accurate account of what you saw
       and heard, don't you? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q.    I only say that because I am anxious that you don't
         make assumptions for the moment, just tell us what you
         saw and heard, and can I take you through a number of
         matters which have been just raised with you? First of
         all, you say that you used the public address system to
         the crowd which was outside the Leppings Lane entrance,
         didn't you? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. And you were positioned at the edge, as I understand
       it, of this thronging mass? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Would it be fair to call it a thronging mass? - A. Yes,
       sir, it would.




H
                                              M.» BUXTON




You don't agree with evidence which the learned Coroner
mentioned to you, which has already been given to this
Inquest, that your Land Rover in fact could not get
into the crowd. It was so thick that you had to be
guided in by another -Officer? - A. .1 have no
recollection of that, sir. I would not drive the Land
Rover into the crowd anyway. '

But might it be true that another mounted Officer led
you into the crowd? - A. I have no recollection of
that, sir.

I understand that. Are you in a position to tell us it
did not happen, or simply that you do not know whether
it happened? - A. I don't know whether it happened,
sir.

So to be fair, it might have happened? - A. It may,
sir, yes.

In which case you would be not quite on the edge but
being surrounded by people, admittedly near the back of
this throng? - A. It is not my recollection that I was
surrounded by fans, sir.

So be it. You were directing your attention to the
people who were already at the back of this throng,
weren't you? - A. Yes, sir.

They were already there and your idea was to get the
people at the very back to come back, in order to
relieve pressure on the front? - A. Yes, sir.

I would not disagree with the sense of that, Officer,
at all. You also told us that you saw people still
pouring down Leppings Lane, was your expression? - A.
Yes, sir.

And your expression was pouring? - A. Yes, sir.

Why did you use the word pouring? What were you trying
to convey? - A. Well, they weren't just casually
walking down Leppings Lane.

No, what were they doing? - A. They were walking with
determination.

It was a whole mass of people coming down Leppings
Lane? - A. Yes, sir.

And that mass of people were joining those who were
already at the back? - A. Correct.
                                                                     66

                                                                          *   *

                                                       H .' BUXTON




     Q. So those who were already at the back, to whom you were
        .directing your message, if they heard your message,
        were going to be pressurised by those who were joining
jj       them? - A. Probably, yes, sir.

     Q. I just want to ask you whether you saw anything for the
        moment. Did you yours'elf see anything being done to
        stop people continually pouring down Leppings Lane to
        join this throng at the back? - A. No, sir.

     0. You are of the view that the fans heard your message? -
        A. Yes, sir.

     Q. But you don't know that, do you? - A. Yes, sir, I do
        know that.

     Q. How can you know that? - A. Because I was joined
        shortly afterwards by Inspector Ellis and he tried the
        same thing, and I could hear him perfectly.

     Q. If you could hear Inspector Ellis what was he saying? -
        A. He was asking them to stop pushing, just the same as
D       I had been.

     Q. Uas he saying anything about kick-off? - A. No, sir,
        have no recollection of that.

     Q. The mounted Officer to whom you tried to communicate,
        and I am asking you again not to make assumptions, just
        tell us, by what method did you try to communicate with
        the mounted Officer? - A. I called him on the PA system
        on the Land Rover.

     Q. The very system with whichyou were trying   toaddress
        the crowd? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. I don't want you, with respect to you, to explain why
        he did not hear because you don't know for certain why
        he did not hear, do you? - A. No, sir.

     Q. But he obviously did not hear? - A. No, sir.

     Q. You have given a possible answer to us, because you
        were asked about it, namely he was wearing a helmet? -
        A. Yes, sir.

     Q. But you have given on another occasion another
        possibility and to be fair to you I wonder if you can
        have a look at the statement which you made about these
        events to, I assume, the West Midlands Police.

             MR. KING:   Sir, could he merely look at, before I
        ask him any further questions, page 2?




H
                                              M.' BUXTOH




     THE CORONER:   Yes, I will just mark the passage.

     HR. KING:   What was the reason which, when you
were making this statement, you were offering for why
the mounted Inspector did not hear .you? - A. Because of
the noise from the crowd.

Was the crowd making noise? - A. Yes, sir, very much
so.

Was it sufficient for you to think when you wrote your
statement that that might be a reason why the Inspector
did not hear you? - A. Yes, it might be a contributory
factor.

And if it is a contributory factor for the Inspector,
you can't say, and to be fair you would not want to
say, it could be a factor for those in the crowd,
couldn't it? - A. Not to hear the PA?

Yes. - A. I doubt that very much. It overrides
everything in the immediate vicinity.

I understand that is your opinion but if you are being
fair and you are offering the view that as far as the
mounted Inspector was concerned the crowd noise could
not have helped him, to be fair that might well be a
reason why some people did not hear? Would you go that
far? - A. Yes, it might be a reason why sorae people did
not hear.

Thank you, because we are not dealing, are we, with a
calm situation, when you are describing using the PA,
are we? - A. Ho, sir, not at all.

Indeed, it was such that you yourself decided that you
ought to ask for the game to be postponed? - A.
Correct, sir.

And in order to have the game postponed what method did
you use to communicate? - A. I used my personal radio
to contact Ground Control.

And this was before you had made the effort to have the
line formed? - A. To be perfectly honest, sir, I don't
know when it was. I believe it may have been after the
line.

Can I again ask you to look at the statement you made
much earlier than today, which was I think 13th Hay,
1989? Have a look at the way you have described it in
that statement, the order of events. - A. Yes, sir.
                                                                   68.
                                                                         *

                                                      M.- BUXTON




    Q. Would you agree that your recollection was, when you
       .made this statement, that you called for the game to be
       postponed or delayed before you called for the counted
        Inspector through the PA system? - A. Yes, sir, I will
B      accept that this is correct.

    Q. That is correct, and in. order to call for the game to
       be delayed you used your radio? -A. Yes, sir.

    Q. With whom did you communicate? - A. Ground Control.

    Q. Did you get through? - A. Yes, sir, I did.

    Q. To whom did you speak, do you know? - A. I believe it
       was Sergeant Goddard that replied.
    0. Just dealing for the moment with the use of your radio,
       you had no problem using your radio? - A. No, sir.

    Q. When later on, and I will come to later on in a moment,
       but later on you heard a message about "Everyone on the
       track" or something like that, was that also heard over
D      your radio? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. The same one? - A. The same one.

    Q. Do you understand what I mean about radios being on
       "talk-through"? - A. Yes, sir, I do.

    Q. I think I understand it, you probably do, no one else
       may - tell us what it means? - A. "Talk-through" means
       that every personal radio can hear every message that
       is being transmitted, by the receiver and the person
       sending the message.

    Q. Even though, of course, it need not necessarily be for
       them? - A. No, sir.

    Q. They can hear it. Was your radio on "talk-through"? -
       A. Yes, it was, sir.

    Q. It it normal practice for radios to be on "talk-
       through" at this sort of match? - A. At football
       matches, yes.

    Q. So anybody who had their radio on "talk-through" would
       have been able to hear the message which you have just
       described? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Let me go back to that message, which we now know from
       your recollection was before you asked for the line to
       be formed? - A. Right, sir.

    Q. You got through to Sergeant Goddard? - A. Yes, sir.




H
                                               M.' BUXTON




 Did he acknowledge your message? - A. Yes, he told rae
.it was too late.

He said it was too late? - A.   Yes, sir.

Did he just say it was too late immediately, or did he
go away and say, "I will come'back to you"? - A. Oh no,
I would not say it was almost immediately, but I passed
the message, "Could we have the kick-off delayed", and
the reply was, "It's too late".

I am interested as to whether there was atime gap ....
- A. I don't think so, sir.

So there was no time gap, you asked for it to be
delayed, and the answer came immediately back, "It's
too late"? - A. I would not say it was immediately, but
I can't recall that there was a time lapse.

It did not look as if he was referring it to anybody? -
A. I would not know about that, sir.

Fair enough. Again the sequence of events after you
have sought that delay is then you seek the line of
mounted Officers, and then you notice the crowd being
relieved, the pressure being relieved? - A. Yes, sir.

It is in that order, isn't it? - A. That is right, sir.

Can you estimate how long it was between your asking
for that delay of the kick-off and when you finally
noticed the crowd being relieved? What did it seem
like? - A. It seemed to all occur at once really. It
obviously didn't but it was minutes.

It would be fair to say it was several minutes, to your
recollection, wasn't it? - A. Yes.

Your impression was it was several minutes passed
between your asking for the game to be delayed and the
crowd being finally relieved? - A. Yes, sir.

When you heard the message, "Everyone on the track",
and you say you saw the pitch and you thought there was
a pitch invasion, you did not actually see anybody
actually on the pitch itself, did you? - A. Ho, sir.

So you did not actually see anyone invading the pitch
as such? - A. No, sir.

All the people you saw were actually simply on the
perimeter track? - A. That is correct.
                                               M.' BUXTON




Everyone can make mistakes and what I am now saying is
jiot a criticism of you - I want you to understand that.
- A. Right, sir.

I am trying to investigate why it would be that someone
of your experience, because you are an experienced man,
would say to yourself Immediately you saw people on the
perimeter track, as opposed to on the pitch itself,
 'there is a pitch invasion". Can you help us at all? -
A. Yes, because the Police Officers could prevent them
from going onto the pitch.

But did you see any Police Officers behind them,
seeking them, preventing them going on the pitch? - A.
I saw Police Officers were present in the area but I
did not see them physically restraining anyone from
running on the pitch.

It is important - I repeat I am not trying to criticise
you. - A. Oh, no.

Because we can all make mistakes in a moment. I am
trying to see the picture which you had. The picture
you had were people on the perimeter track, right? - A.
Yes, sir.




              /Q. Quite a lot .
m
                                                                  71
                                                                       *



                                                     M. BUXTON


        Q. Quite a lot of people I understand? - A. Not quite a
           lot of people. There were several people, several
           fans.
    B   Q. We have got video evidence and we have got
           photographs so that we cap look at it ourselves. Did
           you see any Police' Officers on the perimeter track? -
           A. Yes, sir.
        Q. Where were they in relation to the perimeter fence? -
           A. They were in front of the perimeter fence.

        Q. I understand that but which side of the perimeter
           track were they? Were they on the side of the
           perimeter track nearest the fence or the side of the
           perimeter track nearest the goal? - A. I can’t answer
           that, sir. I walked down the steps towards the pitch
           and it was just the picture I got as I approached but
           I wasn’t looking constantly at the scene.

        Q. When you got there and you started to help very
           properly - it sounds patronising but I commend you
    D      for that - it was a dreadful scene? - A. Yes, sir.

        Q. You describe seeing Chief Inspector Nesbit? - A.
           Chief Superintendent Nesbit.

        Q. Sorry, I hope he is not. Chief Superintendent Nesbit
           was trying to do something. What was it he was
           trying to do? - A. The people were trapped in Gate 3
           and because of the noise from the crowd it was
           difficult to communicate with other Police Officers
           in the immediate area. So I went to the Land Rover
           and got a loudhailer.
        Q. So you got him a loudhailer and then Chief
           Superintendent Nesbit could communicate with other
           Police Officers along the perimeter track? - A. And
           the crowd or whoever.
        Q. You used the words, "to get some order"? - A. Yes,
           sir.
        Q.    What was the order he was trying to get, what was it
             he was trying to do? - A. So far as I can remember he
             was trying to clear Gate 3.

        Q.   It follows from that,  does it, that before you went
             to get the loudhailer to help him - I do not blame
             him for this - he was not being successful in getting
             the order? - A. No, sir.




    H
                                                              72.
                                                               < vf f
A
                                                 M. BUXTON



    . Q. Clearly, therefore, the other Police Officers who
         were there were not themselves forming any sort of
H        order or organisation? - A. Oh no, sir. I assumed as
         everyone else assumed that it was a simple pitch
         invasion that was occurring.

     Q. I understand that. What you are saying is that the
        reason why the other Police Officers were not doing
        anything to perhaps get people out was because they
        thought too it was a pitch....
          THE CORONER:   Hang on a minute.   I do not think you
     can put it like that.
          MR. KING: I am sorry, sir. I am jumping ahead
     because I did not understand the answer, I will be honest.
     Let me take it in stages.

           THE CORONER:   Yes.

     Q.        MR. KING: Chief Superintendent Nesbit was
D         trying to get some order? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q . Part of that order was communicating with other
         Police Officers? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. He clearly was not getting that order before you got
        the loudhailer? - A. As I say, yes.

     Q. So what was happening with those other Police
        Officers before you got the loudhailer to make you
        believe he was not getting the order that he
        wanted? - A. Each Police Officer was doing his own
        thing.

     Q. Your view was that there was not perhaps any
        organisation of the Police Officers as a whole? - A.
        At that stage there wasn’t any need for organisation
        because it was assumed, I assumed, it was a pitch
        invasion and was just a matter of containing them on
        the running track, on the track.

     Q. That was at the very time you went to get the
        loudhailer for Chief Superintendent Nesbit? - A.And
        then when I saw what the situation was I went for the
        loudhailer.

     Q. What did Chief Superintendent Nesbit do with that
        loudspeaker? - A. He ordered the other Police




H
                                                M. BUXTON


     Officers to form a cordon from Gate 3 to pass the
     people through.

Q. Before Chief Superintendent Nesbit did that, that was
   not happening? - A. No, sir.

Q. That is correct, is.it? - A . That is correct, yes.

     THE CORONER:   I do not think you can say that either.
You can ask him, with great respect, whether he saw
anything happening.

       MR. KING:   So be it, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I say this, Mr. King, notbecause I am
trying to interrupt you but we know for a fact that people
did come out before. We had a witness.

     MR. KING: Sir, with respect, the tunnel which we are
hearing about which is the order which the Officer is
speaking about is what I am interested in.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I realise that but what I am
anxious is that you should not put to the Officer something
which he might make an admission to which he cannot
actually make.
       MR. KING:   So be it, sir.   I accept that.

Q. You went to get the loudhailer to help, from your
   observation, Chief Superintendent Nesbit get the
   order which he was not already getting. That is
   fair, is it not? - A. Yes, to help him achieve better
   order.

Q. The order which you saw him getting when he got the
   loudhailer was to organise what? - A. It was to
   organise the exit of people from Gate 3.

Q. What exactly did he organise? What did he do? - A.
   People were trapped in Gate 3. They were trapped on
   top of one another in Gate 3 in like steps. They
   weren't one on top of the other and we had to get
   them out.

Q.   What method did he organise with the loudhailer? - A.
     We past these people back to each other and then put
     them on to the grass track.

Q.   Forming some sort of   what? - A. Line.
                                              M. BUXTON


Q. All I am asking is that before you went to get the
   loudhailer, had that line been formed? - A. No, sir.

Q. Before you went to get the loudhailer, your evidence
   was, and I am not putting words, into your mouth, that
   individual Officers were doing their own thing? - A.
   Yes, sir.
Q. After you got the loudhailer, those individual
   Officers were then doing things in co-ordination with
   each other? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. So it would be fair to say from your observation that
   the difference which Chief Superintendent Nesbit's
   use of the loudhailer was to bring co-ordination and
   organisation to individual Officers' hitherto
   actions? - A. Yes, sir.

     MR. PAYNE: Before Mr. Catchpole cross-examines, if he
is going to, and before you deal with that note from the
Jury, sir, I wonder if I might be permitted just to say
that this witness was asked a lot of questions about his
opinion, about whether the Land Rover could be heard, and
it is important that we do not stray into opinion evidence.
I was just checking in my notes and I find that you have
called so far a total of nine witnesses at various
positions round the crowd all of whom heard the loudspeaker
very clearly.
     THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, you are quite right in what
you say. I am sure the Jury will remember.   I do not think
you were testing how he could tell.

     MR. KING: Absolutely, sir, and to be fair if we are
going to refer to evidence which has been given in the past
there has been evidence from other people who did not hear
it. I was not the one who introduced questions as to the
effectiveness of this loudspeaker.

     THE CORONER:     Mr. King, I am not criticising you.

     MR. KING:    I am obliged, sir.

     THE CORONER:     I will come to your questions at the
end, if I may.
                 Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Officer, who asked you to go to the Leppings Lane end
   at 2.40? - A. It was ground control.
                                                                75




                                                   M. BUXTON


    Q.    Were you given any specific instructions as to what
         you were to do when you arrived at Leppings Lane? -
         A. No, the message was, "Go to Leppings Lane and
         assist with crowd control".
B
    Q.    When you arrived there what did you intend doing? -
         A. I intended to use the PA system. I assumed that
         is why I had been sent, to use the PA system on the
         Land Rover.

    Q.   Just to ask people to move back? - A. Yes.

    Q.    You got to Leppings Lane a few minutes after 2.40?    -
         A. Yes.

    Q. Did you see Police Officers near your Land Rover
       taking effective action to organise the crowds at
       that time? - A. I have no recollection of that. I
       can't say one way or the other.

    Q. Did you see Gate C opening? - A. No.

    Q. In your experience does a pitch invasion usually take
       place before a game starts or at the end? - A. A
       pitch invasion can occur at any time.

                     Cross-Examined bv MR. RUSSELL:

    Q. Officer, how far was it in your estimation from the
       Land Rover to the far parapet of the bridge away from
       the stadium? Do you know which bridge I am referring
       to? - A. No, sir.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   Can we put the overhead picture
         on? It is 255, the aerial view. Can you see that
         picture? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q.        MR. RUSSELL:   Officer, in the aerial photograph
         one can see a road going off to the right out of the
         picture, do you see that? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. That is the road which goes up to Catch Bar Lane, is
       it not? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. That road goes over a bridge before it turns either
       left to go down Leppings Lane or if you wish to go
       into the stadium right towards the Leppings Lane
       turnstiles? - A. Yes, sir.




H
                                                                76




                                                    M. BUXTON


    Q. The bridge has two parapets, one on the stadium side
       of the road and one on the far side of the road away
       from the stadium? - A. Yes, sir.
B   Q. Approximately how far was your Land Rover from the
       parapet of the bridge the.far side of the stadium? -
       A. I would be approximately midway between the end of
       the parapet and shop at the end of the terraced
       houses.
    Q. The parapet you are referring to there is the parapet
       on the stadium side? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. About how far in yards would you say your Land Rover
       was from the parapet on this side of the road, that
       is away from the stadium? - A. Over 20 feet, sir.

    Q.    20 feet? - A. From the parapet   on the far side ofthe
         road?
    Q. From the parapet on the far side? - A. That is away
       from the stadium?
    Q.    Away from the position of your Land Rover in the
         mouth of the entrance to the stadium. I was going to
         suggest it must be somewhere in the region of 30 to
         40 yards but you would not agree with that? - A. I
         wouldn't say it was 30 or 40 yards, sir.

    Q. How far would you say? - A. From the parapet at the
       far side of the bridge away from the stadium to the
       Land Rover?
    Q.   Yes. - A. It would be the width of    the road.

    Q.    And a bit more presumablybecauseit was diagonal
         across the road? - A. Just a bit more, yes.

    Q. In any event it was way beyond the back of the crowd?
       - A. Yes, sir.
    Q. We heard yesterday evidence from Mr. Lackey who was
       sitting on the bridge and told us that he heard you
       make the announcement that you described earlier that
       there should be a line of horses formed which was the
       instruction that you say you gave to the mounted
       Inspector? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q.    Does it surprise you that someone   that far away heard
         that announcement? - A. No, sir.




H
ny
                                                                    11
                                                                         *


                                                       M. BUXTON


         Q. Officer, you have talked about the function of talk
            through on radios? - A. Yes, sir.
     H   Q. You have said that when the talk through function is
            in use everyone else can hear everyone's messages? -
            A. Yes, sir.
         Q. That, of course, is in an ideal world where there is
            no competition for the noise being made by radio by
            factors and people in the vicinity of the person with
            the radio? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

         Q. Would you agree - perhaps it is   obvious -   that if you
            have a radio and you are in the   middle of   what has
            been called an inferno of noise   you might   not hear
            radio messages on talk through?   - A. That   is correct.

         Q. Officer, when you first left your Land Rover in
            response to the call to go into the stadium, can you
            please help me with this; from what point did you
            first see the state of affairs on the pitch? - A. I
            was in a gangway to the right, as we look at it, of
            the Police room looking down towards the Leppings
            Lane goal.




                                    /Q. So you were.




     H
                                      M.   BUXTON




So you were in the corner of the South Stand? - A. Yes,
sir.

Is that the point from which you made your entry on to
the pitch? - A. Yes, sir.

Would it be fair to-say that from the time you arrived on
the pitch for the next minutes, perhaps the next half an
hour, there was little time for you to look at your
watch? - A. I had no time at all for that.

Doubtless you found that time passed very quickly,
largely in part because you were very busy? - A. Yes,
sir.

You have told us when you came on to the pitch there were
no players?   The players by that stage had left? -A. I
didn't see any players at all, sir.

It is right that one of the things you did notice on the
pitch was an event or an happening in the Nottingham
Forest goalmouth? - A. When I first entered the ground I
went down the passageway.   I was looking towards the
goal.   I wasn t looking towards the pitch.   I wouldn't
know if the players were on or moving off.   I went over
to the goals and one of the first incidents was a
Liverpool supporter at the other end of the ground, in
front of the Nottingham fans in the goal area, creating
antics, goading the fans.

He was by himself? - A. Yes, sir.

I am just using this because I am just trying  to explore
what time you first got on to the pitch because as I
understand your evidence that is one of the first things
you noticed on looking on to the pitch, was this
Liverpool fan gesticulating at the Nottingham Forest
supporters? - A. Yes, sir.

He was gesticulating at them up in the Spion Kop? - A.
That's correct.

Shortly thereafter you saw him retreat away from the goal
mouth and he was subsequently arrested in the middle of
the pitch? - A. That's right, sir.

I think there is a photograph of thisfan    and it helps us
because it has got a time on it.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, it isn't a photograph which has
got a "C" number yet, but in view of what he has
subsequently said, I do think it is important to
establish when he first got on to the pitch and what he
                                                               .79
                                                                      «
                                                M.   BUXTON




       did thereafter because he gave one time in respect of
       Chief Superintendent Nesbit that I feel it is important
       to explore:

B   Q. Can I ask you to look at this photograph?

            MR. RUSSELL: . Sir, for those of my colleagues who
       have them it is in album ER:.2 and it is photograph number
       37.   Sir, it is a very simple photograph.    Perhaps it
       could be shown to the jury before I ask the question.
       There is also a photograph of the retreat towards the
       centre of the pitch before his arrest.

            THE CORONER:   If you can restrict it to one I would
       prefer it.   Let the officer have a look at it. When he
       has seen it we will have an acetate done.   What we are
       after is the time.   That is right, isn't it,
       Mr. Russell?

            MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, it is:

    Q. Officer, that is the man you saw gesticulating at the
       Liverpool end? - A. I couldn't swear on oath, sir, that
D      that was the man, but similar.

    Q. Someone gesticulating at the Spion Kop in the goalmouth.
       If we could read what was the scarf hanging from his
       wrist it might identify the fact he was a Liverpool
       supporter.   Your recollection is that afterwards he
       retreated towards the centre of the pitch where he was
       arrested? - A. Yes, sir.

            MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I do have a photograph of the
       retreat.

            THE CORONER:   I don't think we need it.   I don't
       think you can expect him to identify this man from the
       photograph.   He has given you a fair answer.

            MR. RUSSELL:   Yes, sir:

    Q. That photograph has a time on it in the bottom right hand
       corner? - A. Yes, it does, sir, 15:15.

    Q. I don't think it is 15:15.      I think it is 15:11,   isn't
       it? - A. Sorry, 15:15:11.

    Q. Yes, 15 being the date and 15:11 being the time.   Does
       that enable you to pinpoint the time at which you first
       surveyed the scene on that football pitch? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. You made your way from the South Stand to behind the
       goalmouth and would it be fair to say you didn't rush
       because at the time you thought it was a pitch invasion




H
                                                                 .8 0

                                                M.   BUXTON




       for which there were suitable contingency plans? - A.
       Yes, sir, correct.

    Q. When you reached the   situation behind the goal you
B      realised that it was   more than a pitch invasion, is that
       right? - A. I didn't   realise that, immediately.  It
       became apparent with   the passing of time.

    Q. You   saw a gate in the fence, I think? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. You saw fans lying trapped on top of one another in the
       gateway? - A. Correct.

    Q. You went to the open gate, would that be right? - A. Yes,
       sir.

    Q. You tried to pull a youth out of the entrance but he said
       his foot was trapped? - A. That is correct, sir.

    Q. For how long did you try to pull that youth out?       - A.
       Several minutes.

    Q. Several minutes? - A. Yes.
D
    Q. Anyway you had a good effort.   I will not hold you
       necessarily to that answer, but you had a good attempt at
       getting that youth out but you couldn't because is foot
       was trapped? - A. That is correct.

    Q. Were you by yourself at this stage or were you with other
       officers? - A. I believe other officers were present.

    Q. After you had given up trying to pull the youth out
       because his foot was trapped, you then tried to pull a
       young female out, didn't you? - A. Yes, it became obvious
       we had to pull them from the top to get the entrance
       clear.

    Q. You found you couldn't pull her out because she herself
       was trapped by fans behind her? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. For how long did you attempt to try and pull h e r o u t ?       -
       A. Again, several minutes.   We were successful in
       pulling her out eventually.

    Q. After that you then pulled out another youth who had been
       trapped over the girl you had just successfully pulled
       out, is that right? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. After that you were able to pull out a further youth who
       was at the bottom, towards the fence? - A. Yes, sir.  We
       had to get the youth out who was on the bottom, whose
       foot was trapped.




H
                                                               81
                                              M.   BUXTON           .f *



    Q. Therefore, some three or four people you assisted in
      getting them out through the gate 2 in enclosure 3? - A.
      Yes, sir.

B   Q. I have asked you in giving an account of that how long
       each stage took, but overall how long did that stage of
       the operation take? - A. Quite a few minutes, sir.

    Q. Five, six, seven, eight, how many minutes? - A. I'm
       sorry. sir, I am not able to answer that.

    Q. Quite a few minutes? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. After you had managed to pull out the man, the youth
       whose foot had been trapped, did you have a bit of a
       rest? - A. Yes, sir, we had to.

    Q. You needed a bit of a rest and you had a rest by leaning
       against the St. John's ambulance? - A. That is correct,
       sir.

    Q. By that stage the ambulance had arrived? - A. Indeed.
D   Q. We know from the video evidence that the ambulance
       arrived at about 3.15.   I don't know whether you have
       seen the compilation video?   The jury have and we have.

            THE CORONER:    Mr. Russell, what is it you are
       trying to establish?

            MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, you have identified a cut-off
       point in terms of time for these Inquests which you
       identified as the arrival of the ambulance at 3.15.    It
       is clear from this witness's evidenc, which I am
       eliciting, that he did not have any contact with Chief
       Superintendent Nesbit until after he had had his rest
       leaning against the ambulance which had already arrived.

               My learned friend Mr. King, quite properly in
       view of the answer he gave in chief to you, sir, said
       that he saw Chief Superintendent Nesbit at 3.10, which
       was certainly before the arrival of that ambulance.
       What I am seeking to establish beyond any doubt is that
       he did not see Chief Superintendent Nesbit until long
       after the timescale which you have set for these
       Inquests, had past.

            THE CORONER:    Yes, I think you can get to that
       directly now.

            MR. RUSSELL:    I felt I had to lay the ground in
       terms of activity:




H
                                                                      82

                                                 ■   M.   BUXTON




    Q. It was while you were leaning against the ambulance that
       you saw Chief Superintendent Nesbit, wasn't it? - A.
       That's not my recollection, sir.

B   Q. Are you sure? - A. Yes.

    Q. You have already had your -statement put to you twice by
       my learned friend Mr. King.'   I wonder if you could look
       at it again. - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. In any event, officer, before you look at the statement,
       everything you have described so far was before you went
       to get the loud hailer? - A. I will agree by what is
       written in this statement.    I had a clearer recollection
       of events then than I do now.

    Q.    Can you just answer this question: all          the events you
         have described with me, occurred before          you went to get
         the loud hailer? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q.   Can you see the first new paragraph on page A, beginning,
         "I was obliged to recover by resting against the St.
         John's ambulance"? - A. Yes, sir.
D
    Q.   In the next sentence you say, "I sawChief Superintendent
         Nesbit standing on the advertisement hoardings," and in
         the next sentence you say you ran to the ran to the Land
         Rover...

              MR. KING:      Could you possibly...

              MR. RUSSELL:      I will read the whole lot.

              MR. KING:      I get into trouble for not reading the
         whole sentence!

              MR. RUSSELL:      The biter bit!

    Q.    Can I just read these - it is just the timing of when you
         went to the Land Rover that I am interested in, "I was
         obliged to recover by resting against the St. John's^
         ambulance.    I saw Chief Superintendent Nesbit standing
         on the advertisement hoardings and holding on to the
         fence trying to get some organisation but the noise was
         too much.    I ran to the Land Rover and a hand held loud
         hailer and gave it to Chief Superintendent Nesbit who was
         in the same position still trying to get things
         organised."

              THE CORONER:      Finish the paragraph.

               MR. RUSSELL:  Of course I will, but you are inviting
         me to adduce evidence of what clearly happened after
         3.15.   Are you interested in that evidence?




H
     THE CORONER:   I think you should finish the
paragraph.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Certainly:

"He then instructed police officers to form a tunnel down
which we passed bodies of-the fans while some alive, a
lot of them were obviously Head.   We passed back body
after body until eventually we cleared the area." - A.
That is correct, sir.

About how long did it take you to run from the goalmouth
to the Land Rover? - A. Just a couple of minutes, sir.

Presumably the same length of time back? - A. I meant
there and back.

You said in your evidence that you saw Superintendent
Greenwood with a loud hailer as well? - A. At one stage,
yes, sir.

In all the confusion and after this length of time can
you remember precisely when that was in relation to all
the other events you have described? - A. No, sir, it is
just a picture I have got of the scene and seeing
Mr. Greenwood with the...

Or what Superintendent Greenwood was doing? - A. No, sir,
it is just an impression I have retained from the scene
of seeing Mr. Greenwood in possession of a loud hailer.

Do you know an officer called Sergeant Tissington? - A.
No, sir.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I don't think I can take it
further.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sorry, sir, there is one matter that
perhaps I could ask arising out of some of the things
that have been said in relation to the pitch invasion?

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

        Further Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

Mr. Buxton, how far did what you saw outside the Leppings
Lane turnstiles affect your view as to whether what was
going on inside the ground when you got was a pitch
invasion? - A. I dissociated the two.   On leaving
Leppings Lane I forgot all about it and then when I got
the instruction about everybody on the pitch and I walked
down and saw the fans climbing over the fencing I just
thought it was a pitch invasion.
                                                                     84

                                                   M.   BUXTON
                                                                           .f 9



    Q.    You put that out of your mind? -   A. Yes.

    ,Q.   You are walking down  towards the Leppings Lane terraces
          and you actually do see the terraces at that time, as you
B         are walking towards them? - A. Yes, I could see them.

    0. You still thought ,it was a crowd invasion? - A. I didn't
       associate the two at all.

    Q.    You still thought it was a crowd invasion as you        were
          walking towards the terraces, being able to see        them? -
          A. I thought it was a pitch invasion.

    Q. That is what I meant, a pitch invasion? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. You were still looking towards that end for how long
       before you realised it wasn't in fact a pitch invasion
       but that people were getting hurt? - A. As soon as I saw
       a dead body.

    Q. Could you tell us how long that was? - A. No, sir, I
       c a n 't.
D   Q. However, there was a period of time when you were walking
       towards that end of the ground, looking in the direction
       of the terraces, when you still believed it was a pitch
       invasion? - A. Yes, sir.

               MR. ISAACS:   Thank you.

                          Further by THE CORONER:

     Q.    Just to be quite fair to you, it is right that you came
          on to the pitch "cold" so to speak?     You had just heard
          a message and you saw people? - A. Yes, sir.

     Q. You didn't see players, as far as you can remember? - A.
        No, sir.

    Q. You drew a conclusion which you had to revise later on,
       but you weren't there the whole time, you hadn't been
       watching... - A. Oh, no, sir.    I just thought I was
       assisting with a pitch invasion.

    Q.     I ask you this because it is obviously        a painful time for
          you as well? - A. Yes.

    Q.     What I am trying to establish is that    you hadn't been in
          the ground until you actually entered     it? - A. No, sir,
          it wasn't my duties.

    Q. At that point? - A. No.




H
                                       M.   BUXTON




The jury has asked three questions, but I think this
officer is not the right person.    I am going to read
them out so that people know.    The questions are:  "Had
Sergeant Goddard the power to delay the kick-off?"     I
don t think you can answer that? - A. No, sir.

You might be able Jto answer but I don't think you would
have the knowledge.-- A. There would be officers senior
to Sergeant Goddard in the control room.

The second question is, "If no, who had the authority to
delay the kick-off?"   I think we will find that out from
somebody else in due course.   The third question is,
"This isn't the first officer who mentioned that fans
usually are dropped off at Leppings Lane by coach.  Why
not on this match?"   You go on to say mentioned in
briefings.   "Was it mentioned in briefings?"   I think
you weren't actually at Leppings Lane? - A. No, sir, but
the answer to that is there were far too many coaches.
The coaches would bring the fans to Halifax Road.   They
would park up.   The fans would get off and walk back to
the ground.

What you are saying is that the normal arrangement is if
there aren't very many you allow them off close by? - A.
Yes.

If there are more they have got to walk further? - A.
Yes.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, having regard to one of those
questions - it will become obvious which one - may I ask
this officer some other questions?   It is about
delaying the kick-off.

     THE CORONER:   Only insofar as he...

     MR. ISAACS:    I am not going to ask him about
anything he can't help us about, sir.    You need have no
worries about that.

        Further Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

Mr. Buxton, we have a situation where the fans outside
the Leppings Lane turnstiles are either at the front and
being pushed or coming from the back and joining those
fans who are being pushed and I expect in their own way
being part of the pushing.   You have tried to talk to
them through your loud speaker, you tell us, and it has
had no effect? - A. That is correct, sir.
                                                             86
                                                             v vf 9

                                            M.' BUXTON


    Q.   You make this enquiry, "Is it possible to delay the
         kick-off?" - A. Yes sir.

    Q.   What were you hoping to achieve? - A. Well, if we
         could have delayed the kick-off it would have been
B        something to offer the fans to alleviate the
         situation.

    Q.   How would you have hoped to get that through to them?
         - A. I would have told them.

    Q.   How? - A. Just simply saying, "The kick-off has been
         delayed, there's no reason to push and shove, there's
         plenty of time to get in, there's another quarter-of-
         an-hour", 20 minutes or whatever.

    Q.   Through your loudspeaker? - A. Yes, that was the only
         available means for me to do it.  I could do no other.

    Q.   Did you think at that stage that if you had done that
         you would have had any greater chance of success? - A.
         It was something to offer the fans.   I arrived, I
         appealed to them, it did nothing.   I thought it might
D        be just something to offer them.

    Q.   Just a hope? - A. Yes.

                       Further by THE CORONER;

    Q.   I will just ask one other question out of this.  I
         take it your hope was based on the assumption that the
         fans could hear you? - A. Yes sir.

              THE CORONER: I want to thank you for coming.
         Thank you very much indeed for being here and giving
         your evidence.
    Q.   Before you go, we are going to give this a C number
         now, and that is the picture which you looked at, is
         it? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Although you cannot identify this fan? - A. I will
         accept that, yes.

              MR. JONES:   That is PR.2/37 and we have given
         that C.323.

              THE CORONER: Mr. Buxton, thank you very much
         indeed.



G




H
f   2-
                                                                        87




                                                          G. WRIGHT



                                  GRAHAM WRIGHT Sworn

                                    By THE CORONER:
         B   Q.   Graham Wright,' PC.2980,   is t.hat right? - A. That is
                  correct, sir.

             Q.   You were part of a serial which I think was under the
                  supervision of Police Sergeant Payne? - A. That is
                  correct, sir.

             Q.   And various other officers above you? - A. Yes sir.
             Q.   You were deputed to look after the area Turnstiles A
                   to G, I think, is that right? - A. That is correct,
                   sir.

             Q.   Had you done this job before? - A. Not those specific
                  turnstiles, sir.

             Q.   So this was the first time, 15th April 1989? - A. Yes
                  sir .

         D   Q.   Did you go to a general briefing first of all?      - A.
                   Yes I did, sir.

             Q.   Then I think there were some more individual briefings
                  by the Inspectors and Sergeants? - A. There was an
                  individual briefing by Inspector Purdy and Inspector
                  Syk es.

             Q.   Were you posted outside the turnstiles or inside the
                  turnstiles? - A. Outside the turnstiles.

             Q.   Your task was what? - A. To control the incoming
                  supporters, to search supporters for alcoholic drinks,
                  cans, bottles, offensive weapons, etc.

             Q.   You took your position outside which turnstile, do you
                  remember? - A. I was outside turnstile C.

             Q.   How many yards out from it would you have placed
                  yourself approximately? - A. A number of feet, in
                  actual fact, sir.

             Q.   You started at about noon, I think, that is right, is
                  it not? - A. We were in position for when the
                  turnstiles opened at noon.

             Q.   Initially I think there wasn't a particular problem,
                  you could search virtually everybody, is that right? -
                  A. Yes, that is correct.

             Q.   And, in fact, you did? - A. Yes sir.




         H
i   >

                                                                   88

                                                                           *

                                                       G. WRIGHT


            Q.   It was a lovely day, I think, was it not? - A. Yes,
                  the weather was fine, people weren't wearing top coats
                  so it was quite easy to search most people.

            Q.   Apart from a few minor things, you did not really find
        B         much? - A. Not for the first couple of hours, no sir.

            Q.   Did anything you found’necessitate you going away? -
                 A. No, I remaine'd at the turnstile throughout.

            Q.   Did you notice whether your colleagues had occasion to
                 leave the turnstile area? - A. Yes, before I
                 eventually left the turnstiles, all my serial, I
                 think, except for two or three had left for various
                 reasons.

            Q.   Was that to do with the discovery of prohibited
                  articles, shall we say? - A. In some cases it was to
                  do with seizure of property, and in some cases I
                  believe it was because they had arrested a couple of
                  supporters.

            Q.   That meant that they then went off somewhere in the
        D        ground where there was a Police room, a detention
                 room? - A. That is correct, yes.

            Q.   Where procedures had to be gone through? - A. That is
                  correct.

            Q.   You did not go yourself? - A. I remained at the
                  turnstile.

            Q.   But, of course, it depleted the number of officers
                  outside? - A. It did, yes.

            Q.   Initially that did not worry you because you knew
                  there were chaps inside who were also searching? - A.
                  We could see through the turnstile and there was a
                  further serial of police officers inside who were also
                  searching.

            Q.   They were looking for the same sort of things, so what
                  you missed hopefully they would pick up? - A. Yes,
                  that is correct.

            Q.   I do not mean you personally; I mean what was missed.
                  - A. That is correct, yes.

            Q.   How long did it go on then in this sort of way? - A. I
                 believe the build-up occurred around 2.30.   Obviously
                  the build-up was such that no one had chance to look
                 at watches, etc.




        H
                                     G. WRIGHT


So what happened then, in your own words? - A.
Basically there was just so many supporters that it
was impossible to search them.  It was more the task
was trying to funnel them into the turnstile because
they were being pushed from behind, and to try and
speed up the flow through the turnstile.

So you changed-your function, so to speak, from
searching to funnelling? - A. Yes, if one was able to
make a little bit of a line as they entered the
turnstile, it meant that the flow went into the
turnstile easier than two or three people trying to
get into the narrow confines.

I think you have already said - and I do not want to
go over this and we know it anyway - there was a
considerable crush just outside these turnstiles? - A.
There was, indeed, yes.

The pressure was coming from further back? - A. From
quite some distance back, I would think.

You, I think, caught a glimpse of Inspector Purdy at
some point, did you not? - A. Inspector Purdy was
stood up on top of a railing and that meant I was able
to see him above the heads of the crowd that was
surrounding me.

What did you see him do, briefly?  We have heard from
him already. - A. He was on top of the railing. He was
shouting at the crowd telling them to ease off, to
stop pushing, to take their time as they came in, and
he was also gesticulating with his arms giving the
same message.

It was very noisy, of course, was it not? - A. It was,
yes.

At some point I think you did not feel that you were
doing anything out there, or you were told to go
inside, is that right? - A. Eventually we weren't
having much effect there and so Inspector Purdy passed
a message on to me to move through the turnstiles.

Did he do that by word of mouth, or signal, or what? -
A. I think he shouted, but he also signalled because
of the noise.

In fact, you did do that? - A. I went through the
turnstile that I was, in actual fact, covering.   I
went through turnstile C to get into the ground.
r:z
                                                                     90

                                                                          .f *

                                                        G. WRIGHT


               You do not know what time that was, do you? - A. It is
               difficult to estimate.  I would think 2.40/2.50, I am
               not sure.

          Q.   There were still a lot of people outside at that point
      B        anyway? - A. Yes, that is correct.

          Q.   Your next move -was I thi-nk you decided to come out
               again? - A. I came straight back out.    Inspector Purdy
               was in charge of my sector.    I came straight back out
               via Gate C in order to re-contact him to be further
               deployed.

          Q.   So when you got out, let us just clear this, you have
               no recollection of any ingress of fans when you
               managed to get out, is that right? - A. I am sorry,
               would you repeat that?

          Q.   Do you remember whether a group of fans managed to get
               in through the gate when you came out? - A. Gate C,
               no, none came in when I went out.

          Q.   You came out, so what did you do then? - A. I went
      D        round to where Inspector Purdy was on the fence, but
               at that moment a young child was passed over the heads
               of the crowd that were pushed up against those gates.
               The child was barely conscious and he was passed over
               their heads and I took him and I carried him into the
               concourse behind the turnstiles to where there is a
               portacabin which had been set up as a first-aid room.

          Q.   So, in fact, you went back in through Gate C? - A.
               Yes, I had to go back in via Gate C again.

          Q.   You managed to get in, somebody opened the gate      for
                you presumably? - A. Yes.

          Q.   Because it    has got to be opened from the inside,
                hasn't it?   - A. It has to be opened from the inside,
                yes.

          Q.   Again you got in with the child? - A. I believe      I was
                the only one to enter with the child, yes.

          Q.   Just so that we can get this clear, this boy in      fact,
                or girl, the child --- A. It was a boy.

          Q.   Recovered?   - A. He was conscious and he was just short
                of breath and very pale when I left him.    I left him
               with other officers inside.

               So having taken him to the first-aid post, what was
               your next action? - A. Again back to Inspector Purdy.




      H
                                      G. WRIGHT


Back out? - A. Yes, back out through Gate C, to be
again further deployed.

What was the position like at that stage? - A. There
was quite a crush on the turnstiles.    The crush had
not subsided o,n the turnstiles at all.
Can you remember whether there was a crush on the
concertina gate? - A. No, there was no crush on the
concertina gate when I went out of it;    I was able to
get out okay.

What else was happening? - A. The mood of the crowd
was quite hostile.  I remember a specific incident
where a fan who was on the wrong side of the railing .
that Inspector Purdy — —

Do you mean the River Don side of the railing? - A. He
was on the river side of the railing.  He for some
reason dropped his ticket, which went under the feet
of the crowd who were on the inside of the railing,
and as he tried to retrieve it he was kicked by a
number of people who thought he was trying to get
under the railing and join in the queue, queue
jumping.

Apart from that, did you see anybody actually try and
jump the queue in that way by coming in from the side?
- A . No, I didn't see anybody.

So what did you, in fact, then do? - A. The next thing
I did, obviously we had identified that it was
necessary to stop the crowd pushing from the back, and
so I went out to the wrought iron gates which are on
the perimeter of the ground from Leppings Lane.

Do you know which gate you aimed for?  There are three
sets. - A. Yes, there are three sets and I was on the
set that is furthest away from the river.

Furthest away? - A. Furthest from the river, yes.

Do you know about what time you got to that place? -
A. Again it is very difficult to estimate times here.

Can you remember whether the Land Rover was about? -
A. I never saw the Land Rover, sir.

Did you hear it, as a matter of interest? - A. No, I
was on the wrong side of the crowd to hear the Land
Rover really.

You did not hear it anyway, whichever side you were? -
A. No.
i   I
                                                                   .92




                                                       G. WRIGHT


                 What did you then attempt to do? - A. It was
                 difficult, but I managed to close the wrought iron
                 gates that I went to.   The right-hand one I was able
                 to close and then put the bolt, which is at the bottom
                 of the gate, into the concrete ground.   That held that
        B        one in place. , The left-hand gate unfortunately
                 normally padlocks to the right-hand one.   Obviously I
                 am not in possession of .a padlock so I had to hold
                 that one closed using physical force.

                 Did you stay turnstile side of the gate, or did you
                 place yourself on the outside? - A. I was on the
                 turnstile side of the gate.

            Q.   So you were holding it closed? - A. They closed
                 outwards.  I was on the inside as they open.

            Q.   So there you were with a crowd approaching the
                 turnstile behind you? - A. I am sorry, sir.

            Q.   There was a crowd behind you going towards the
                 turnstiles? - A. Yes.

        D   Q.    Then there was you? - A. Yes sir.

            Q.   Then there was a gate? - A. That is correct.

            Q.    Then there was something ahead of you? - A. That is
                 correct.

            Q.   What was ahead of you? - A. There was a considerable
                 crowd on the other side of the gates.

            Q.   What was happening with that crowd as far as you could
                 see? - A. Again they were pushing, they were trying to
                 get the gates open.  They were trying to come forward,
                 obviously determined to get in to see the start of the
                 match.

                 Did you see any horses, can you remember? - A. I had
                 seen horses when I had been on the turnstile.  One
                 horse had come close in when I had been on the
                 turnstile.  I was aware of horses in the area, but I
                 didn't notice the specific function of the horses.

                 I think whilst you were on that gate you managed to
                 hold it for a time, didn 't you? - A. I held it for
                 most of the time, but it was brought to my attention
                 that there was a woman, I think, being crushed up
                 against the gate at one stage, and so I managed to
                 filter one or two people through, and then I managed
                 to close it again.  But two or three times the force
                 of the crowd against it just pushed it open.   I
                 couldn't hold them.




        H
                                      G. WRIGHT


Then I think something else happened, did it? How did
the situation resolve itself as far as you were
concerned? - A. I wasn't aware of particularly what
was going on in the turnstile area because I was
concentrating on the people the other side of the
gate.  Eventually I realised that the crowd had
subsided on that turnstile side.    I noticed that the
other gates h ad been opejted and so I was forced to let
the crowd through the gate I was holding because
obviously they had seen the other gate was open as
well and so were even more determined to get through
then.




                          /Q. In other words
&
                                                                       94


                                                          G.* WEIGHT




           In other words, what you are saying is that the gates
          .to the left of you had opened? - A. The two to the left
          Of me.   I am not sure if both were open but at least
          one set were.
    B
        Q. But there was a passage through? - A; Yes, the crowd
           was going forward through those gates.

        Q. And you could not see any point in holding yours shut
           if the gate next door to you was open really? - A. That
           is correct, and also as I say the crowd could see that
           that gate was open and so it would have incensed them
           if I had tried to hold them back and not the others.

           Did you at any point before you released your gate -
           forget the others, your gate only - see any of the big
           concertina gates open? - A. From that position I could
           not see them, because I am round the corner from Gate C
           and also, as I say, I am concentrating on what is in
           front of me, which is the other side of the gate.

        Q. So you don't know? - A. No.
    D
        Q. Did you hear any messages? - A. No, I didn't hear any
           messages up to that point.

           Did you hear any messages after that point? - A. Once
           the crowd had gone through the gates I was holding and
           had virtually subsided I then heard a tannoy message,
           which was on the ground's public address system, asking
           the Liverpool supporters to move back from the fences.

        Q- From the fences? - A. I believe it was the fences.     I
           can't be sure whether they said fences or gates.

        Q. But this was after the crowd had raore or less
           dissipated? - A. This was after the crowd had gone, and
           in effect at that time I did not know which
           fences/gates the tannoy message referred to.

           As far as you were concerned things had resolved
           themselves out there, at this stage? - A. As far as the
           crowd entering the ground was concerned, yes, it had
           been resolved at that time.

           Where did you then take yourself? - A. I then moved
           back into the ground, into the concourse which is to
           the rear of the West Stand, between the turnstiles and
           the Stand.

           What happened after that? - A. We went back in there
           for further deployment by the Inspectors e t c . , and it
           was then that I became aware there had been a message
           to move round onto the pitch.  I had not got a personal




    H
                                                                  95
                                                                       • f *

                                                     G.' WRIGHT




       radio myself but other Officers started running round
      .and I ran round with them.

B   Q. Which way round did you go? - A. We went round the back
       of the Police Room.

    Q. You mean the Police Room or the Control Box? - A.
       Sorry, the Police Control Box which is between the West
       Stand and the South Stand.

       When you first glimpsed, if I can use that word, the
       pitch area, within the Stand area, do you remember what
       was happening on the field? - A. Yes, from between the
       West Stand and the Police Control Room you could just
       see the pitch and you could see that there were
       obviously supporters on either the perimeter track or
       the edge of the pitch. I could not see exactly where
       they were from that position, and so we just continued
       to run round into the South Stand.

       What I am interested in is whether you could see what
       was actually happening on the playing area? - A. I
D      don't recall seeing any players on the pitch. All I
       saw was quite a large number of supporters on the edge
       of the pitch.

       Not on the pitch itself? - A. It is difficult to say.
       From that position youcannot tell whether they are on
       the perimeter track or   the grass. I would say they
       weren't on the playing area.

       Yes, one can argue ad nauseam where the pitch is but if
       we assume that the pitch is within the white lines,
       between goal and goal, were there any on that part? -
       A. They were in the area just the other side of the
       perimeter fence. I would not think there were any on
       the playing area but it was difficult to tell from that
       position.

    Q. What was your instant reaction? - A. From that position
       it looked like a pitch invasion.

    Q. Did you then continue round? - A. We continued round
       into the South Stand.

    Q. Into the South Stand? - A. That isthe only way one
       could access the pitch because of the perimeter fences.

    Q. I see, yes. Carry on. - A. We continued round into the
       South Stand and went down one of the gangways which
       gave access to the football pitch, and then
       straightaway to the perimeter fence of the West Stand.




H
                                               G.- WRIGHT




 So what you were doing, you were trying to get to the
.West Stand, but you had to do it ...? - A. Yes, because
 obviously the West Stand is separated by a perimeter
 fence one has to go via the South Stand.

At what point did you begin to realise that this was
something a bit different? - A.- From the South Stand I
think immediately I could see. Obviously I am at a
different angle then, I am looking from the pitch side
towards the perimeter fence, and I could see that the
mix of Police Officers, crowd, you could tell then that
it was different, it wasn't a pitch invasion.

So it didn't take you very long to divine that there
was something else? - A. No, I think we realised as
soon as we came down out of the Stand.

Then   I think you too went to Pen 3, didn't you? - A.
Yes,   I went along the perimeter fence, and it was Pen 3
gate   where I saw the most activity and that is where I
went   straight to.

You saw some people who looked to you as if they were
dead, didn't you? - A. The first time I realised that
someone was actually dead in the area was once I had
got in a position in the gateway to Pen 3. I could see
people pressed up against the fence prior to that,
obviously.

What action did you take yourself? - A. I saw, as I
say, that the centre of the activity was the gateways,
because that is obviously the only way out of the pen,
normally. There were Officers climbing up onto the
railings, sort of leaning over the fences, but there
were two or three Officers at the gateway trying to
pull people through, but the narrowness of the gateway
prevented more than two actually reaching through, and
so there is like a support bar at the side of the gate,
and I climbed up that to see if I could reach over the
top of them, and see if I could help that way, because
it seemed to me that you needed to lift people upwards
in order to pull them out.

What about directing them out at the back? - A. Well,
eventually from that position it was obvious that
people could not be released because of the pressure on
the back, and so I then bridged myself across the gate
and from that position I was fairly high up and I was
able to shout at them and gesticulate for them to move
back but it had no effect I am afraid.

It didn't have any effect? - A. It didn't seem to have
any effect whatsoever.
0
                                                                       97

                                                                            .f *

                                                          G.' WRIGHT




        Q. Of course we know that a lot of people close to the
           .gate - when I saw we know, I assume we know - they were
           being pressed and perhaps even have been dead and
            therefore they could not move, but how far back were
    B       you aiming your messages? - A. I would say that terrace
            goes back about 40 feet. I was aiming it - I could
            see right back to the b.ack of it and I could be seen by
            people at the back of it, because I was high up between
            the gates in actual fact, so I was aiming it right at
            the back.

        Q. It appeared to you that people weren't actually going
           out through the tunnel at that point? - A. No, there
           was no one leaving.

        Q. How well do you know the Leppings Lane terraces? - A.
           Reasonably well.

        Q. Did you know that there were gates at the back between
           each pen? - A. I wasn't aware thatthe pens were
           separated by gates, no.

    D   Q. Eventually I think you entered the terrace, didn't you?
           - A. The weight of the people pushing on those that
           were trapped up against the wall prevented them from
           being released, and we realised that to have any effect
           we had to go inside the pen itself, so we virtually
           climbed over the people who were pressed up against the
           wall, in order to start pulling them back from behind.

        Q. Did that have some success? -   A. Yes, once enough
           Police Officers were in there   and started to pull
           people back, then it released   the pressure on those at
           the front and we were able to   start moving people.

        Q. I think I do have to ask you this question. I don't
           like to but I think I have to. Did you find the people
           who you were asking to move back co-operated with you?
           - A. No, I was being shouted down. I believe nost of
           them still thought they were there to watch a football
           match and I don t think ....

        Q. Do you think that the people - you see, you had the
           advantage, if I can put it like that, of having seen it
           from the pitch side and having entered and you knew
           what was happening - could those people actually see
           what was happening at the front? - A. I believe that
           most of them could do, yes, because the terrace is
           obviously sloping and so you have got an elevated view
           down onto the pitch. It wasn't just me at the gate,
           there were two or three of us at the gate but there was
           also Officers stood on - in front of the perimeter
           fence there is like a railing, and Officers were stood
           on there reaching over the fences and lifting people




    H
                                              G.* WRIGHT




actually over the fences. For Police Officers to be
.lifting them onto the pitch they must have realised
 that the situation had changed.

So what you are saying is that your, initial impression
was it was a pitch invasion, but you recognised quickly
that it wasn't? - A. That was only a brief opinion.

Yes, and similarly what you are trying to say is that
if people see Police Officers doing that, then they
might recognise that this was an unusual situation? -
A. It is contrary to what Police Officers would
normally be there for.

I unders tand.

             Cross-Examined by MR. HALE

Officer, to deal with it from back to front, you were
present inside the ground and you saw people crushed up
against the fences between the terrace and the pitch? -
A. That is correct, yes.

And whoever's fault it was, we are not going into that,
but they were crushed up there by the weight of the
crowd behind them? - A. That is correct, yes, sir.

Going back one stage further, you were also present
outside the turnstiles? - A. That is correct, yes, sir.

And you saw the same sort of people, whether they were
the identical people but the same crowd, pressing up
against the turnstiles, and did you see people there in
distress? - A. There were people in distress outside
the turnstiles, yes.

You said you saw a little boy carried out over the top,
so the weight of the same sort of numbers of people
pressing against the turnstiles was crushing people? -
A. Yes, in fact, whilst out on the turnstiles I was
concerned for my own safety and that of my colleague.
There was one specific colleague, P.C. Huckstep, who
was in the corner of the turnstiles and Gate B, he was
right in the corner and I was fearful for his safety,
yes.

I want to come one stage further now, come back to the
perimeter gates. You were also there and I think you
said at one time there was someone crushed up against
the gate and you had to open the gate to relieve the
pressure for a while? - A. Yes, they were shouting at
me to open the gates frequently but at one stage it was
pointed out to me there was a woman who was in some
distress and so I allowed her through.
                                                                    99
                                                                    * vf f

                                                       G.* WRIGHT




    Q. It is suggested if those perimeter gates had been used,
       .that they might in some magic way have controlled the
       crowd. From your observation was there crushing there,
       just the same as at the other two places? - A. There
B      was crushing there but obviously it. reduced the
       crushing on the turnstiles.

    Q. Yes, it would have been a matter of spreading the
       crushing out? - A. Yes, instead of having one
       continuous crush, it would have meant in stages which
       would, I would think, reduce the pressure at the front.

    Q. You actually used those gates to try to control the
       crowd? - A. I did, yes.

    Q. You have explained there was a bolt to secure the right
       hand one. The left hand one, there was no means of
       securing it apart from you holding it manually? - A.
       That is correct, yes, sir.

    Q. To the best of your knowledge does that apply to the
       other gates? - A. I couldn't answer the question about
D       the other gates, sir.

    Q.    All right, but the one that you used, was it ideal for
         trying to control a crowd? - A. No, not ideal, sir,
         because as I say, I could not hold the left hand gate
         properly, and I tried to jam it with my foot and nearly
         injured my foot doing so.

    Q. Eventually the   whole situation was relieved when
       someone opened   another gate? Did you see Gate C
       opened? - A. I   could not see from that position, plus I
       was facing the   wrong way.

    Q.    But you felt a relief of pressure? - A. There was no
         pressure at my back which was the turnstiles.   I was
         aware the pressure had gone off but I could not
         actually see it.

    Q. If - I know it is difficult - did you make any estimate
       from the pressure that was on you at that gate, how
       long you could have held out if the pressure had not
       been relieved in some other way? - A. Just for a matter
       of minutes, four or five minutes I would have thought.
       I would not have thought much more than that.

                     Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

    Q. I wonder if Sergeant Griffiths would be kind enough to
       put up C255, please, the overhead photograph? You will
       find that in the bundle in front of you, Officer. This
       question relates to the general planning and
       preparation for the event. You have described the




H
                                              G.* WRIGHT




incident where Inspector Purdy passed to you the boy
who had been crushed in the crowd outside the
turnstiles, and how you carried him inside onto the
concourse? - A. That is correct, yes, sir.




            /Q. And you took him .
                                              G. WRIGHT


You took him to one of those caravans? - A. That is
correct, yes.
Do you know which one it was? - A. I am sorry, sir, I
couldn't tell you which one it was. I believe it was
the first one I came to when entering via Gate C.

You said it had been set up as a first aid post? - A.
I believe it was set up as a first aid post, yes.
There were Officers in there who took the child off
me to look after the child.
He was looked after in that caravan? - A. Yes, there
was an Inspector and at least two or three other
Officers, including one Policewoman.

I want to ask you about a different matter and so you
can turn away from that photograph now. Inside the
ground, as soon as you realised that people had been
crushed and were being crushed in the pen, what was
your first priority as soon as you realised that? -
A. I went straight to the gate which was open with a
view to bringing people out of that pen on to the
pitch or getting them to leave that pen via the back.

You were asked by the Coroner the question of what
happened when you shouted to the crowd to move back
and the only note I have got of your evidence was
that you were shouted down. I repeat the same
question. When you shouted to the crowd to move back
did they in fact move back? - A. I didn't see anyone
go back through the tunnel, no, sir.

            Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS:

When you were outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles
and the crowd were pushing and shoving, and you say
at certain times you felt afraid for your own safety,
did you say anything to them? - A. Yes, but it is
difficult to sort the situation out because the
people I was talking to were the ones who were
virtually pressed up face to face with me and they
couldn't control the situation because they were
being pushed from further back.

You had been there when it all started? - A. Yes,
sir.
There was one moment when things were relatively
quiet. How long did it take before that relative
quietness became what now, we understand, was an
                                                             .102




                                                    G. WRIGHT


      uncontrollable situation? - A. It is difficult to
      estimate it. It seemed to come on very suddenly.    I
      don't ever remember it going from one to the other.
      It just seemed to happen. It is difficult to say,
B     seconds to a couple of minutes..

    Q. In normal circumstances one would expect people as
       they approached a turnstile, whether it is Leppings
       Lane with its difficulties or anywhere else, when
       they see a queue to get into the queue? - A. That is
       correct, yes.
    Q. What happened on this occasion for that not to
       happen? Were people coming at the front or coming
       down the sides so that they did not just join the
       queue at the back? - A. It is difficult to say from
       the position I was in because obviously I was so
       close to the turnstiles. They had to be coming in
       from behind because the railing prevented them from
       coming in from the sides. They had to be coming in
       from behind but there was just such a weight of
       people that it just spread across the whole area of
D      the seven gates.
    Q. Of course, there came a time when the people at the
       front could not do anything about it? - A. That is
       correct.
    Q. There clearly came a time when the first six, seven,
       eight, nine rows of people at the front could not do
       anything about it? - A. That is correct, yes.

    Q. But in the first instance it may have been the first
       row which could not do anything about it. The second
       row would have been pushing them, is that the
       position, the third pushing the second and the fourth
       pushing the third? - A. Yes, it would be an ongoing
       effect through the crowd, yes.

    Q. Until eventually those who had been doing the pushing
       in the second, third and fourth rows would have been
       pushed themselves? - A. Yes, sir.
                    Cross-Examined bv MR. KING:

    Q. What in fact you are saying is that if you get a
       situation where the whole area between the perimeter
       gates and the turnstile area gets full of people you
       are in for trouble? - A. It is difficult to control
       from the position I was in, yes.




H
                                              G. WRIGHT


When you went to close the perimeter gate you had
said to yourself, "I have got to stop more people
coming into this area”? - A. That is correct, yes.

It had already got, to a point where people were being
crushed and it was a dangerous situation? - A. That
is correct, yes.    .
I am not criticising you for one moment for doing
what you did but when you did it the situation had
already got out of hand, had it not? - A. There were
people being forced up - I wouldn't say it was out of
hand because by closing those gates I felt that it
would restore some normality on the turnstiles.

I understand that but the effect of closing those
gates - and I repeat I am not criticising you in the
emergency you were in - was to crush the people
immediately before you whom    you wereshutting the
gates on because they were being pressurised from
behind? - A. As I said before, if you wanted to stop
a continual push, if you can reduce the depth of the
crowd then it will reduce the total force of the
crowd.
Yes, of course. The problem with the people on whom
you were shutting the gates was that they were being
pressurised from behind. You described a woman who
was crushed and who you had to rescue? - A. Yes, that
is correct.
The scene at that stage was that more and more people
were joining from behind clearly and joining the
crush? - A. I can't say what was going on behind
because I couldn't see further than the first two or
three rows.
I am interested now to go to the same point in a
different context. It became obvious to you when you
saw the disaster on the pens, and this is now when
you are by the perimeter fence, that the way to solve
the situation was to relieve the pressure from the
back. That became obvious to you? - A. That is
correct, yes.
Because the people at the front could not do
anything. They could not move back, could they? - A.
No.
Equally people in the middle - and we have seen
photographs which I am sure you can recognise the
                                                              104
                                                               * <f f



                                                    G. WRIGHT


      picture we have all been looking at - could not move
      back if the people behind them had not moved back? -
      A. I wouldn't necessarily agree with that because the
H     weight of people in the middle wasn't as heavy and
      they may have been,able to fight their way back
      through.
    Q. They may have been able to? - A. They may have been
       able to struggle their way back through.

    Q. Struggle their way through. You would agree with me
       that if you are being pressurised from behind it is
       nigh impossible for you to get back, is it not? - A.
       It is difficult but it can be done obviously.

    Q. The best way of dealing with that situation is to get
       to the back and remove the people from the back, is
       it not? - A. Yes, I would say so, yes.

    Q. You do not know - I am sure you are trying to be fair
       as we all are - how far if at all your message "Get
_      back" got back to the terraces? You just do not
D      know, do you? - A. I do know because of the reaction
        I was getting from people in the crowd at the back.

    Q. What was the noise like on that terrace? - A. It was
       quite loud. It was very loud in fact.

    Q. It has been described by others as a deafening noise?
       - A. It was very loud.

    Q. It would be a conglomeration of noise, would it
       not? - A. It was very loud but there was also actions
       as well, arm waving etc.

    Q. Yes, you cannot say - and I am sure you are trying to
       be fair - what someone at the back of that pen, what
       his view was or what he could hear? You just do not
       know, do you, because you were not there? - A. I
       wasn't at the back of the pen obviously.

    Q. I am not criticising any of your actions, Officer,
       because you acted, if I may say so - and again it
       sounds patronising - very commendably when you
       realised the situation but would it be fair to say
       that you were acting on your own initiative? - A. I
       think all Police Officers work on their own
       initiative to a degree and they are controlled to a
       greater degree.




H
                                             G. WRIGHT


Is the answer that you were acting on your
iniatitive? - A. Yes, sir.

It is not a criticism of you this at all, but did you
ever receive an order from a more senior Officer as
to what role you should play in the rescue operation?
- A. After we started, once we got into the pens, and
started pulling people back from the pens and started
attempting resuscitation on people I think we carried
one person out through the tunnel and then when I
came back into the pens that is when I was aware of
Mr. Nesbit being at the gate and trying to organise
things.
Was that your first recognition of a senior Officer
trying to organise things, Chief Superintendent
Nesbit? - A. There had been a Sergeant at the gate
with me when I was first at the gate trying to pull
people through.

I understand that but I am talking about a senior
Officer organising affairs and not acting on his own
initiative but actually trying to organise some
order. Chief Superintendent Nesbit was the first
senior Officer you remembered trying to organise
affairs? - A. He was the one at the entrance to Pen 3
and so he was the one I was most aware of and he was
the first one I was really aware of, yes.

Did you yourself hear any order sending, for example,
serial Officers round the back of the ground to the
tunnel to bring people back through the tunnel from
behind? - A. It would have been impossible for me to
hear such an order, for starters I didn't have a
personal radio, and obviously I wouldn't hear it by
any means.

           Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:

Officer, you said that most of the Officers in your
serial had left the turnstile area for a number of
different reasons? - A. That is correct, yes.

Was the senior Officer aware that these Police
Officers had left? - A. Yes. It depends what you
mean by senior Officer. Inspector Purdy certainly
was aware of that fact.

Were there any reserve Officers available who could
have taken their place at that time? - A. There were
other Officers outside at that particular time. We
                                                               106
                                                                     S   f



                                                       G. WRIGHT


         are talking about a very narrow area and there were
         Officers the other side of that railing assisting
         Inspector Purdy. It was just that I couldn't see
         them properly because I was shielded by the rest of
B        the crowd.
    Q. How many Officers were left with you when most of
       them had left, can you remember please? - A. Before I
       eventually moved to the turnstiles myself there was
       PC Huckstepp in the corner, myself and I believe
       there was another Officer but I can't be sure to my
       left.
    Q. So you got away from that area knowing there was
       crushing there. You left the fans without any
       Officer there, is that right? - A. There was no
       necessity to have an Officer being pressed up against
       the wall and any Officers there would have been
       ineffective in that situation. As I said, the
       emphasis had to be to the rear of that crowd.

    Q. Who was going to instruct those people in the front
D      in any way or make them feel more comfortable when
       the Police were leaving the area? - A. I don't see
       what instructions....
         THE CORONER:   Are you attacking this Officer for the
    action which he took?

           MRS. McBRIEN:   No, no.

           THE CORONER:    I want to be clear about that.

           MRS. McBRIEN:   No, I am not really.

         THE WITNESS:   I don't see what instructions the crowd
    required at that point. There was nothing to instruct them
    in at that particular position.

    Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   I just felt that here were some
         very distressed people and they do look to Police
         Officers for assistance when in difficulties I am
         sure? - A. Yes.

    Q. If they find you were not there, who would they turn
       to? - A. They could see Inspector Purdy up on the
       railing. He was highly visible, Inspector Purdy, and
       he was trying to direct the crowd behind them to get
       back. They could see he was doing that as I could
       see when I had been in the same position.




H
                                                             107
                                                             - *» *



                                                     G. WRIGHT


    Q. So they were looking to him for advice? - A. He was
       highly visible.
    Q. We have heard of three openings of Gate C at 2.48,
B      2.52 and 2.59 but'today you have mentioned a number
       of openings as though you.were gtfing in and out of
       that gate a few times. Is that correct? - A. All I
       can say is that after leaving the turnstiles I came
       out of Gate C, picked up the young child, took the
       young child back in via that gate and then came out
       again. That is three times I had been through it.

    Q. You knew when you left the turnstile area that there
       were crowds outside, that is why you left the area,
       and so when you were coming back through Gate C you
       would be meeting the crowd surely, wouldn't you? - A.
       No, there is a railing which separates those that are
       pressed against the turnstiles from the lane that
       runs down between the ground and the river. There is
       a railing separating them and so as I moved out
       through Gate C there was no crowd against Gate C.

D   Q. Would you say there was nobody outside Gate C at that
       time? - A. There were people around there. I can't
       say who was there. There were quite a number of
       Police Officers there, quite a number of Police
       Officers were in that general area, and I can't say
       how many altogether. There was no crush if that is
       what you mean.
    Q. Do you know the times when you did come out of Gate
       C? - A. No, I am sorry, looking at my watch was the
       last thing I was concentrating on at that stage.

    Q. There is no photographic evidence or video
       evidence? - A. I understand there is a photograph,
       there is video evidence, of the child being passed
       over the heads of the crowd and I took the child.
       You can just about see as I take the child off on the
       video.
    Q. Is that outside the turnstile area then? - A. That is
       outside the turnstiles at the railing I have
       described.
    Q. There is no evidence of you coming out of Gate C or
       going back through Gate C? - A. The time lapse
       between me coming out of Gate C and picking up the
       child we are talking about ten seconds and then
       another ten seconds in taking the child back through.




H
                                             G. WRIGHT


Was there any other way that you could have come back
from the inside of the stadium, back into the
turnstile area, without coming through an enormous
concertina gate? Was there any route you could have
taken? - A. No, that is what the concertina gates are
for, for the exit of crowds, for exit from the
ground. The gate olpviousiy isn’t fully opened if
just one person is going through it.




                       /Q. When you were coming.
                                                              109
                                                               - vf f


                                                         G. WRIGHT



    Q. When you were coming out or going in, did any fans go in
       at that time? - A. I am not aware of any fans going in at
       the times I passed through that gate.
B
    Q. Yet it was when everything was happening...

              THE CORONER:  -Well, he has answered me and he has
         answered you.   He has said he is not aware.    Perhaps I
         could help you, Mrs. McBrien.    It is quite right that we
         have been talking about three openings, but we could
         spend another three weeks proving how many openings there
         were because this gate was open and shut all afternoon,
         but we are not interested in the openings where people
         didn't get in, so the fact that there were other openings
         is neither here nor there.    It makes no difference to
         the purpose of these Inquests.

              It is fair enough to probe whether his exits and
         entries happened to be the same as the ones which we are
         interested in.   He has said, "Nobody came in with me.'
         You have seen the video, I have seen the video, we have
         all seen the video. The jury has seen the video.    They
D        will make an assessment as to whether or not this officer
         would have missed the people who came through it at
         14.48, 14.52 and 14.59.   He has said as far as he is
         aware nobody came through with him and you must accept
         his reply.
    Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   When you came through tne gate, it
         would need to be unlocked?   It is a gate that is
         padlocked?   It is bolted, it is padlocked? - A. I don|t
         know the exact nature of the lock but I understand it is
         released by a catch on the inside and there are always
         stewards on the gate who release the lock from the
         inside.
    Q. Did the    steward unlock the gate for you to useit? - A. I
       believe    so.   I    am rushing towards the gate with a young
       child in   my arms so I think another officer knocked on
       the gate   to make sure the steward opened it for me.

    Q. What about going in through Gate C, how do you do that? -
       A. That is what     I mean, going in.     Going in.I believe
       there is also a window in the gate so that the steward
       can see who is exactly outside that gate.

              MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you.

              MR. PAYNE:   Sir, the police constable told Mr. King
         that he knew his message got back when he was addressing
         the crowd in the pens because of the reaction he got from
         the back.   I was wondering if you would ask him what the
         reaction was?




H
                                                          .110
                                                                 vf f


                                                     G. WRIGHT


                     Further by THE CORONER:

•.Q. Just repeat was the action was? - A. It is difficult to
     exactly describe. One gets more of an impression from
     the behaviour..   I was directing my comments towards the
     rear of the crowd and I was getting arm gesticulations
     and shouts at me and I could see they were specifically
     aimed at me.    It is difficult to described an actual
     atmosphere, but I could definitely tell that they
     understood I was shouting at them.

 Q. Would it be fair to say that it was your impression that
    that was what was happening? - A. It is obviously an
    impression one gets, because one can't hear specific
    words, but it was a very strong impression.

                        Further by MR. KING:

 Q. Officer, I must take issue with you on this. Are you_
    saying you can make a sensible assessment of a pen which
    on any view is crowded with deafening noise, of whether
    or not the people at the back have heard and understood
    what you are saying amid this deafening noise? - A. I was
    pointing for them to go up the tunnel, to leave the^pen,
    and I was getting a reaction that told me they didn't
    intend to do that.
 Q. I understand what you say you were doing on the perimeter
    fence area.   What I am saying is how on earth can you
    know one way or the other what the reaction of the people
    at the back means unless you were there? - A. It is an
    impression, as I said to the Coroner, that one gets, that
    people have understood that when I point to them to go
    through the tunnel and they are waving at me to the
    effect meaning "No."
 Q. How do you know they were just not waving in any event,
    not having heard you at all?   How do you know that? - A.
    It is difficult to describe individual actions.   I can't
    remember specific actions but as I say, it is a strong
    impression I received.
 Q. Notwithstanding deafening noise and the mayhem that was
    going on in that crowded pen? - A. That is correct.

         MR. KING:      Thank you.

         THE CORONER:      Thank you, officer.

         That's it for today. Tomorrow is Friday.    Shall we
    start at half past nine?   Shall we do what we did last
    week, go through and then we will finish?   It isn't that
    much earlier, but it appears earlier.
                                               G. WRIGHT


             (In the absence of the jury)

     THE CORONER:   Tomorrow we will carry on with the
names of the people I gave you yesterday, plus or minus
the video, depending on how we do.   Just to remind you
it is Police Sergeant Proctor, Pqlice Sergeant Scholey
and Police Constable Taylor.
     MRS. McBRIEN: This morning after the witness
Mr. Milton, when he had left I did think of another
question I would have liked to have asked which I think
is very important.   I was wondering if there was any
possibility of his being recalled?

     THE CORONER:   I am very reluctant to do that.   If
you would like to let me have a sight of the question, I
will assess it and if I really think it is vital.   I am
not saying I will never recall a witness because
occasionally it may be necessary, but particularly with
Mr. Milton I am reluctant to do it for various reasons.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   It is in relation to something he
said, his actual words.
     THE CORONER:   If you would be kind enough to let me
have a note of the question you have in mind or you can
tell me what the question is now.
     MRS. McBRIEN:   I haven't actually got the words
here in front of me.
     THE CORONER:   Why don't you sort it out this
evening and then I will look at it and take some decision
on it?
     MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you, sir.
     THE CORONER:   If we can get through these Inquests
without recalling a witness I think we will be lucky, so
you may be the first one, but I don't want to do it if I
can possibly avoid it.
     (The Inquests were adjourned until 9.30 the
                  following morning.)
