HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

           STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

         (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                   At

             The Town Hall,
               Shef field.

                   On

           27th November, 1990




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                             INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                     Page

     R.J.    THOMPSON Sworn

             By The Coroner                           1
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Hale            13
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Payne           13
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Manning         21
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. King            24
             Cross-Examined   by Mrs. McBrien        29
             Cross-Examined   b y 'M r . Russell     30
             Further by The   Coroner                33

     P.P. LOWE Sworn

             By The Coroner                          36
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne             47
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning           49
             Further Cross-Examined by Mr.   Payne   51
             Cross-Examined by Mr. King              51
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole         56
             Cross-Examined by Miss Addelmann        57
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell           58
             Further by The Coroner                  60

     P.P.    LOWE Recalled

             Further by The Coroner                  63
             Further Cross-Examined by Mr.  Payne    63
             Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning   65

    A.J.     BENNETT Sworn

             By The Coroner                          66
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Payne           78
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Manning         82
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. King            84
             Cross-Examined   by Mrs. McBrien        87
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Russell         87
             Further by The   Coroner                89

     A.P.    JONES Sworn

             By The Coroner                           89
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Hale             91
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Payne            91
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Manning          96
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. King            101
             Cross-Examined   by Mrs. McBrien        108
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Russell         109
             Further by The   Coroner                111

DISCUSSION                                           113
              SEVENTH DAY* S PROCEEDINGS

             TUESDAY, 27th NOVEMBER, 1990

    THE CORONER:    I think we will start with our first
witness.    Before we call our first witness, Mr. King,
you raised yesterday - quite properly, it is not in^ any
sense a criticism - with one of the witnesses, I think it
was Sergeant Lomas, the number of pubs which were in the
area.    Of course, he was a Doncaster man and in the end
I had to say he did not know, but I think it is an^
interesting point.    I have been toying with that issue
myself, but as it has been raised we are going to
research it. We think we have got the answers to this
question in the system and we have got an officer who we
think has already done all the work so we are going to
get a statement out. We are going to get him to verify
the information and we will call him and he will tell us
what his research was on that point and at least we will
know, if nothing else.

    I can't tell you when that will b e — and I don't
think it matters very much precisely the timing.

    Richard Joseph Thompson.

            RICHARD JOSEPH THOMPSON Sworn

                   Bv THE CORONER;

You are Richard Joseph Thompson of
    , Liverpool, is that right? - A. That is correct.

I know you had a wasted day in a sense yesterday and I am
very sorry, h u t we didn't do it on purpose, that's all I
can say.   Now             is a pub, I take it, m
Liverpool? - A. Yes, I am a licensee.

On this day, the 15th of April, 1989, you were coming to
Sheffield because you wanted to watch the semi-final? -
A. Yes.

You came down, I think, by car with your son? - A. Yes.

You had a ticket because you were season ticket holders?
- A. My two sons were.   One son wasn't coming and I took
his seat.

You left Liverpool at about 12 noon? - A. Approximately
between eleven and twelve o'clock, yes.
                                     R. J .   THOMPSON



You drove, I think you say in your statement, you drove
straight to Sheffield without stopping except you were
held up at a place called Woodhead, is that right? - A.
That is correct, yes.

There were some road works at this place? - A. I am not
sure of the districts and the layouts, but actually it
was a roundabout.  We came up to a roundabout and that
was the point where everything seemed to be congested,
coming off the motorway.

You arrived in Sheffield at 2.30? - A. I actually got
outside the actual ground itself in towards the crowd at
approximately twenty minutes, quarter of an hour before
the kick-off, which would be about twenty to three,
quarter to three.

What time did you arrive in Sheffield?   What time did
you park? - A. To be quite honest with you I would not
know, really.   Actually, I am not even sure of the name
of the road where we parked but I can say it was on the
main road coming in and there was a police station
opposite.

Well, it doesn't matter because I don't expect you to
remember... - A. I would say it would take us
approximately ten minutes, quarter of an hour, to walk
from there to walk from there.

So we can work it out backwards, so to speak? - A. That's
correct.

In fact you said it was about a mile from the football
ground? - A. Yes.

So you walked towards the ground, with your son, of
course, and you arrived at between twenty and quarter to?
- A. That is quite correct.

On the walk did you see fans? - A. Oh, yes.

What was their demeanour or nature? - A. Happy.

I am not talking about you, I am talking about the
others. - A. Just normal fans' reactions - happy to be
going, hoping they were going to win - that type of
situation.

Did you see anybody carrying cans of alcohol? - A. Oh,
yes.

If you visualise them, was it very few, 25%, 50%, 7.5%,
what sort of... - A. It is a situation really where you
                                     R.   J.   THOMPSON


se 6 people and you don't take an awful lot of notice,
like.    You are walking along.   There were definitely
people carrying cans but I wouldn't like to put any sort
of a figure eon it.

So you arrived at the ground at 14.40, 14.45? - A. Yes.

What met your sight when you got there? - A. Just a mass
of people.

Was this mass outside the perimeter gates?   Do you know
Hillsborough, by the way, or was this your first visit? -
A. No, I had been before.

Did you know there were outer perimeter gates and then..,
- A. Not that particular section, because the section I
had been in before was in the stands and not at that
particular end.   It was new to me that particular end of
the ground.

Let's go back to what you were saying. There were
crowds, you say, when you got there? - A. Yes.

There is such a thing as a crowd and a crowd.    Was it a
large crowd or a small crowd?   What sort of crowd was
it? - A. Well, there were quite a lot of people trying to
get in but it soon got to a situation where you were not
particularly bothered about getting in.    You were
worrying about yourself because even outside it was bad.
To be quite honest with you, I don't even know how many
turnstiles there are to get through.    I was more
concerned about myself than worrying about getting in, to
be honest with you.

Tell me why that...   I understand what you are saying
but I want you to tell me why you were worried about
yourself? - A. Because it was quite obvious you weren't
going to get through those turnstiles.

Yes. - A. Because there was absolutely no organisation of
any description, queues or anything like that.   There
was no-one to...   The only person that I actually saw
who was trying to bring some sort of order, I don't know
whether he was a police sergeant or a police constable on
a horse.   He was the only one trying to get some sort of
order, but there was absolutely no sort of order, with
any queues of any description.   You go to normal matches
and obviously the police are there, or stewards and they
are making you line up.   There is some sort of order,
but on this particular occasion there was absolutely no
order whatsoever.

Are you saying that there were no queues? - A. Oh, there
were no queues, no.
                                      R. J .   THOMPSON


Yo(i saw one police officer on a horse - you don't know
what rank he was but that is neither here nor there -
attempting to make... - A. ...some sort of order.

Apart from that you saw nobody else who appeared to be
doing anything with regard to that? - A. None whatsoever,
no.

Were the people in this crowd pressing forward? - A. You
didn't have much choice because you had that many people
coming on the back of you.    As you can appreciate, you
are standing in a crowd and you have obviously got a
fence of some description up there and the people are up
against there it is obvious the pressure is going to
become greater outside.    It is just one of those
situations where no-one can do anything about that. What
it really needed was somebody, or some authority of some
description, to start at the back of the cro^d and start
lashing them down the street.

You don't think that people on their own initiative are
capable of seeing that if there is an obstruction that
they ought to hold up? - A. I would say yes, but in a
situation like that, no, because everybody is trying to
get in.

Eventually I think a large gate opened? - A. That is
quite correct.

In fact it was a gate at the   side which we know as Gate
C, do you agree with that? -   A. Well, I didn't know
exactly what gate it was but   I know exactly what side of
the ground it was on because   I was there.




                 Q. You went through it
                                             R. J. THOMPSON
    /
Q. You went through it? - A. I actually went through the
   gate, yes.

Q. Were you at the beginning, middle or end? - A. I was
   probably I would say within the first hundred people
   to walk through that gate.

Q. You were quite close to the gate? - A. I was quite
   close to the fence, yes.

Q. Can you just recollect when you went through the gate
   whether it was fully open or partially open? - A. I
   think they more or less opened them right away but I
   would not like to state categorically whether they
   were or not but as far as I am concerned they were
   open.

Q. I am not ...? - A. I am not trying to say even a
   little bit.  I am just thinking to myself that they
   were wide open.

Q. You cannot absolutely certainly say so? - A. No, no,
   I wouldn't definitely swear to that particular point,

Q . At that time what did you feel about the opening of
    that gate? Did you feel relieved or what? - A. It is
    quite straightforward.  In my own honest opinion if
    somebody had not opened them gates I think you would
    have had a lot more deaths on your hands because it
    was quite obvious from where we were standing that
    the actual fencing of the gate or whatever system it
    was, I do not really know, it was swaying about and
    it was quite obvious if somebody did not do something
    it would have gone and it is as simple as that,  I am
    afraid you would have had a lot more deaths on your
    hands. Well, I feel that way anyhow.

Q. In other words, from where you were standing, from
   your observation you felt it was the only thing to do
   to avoid injuries at that place? - A. I think so,
   yes.

Q. I want to move on from that. You have got through
   these gates and you I think headed towards the
   tunnel? - A. It was not a case of heading towards a
   tunnel.  It was a case of there was nobody there to
   direct you to tell you which side. There was nobody
   saying, "There was 1, 2, 3, 4 entrances" or whatever
   the case may be. What we actually seen was people
   walking down the tunnel and it is obvious that
   everyone is going to make for the same area.
                                                          6




                                              R. J. THOMPSON
      /
Q. I am not criticising you in any sense of the word. -
   A. No, I was just saying that everybody seemed to be
   heading towards the tunnel.

Q.   You did notknow the ground? - A. No.

Q.    Nobody else was there to tell you where else to go
     and so you just followed everybody else? - A. To be
     quite honest with you, I think I only seen one
     steward actually there inside the actual gates after
     they opened the gates.

Q. Was he near the gate as a matter of interest?    Can
   you remember? - A. Which, the actual tunnel?

Q. The concertina gate through which you entered into
   the ground.  Is that where you saw the steward? - A.
   He was just the other side of the gate, yes.

Q. You got to the tunnel. Just describe very briefly
   what it was like when you got into it? - A. As I say,
   we didn't even have to run across. We just walked
   down and walked towards the tunnel.

Q. The tunnel was relatively clear at that point? - A.
   At that particular point. Naturally there were
   people walking down. There was movement, you know
   what I mean, and I just hit something black and the
   tunnel was actually dark.  I am not the best of
   sighted and I took my glasses off and I actually went
   like that and I put them in my hand like that
   (demonstrating) and I just said to my son, "If you
   come across any steps or anything just give me a
   knock" because I could not see.

Q. Yes, I understand.  You then got to the other end of
   the tunnel, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you remember which side you went? Did you go
   left or right? - A. As we went into the tunnel we
   went slightly left.

Q . When you got out of the tunnel you remained on the
    left hand side? - A. I am afraid we didn't have any
    option.

Q. Why was that? You said it was not too bad in the
   tunnel from what you have just told me? - A. That is
   quite correct.

Q. Can you just tell me why when you got nearer to the
   exit of the tunnel you say you did not have any
                                                         7




                                              R. J. THOMPSON
      /

     option? - A. Because it was quite obvious it was
     full.

Q. It was full? - A. Yes, I mean you just could not go
   anywhere. I walked in approximately no further than
   from here to the end of the gentleman sitting at the
   end.

Q. At the end? - A. Yes, approximately.  I did not even
   get to him.  I was actually moved on. There was not
   even that sort of area of space.  It was just a case
   of being pushed through people.  It was just a case
   then of a dead end. You just could not go either
   left, right or anywhere.

Q. At that point you came to a stop? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you recollect whether the players were on the
   pitch at that point? - A. I think at the time they
   were warming up.

Q. I take it you were anxious to get in because you
   wanted to see the match, of course? - A. I am afraid
   that once I got in I was not particularly worried
   about anybody.

Q. Initially when you were going down the tunnel? - A.
   Naturally, yes.

     MISS ADDELMANN: Sir, I wonder if the witness could
sit a little nearer the microphone?

Q.        THE CORONER:   Could you sit a little bit
     further forward because the mikes are very good
     provided you get near enough to them. - A. Yes.

Q. Having got to the position which you have described -
   and I shall show you a little plan and ask you to put
   a cross on it so that we know as near as possible
   where it was - what happened then? What did you see
   or hear? - A. What actually happened was that my son
   just turned round to me, and in fact I still had my
   glasses in my hand, and he said, words to this effect
   because I do not really remember the exact words,
   "Dad, we are in a mess here", just like that. He
   said, "Move to the left" but you just could not move
   anywhere. There was no way you could move.   It was
   completely solid. From that point on as regards
   players, pitch or anything else, I do not know
   anything about because it was just a sheer case of
   fighting for your life from that point on.
                                             R. J. THOMPSON

Q. Did you attempt go to back out of the tunnel? - A.
   You had no chance of going anywhere.

Q. So you did not? - A. Nothing whatsoever. You could
   not move backwards, forwards, Sidewards or anywhere.

Q. Did you hear people around you calling out to others
   to move back? - A. TO be quite honest with you, as I
   say quite honestly, we were that concerned because
   the pressure was becoming greater.  I am getting on a
   bit and I was puffing and panting.  I was fighting
   for my breath and I wasn't particularly bothered
   about anybody to be quite honest with you.

Q. I am not asking about you? - A. All I could hear was
   noise and that was it. Just people shouting and
   screaming. What they were shouting or anything else, -
   to be quite frank with you, I don't know.   I would
   not doubt that they were shouting "Get back'*.

Q. Pardon? - A. I would not doubt that they were
   shouting "Get back".

Q. The reason why I ask is that in your statement you
   say there was screaming? - A. Yes.

Q. I will read to you what you say:

   "At this time people around me were screaming at
   others still in the tunnel to turn back as there was
   no room but the crowd kept coming to the point where
   there was a surge of people-"

   As I say I am not too concerned.   I am interested in
   getting at the truth? - A. Yes.

Q. It does not matter in a sense what is written here
   and what you tell me. What I want you to do is to
   tell me, as best as you are able, what you remember
   to be the truth of that incident? - A. Yes.

Q. If you go back to what I have just read, whatever it
   is, was that at the position you have just described
   where you have come to a dead end? - A. I am sorry,
   would you repeat that please?

Q. When you heard the people screaming, whatever they
   said, was this at the position which you have
   described to me a few moments ago when you had got to
   just past the gentleman at the end, so to speak, in
   distance? - A. Yes. Actually they were all round me
   and even at the back of me.
                                          R. J. THOMPSON


Having now read that to you can you remember whether
you did hear people say to people "Get back"? - A. I
would imagine they would do, yes.

You cannot really remember? - A. Not at this point,
no.

In the passage which I have just read to you, Mr.
Thompson, you used the word "surge"? - A. Yes.

You have described the difficulty with breathing and
so on. Can you recollect whether you remember a
surge coming behind you? •‘-A. Oh yes, yes. There is
no question about that.

In fact, were you then carried     further forward?-A.
Actually what happened then was, as I say, my son
made that comment and there was shouting and
screaming all round us. At that point then when my
son said that he said, "Try to move to the left".
There was a surge from the back and I got pushed
forward and I actually wound up with two fractured
ribs at that point.

You hit the barrier? - A. I hit the barrier,  t
didn't know the barrier was there. It wasn't
obvious, you know, and I just hit the barrier and I
wound up with two fractured ribs at that point.  I
managed somehow, and I do not know to this day how it
happened, I just actually spun round at the back of
the barrier with my back to the pitch facing the
tunnel.

At that point you could not see what was goingon.
In fact, you have already told me you have no
recollection of what was happening anywhere else? -
A. No, none whatsoever, no.




                         /Q.   Your son fortunately.
                                                                 10



                                                  R.   J.   THOMPSON




Q. Your son, fortunately for you, remained close by, did
   he not? A. As it happened, as I got pushed round to
   the other side, I got spun right round and I ended up
   on the other side of the actual barrier, ray son
   actually wound up on the end of the barrier, right on
   the end of it. But even he did not know that he was at
   the end of the barrier, as you can appreciate with all
   the people who were there.

Q. Because there were a lot of people there? A. Yes, and
   I am just screaming to him to throw himself to the
   left, that is right, to his left because we were
   standing facing the pitch, or he was - I wasn't.   I was
   just screaming to him to throw himself to the left, but
   he didn't actually because the next performance, there
   was another surge of people and he just wound up right
   next to the side of me.

Q.    I see, and then I do not know that we need to go into
     the details but you were helped to be lifted up and
     were you passed forward, can you remember? A. NOj I
     actually crawled on my hands and knees over people s
     heads.

Q. Were you crawling to the side or to the front, can you
   remember? A. I am not exactly sure of the layout of
   the thing, but the actual gate onto the pitch, whether
   it was just one of those things that was meant to be or
   not, I don't know, but I was actually right facing that
   particular thing, so I actually didn't have to go in
   any diagonal or anywhere, I just went straight.

Q.    Fortuitously you were in line   with it? k.   I was
     actually more or less in line    with the actual gate,
     yes.

Q. Did you get out through that gate?      A.     I actually got
   out through that gate, yes.

Q. Did you manage to do it by yourself, or were you pulled
   through? A.   I managed to get to it and then I just
   fell onto the pitch.

Q. Your son, of course, was     still inside at    that time?     A.
   My son was still inside,     yes.

Q. Then fortunately a policeman, I think it was, helped to
   pull him out, is that right? A. Actually he was told
   to get back in actually.  What happened was I looked
   back up into the ground and he was actuallysat on
   people s heads and I am screaming and shouting for him
   to get out but he obviously could not hear me and at
   that particular time I didn't even know anyhow his legs
                                          R.   J.   THOMPSON




were trapped and he couldn't get out and somebody in
the crowd just heaved him up and ---

I am sorry, I missed that last bit. A. Somebody
heaved him up by his legs and he actually came rolling
straight down the crowd and he wound up stretched with
his hands and his complete body lying on people's heads
with his hands outstretched, approximately about a foot
to 18 inches off the gate, and I was just standing^
there and just shouting to the policeman to help him to
get out and the policeman was shouting at him to get
back because I do not think he realised at that point
how serious things were.   Anyhow, I will be quite
frank with you, I was walking up and I'll be honest
with you if he hadn't pulled him out I was going to
poke him, or thump him. As it happened a police lady
walked in between me and the constable and she started
to pull him out and then the policeman helped him.
Once I saw him hit the floor, I just turned away and I
was just thankful and relieved. My son was on the
ground then.

Can I just ask you, when your lad came out, do you
recollect whether the game was still in progress,
because by that time in a sense your immediate worry
was over, though of course there was tragedy all round
you? Can you remember whether the game was still in
progress at that point? A. To be quite honest with
you, the game was on, but I was actually just on the
inside of the penalty area, actually fell into there,
and the game as far as I know was still going on. I
don't remember seeing players, the ball, or anything.
I was in that much pain by that time.

So are you saying then that by the time you got into
the penalty area and your son had actually got^out,
this was still at the point when the game was in
progress? A. Yes.

You have mentioned that the police officer said, "Get
back"? A. Yes.

Was he   shouting this "Get back", or what was he doing?
A. He    was just shouting and waving, "Get back".

One other thing I want to ask you and then I think I
have probably finished. When you were outside and your
son was inside - do you remember you mentioned this -
and you said, "I called to him to get out"? A.. Yes.

Can you say how close you were to him at that time?
How near was he to the outer perimeter fence? A. When
he was   actually sat on people s heads?
                                          R.   J.    THOMPSON




Yes, that is right, when you were shouting at him and
wanting to come but he could not because his legs were
trapped, do you remember, you told me that a few
minutes ago? A. If anybody in the Court room knows
the actual distances, I don't know, but I am only
guessing from distances, but I was approximately I
would say - - if anybody is here and knows the first
barrier after the entrance from the tunnel, he was
actually there, so it was quite a long way.

He was still a long way back? A. He was still a long
way back. He had no chance of hearing me.

That is what I am trying to find out.   A. Yes, he had
no chance of hearing me.

I am trying to find out how close you were.     A.    Yes.

If you would turn round and walk to the officer and put
the terracing up, can you orientate yourself? A. Yes.

Can you point out which is Enclosure 4, which is where
the gentleman was? Show me where you came to your
stop. Put a cross if you can. A. I was actually
right at the end of that barrier, so you can see the
distance from that barrier actually coming down to that
gate is quite a considerable distance.

Indeed. That is the same position, more or less, where
your son was when you were trying to shout to him, is
that right? A. Exactly at that point. He was still
at that point, just sat on people s heads in front,
yes.

Do you remember, you told me you came in and you
managed to get in a little way and then you came to a
sort of full-stop. Where was that? Was that that
position, or a little bit higher up? A. It was
slightly higher, probably about two lines higher.

Put a circle there? A. It would be slightly more to
the left of my cross, as I wound up getting shoved
forward and then round that corner at that barrier. I
hit that barrier on the end.

Can you just put a circle where that first stop
position was which you have just described? You have
said exactly the same position.  I am trying to find
out where your first position was when you got into the
pen. We will take the cross as being the first
position and the cross with the circle as being the
second position which you have marked. Can you come
back. A. Yes.
                                                                  13

                                                    R. J .   THOMPSON'




             THE CORONER:   That is C293.

                     Cross-Examined by HR. HALE

Q. You have been to nany matches before,       I assurae? 7 A.      -
   Yes.

Q. The crushing that occurred outside the turnstiles on
   this occasion, had you ever experienced crushing like
   that before? - A. No.

Q. The pressure was obviously very great there? - A. Yes.

Q. Was it contained only by the structure of the
   turnstiles? - A. Oh, yes.

0. If they hadn't been tnere what would nave happened to
   that crowd of people? - A. uell if they had collapsed
   they would have all died, X think.

Q.   Ho, assume tnat there was some less substantial
     structure there, say crowd barriers, you know, the
     portable kind, or even a line of Policemen standing
     across trying to hold that crowd back, would they have
     succeeded? - A. I aa not really sure what you are
     really after.  It there nad been anything less .strong
     than tnat it would have gone.

Q.    It would have gone? - A. Yes.

Q.   Yes, that is what Iwas asking    you, because when you
     got inside the tunnel and onto the stand, the stand
     itself is fairly wide, although it is divided down into
     segments,  was it tne sarae sort of pressure that cane
     from behind when you were down on the stand as the
     pressure tnat you had experienced at the turnstiles? -
     A. No, the pressure inside was greater.

0   .Thank    you.

                     Cross-Examined by fIR. PAYNE

Q. Mr. Thompson, on the question of the atteapts to
   control the crowd outside the turnstiles, I wonder if
   you can be shown so,Tie photographs, please, beginning
   witn tne Coroner's number 282.

     iirl. .PAYNE: I a® not sure if this in in the Jury's
     bundle, sir.   It was not part or tne original bundle,
     out it is the one whica was produced ....

          THE CORONER:      We have got it up on tne screen
     anyway.
                                         R. J .   THOMPSON




     MR. PAYNE:    Mr. Thompson, this photograph you are
looking at is of Leppings Lane, a short distance away
from the ground, and it is taken at 25-past-2, which is
about 20 lainutes, 25 minutes before you arrived at the
ground. - A. Quite correct.                       '

So can we take it froa your evidence that by the tirae
you arrived the queue of people didn't look anything
like that? - A. Host certainly did not.

And at that tirae, as we can see in that photograph,
there were - well in this particular photograph we can
see a Police horse in about the middle of the picture,
and then one just partly hidden by the bus on the left
hand side? - A. Yes.

And also a number of Policeman? - A. That is quite
correct.

Who haven't got very ouch- to do in that photograph,
sorne of theta? - A. That's right. They must have all
gone for tea.

well, tne crowd is approaching in a queue down tne
pavenent, isn't it? - A. Yes.

How the point is that by the time there was such a huge
crowd as when you arrived at about quarter or lO-to- 3 ,
were you able to see into the crowd, I mean to see who
was there and where the Police were? - A. Actually, as
I stated before, there was no queue of that description
when we were actually at that point.

Ho. - A. You see where it has got "Dunlop" on tne side
of the wall?

Yes. - A. Is chat the part that tnen goes towards the


Ho, it is one street back from that. - A. iiell, all
that I know is the particular street that I walked down
towards the actual entrances to the ground, there was
no queues and the people were just walking normally, no
bother of any description, they were just walking down.
It was when you actually turned into - as I say, I
don't know the layout of the roads and all the rest of
it » but actually as we walked down all that I can
remenber, it actually corae like that, sort of towards
the turnstiles, so when we arrived we just walked
along, and actually turned slightly and the turnstiles
then were down at the bottom like that. So there was
none of that whatsoever when we arrived.   We just
walked to that point where all the people trying to get
in were in a mass outside these particular turnstiles.
                                                         15

                                              R. J. THOMPSON




Q. Ves.   We hav e n ’t found out froaj which direction you
   approached the ground. - A. Well, that's what I am
   saying.   I am not sure, you see, of the names of the
   roads.   We came from Woodhead way, so if anybody could
   help ine with the naae of the faain road tnat's running
   down, I don't know. All I know is there was a Police
   Station opposite where we parked.

0 . Do you know if you came over a bridge?   No, you
     probably wouldn't know that.

          THE CORONER:   Try the roundabout with the petrol
     station.

Q.        HR. PAYNE:   Do you remember passing a roundabout?
     Walking past a roundabout and then down which would
     take you down Leppings Lane? You probably don't know
     the name of the road. - A. Somehow 1 nave got a feeling
     that 1 can remember a bridge actually.  It was quite a
     main road that we actually walked down.

0 . 0o you remember going past a park, which is
     Hillsborough Park? - A. To be quite honest with you I
     wouldn't like to say yes or no to anything like that.
     All I know is it was a big main road tnat we actually
     walked down towards it. All I can say is when we
     actually got down, heading towards the ground, from
     this particular main road, if that would help, we
     turned right, if that could help at all.

Q. Did you turn sligntly back on yourself then? - A. well,
   I would suggest, if you can just watch my aands, that
   we are walking along the particular road like tnis - I
   beg your pardon, we didn't turn —   did I say I turned
   right or left?

Q. Right. - A. Right, that is quite correct.  As we came
   along we turned right and walked along a narrow road
   with terraced houses.  I can remember terraced houses
   somewhere in that particular road, and walking along
   and then we sort of hit the end of the terraced houses
   and just slight left turn, and tnis is where the actual
   gates were.

Q. You turned left into the ground? - A. we seemed to walk
   along this particular road and turned slightly like
   _that. As I say, I am not sure of the layouts of the
   roads or anything.

Q. No, we can find out though, I think.  Having gone down
   througn some terraced houses .... - A. t»e turned right,
   we walked down the road and then turned left.
                                              R. J .   THOMPSON




Q.   Then you turned left, well that looks like coming      down
     Leppings Lane. - A. As I say, I am not: sure.

Q. Very well.  I want just to follow the sequence.  You
   have told us your arrival time was about'20 or quarter-
   to-3? - A. Approximately, yes.

Q.   And that is when you saw that there was a mass    of
     people at the gates? - A. At the gates, yes.

Q-   Then you got to join the crowd? - A. Yes, over on the
     right hand side where the actual gates wound up being
     opened, we were actually on that side of it.

Q. Then eventually you had got to get in? - A. That's
   right, yes.

Q. Then they opened the gate, so by the time you got in,
   how long had that taken you then, from the time you
   arrived? - A. Actually, I wouldn't say we were all that
   long, because we were in the ground for a warm up. The
   only reason we got in so quick is because the gates had
   opened, and I happened to be, and my son, were on that
   side, so if the warm up time will give you
   approximately the time, it was probably quarter of an
   hour or so, I should imagine, even though there was
   such a mass of people.  I probably got in quicker than
   some of the people that had been waiting there.

Q. So, does that sound like about 5-to-3 that you actually
   got in? - A. As I say, if anybody knows what time the
   lads came out to warm up, that would give you the time,
   but I wouldn't know.

Q. Right, well I am going to ask you to look at a
   photograph which is timed at about 5-to~3.  That
   actually happens to be a photograph that we have got of
   that time, and it sounds as if it is about the time
   that you are talking about.

        MR. PAYNE:   Sir, this is a photograph which has
   not yet been put in.  It is in the South Yorkshire
Police Composite Album 1 and its number, 32A, in bundle
   MWL/10, so I wonder if we can follow the previous
   procedure, whereby those of us who have got these
   bundles can share them with the Jury and yourself and
   the Witness, so that everybody has a chance to look at
   this photograph?

          THE CORONER:   Can I just look at it please?


                  /MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I am going to ask ....
                                                                   17

A

                                                  R. J. THOMPSON



              MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I am going to ask the witness also
B        to look at one other in that bundle,* which is 34A.   Sir,
         it is open at 32A, and I would like him also   to look at
         34A, which is a minute later.

              THE CORONER:   Let's number these then, MWL.10/32A
         is C.294.   The other one was MWL.10/34A, that would be
         C.295.

              MR. PAYNE:   It is suggested we might have a
         photograph of Mr. Thompson and it is not one  of theones
         I have asked to be copied.

              MR. KING:   It is not my idea.^  I give the credit
         to Mr. Catchpole who suggested it might be.

               THE CORONER:     Show it to Mr. Thompson.

               MR. PAYNE:     It is 33A, is the one we are looking
D        at.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   Just have a look while we are waiting
         and see whether that is in fact a photograph of you? - A.
         No, that's not me.

               MR. KING:      It was worth a try, sir.

              THE WITNESS:   They always say you have got a
         double, don't they?    He's fatter than me!

              THE CORONER:   34A is C.295.    Would^you pass this
         bundle back to Mr. King, please.   I am going to ask you
         in a moment to tell us what time that is.

              MR. PAYNE:   I have got a note of it, sir.   It is
         timed at 14.55, but actually the clock is wrong and I
         think it is one minute early.   It should be 14.54, if it
         matters:

    Q. Can I ask you a question about that, Mr. Thompson.   Just
       turn and look at the photograph. - A. Would you like me
       to walk to it because I am not sure of the layout of that
       particular thing.

    Q. If you would.    Mr. Thompson, we are standing there just
       outside the gate that you probably went through, the gate
       is just off the photograph to the right. - A. Over this
       side, are we?

    Q. Yes.   The ground is behind you, where you are standing
       there.   It is behind you and to your right, the football
       ground itself.   It is behind where you are standing now



H
                                                                 18



                                           R.   J.   THOMPSON


     anti to your right. - A. Can you just explain to me.
     Where are the actual turnstiles on this...

Q.    The turnstiles are just round the corner of that brick
     wall which you can see in the foreground.    They are
     round there to the right.    A. They are round to the
     right hand side?

Q. Just round that corner out of sight out of sight. - A.
   Right.

Q. The place where you probably approached the ground is
   down that street, which we are looking more or less
   straight down the street in the background. - A. Yes.

Q. With terrace houses on both sides. - A. Yes.

Q. That's Leppings Lane.   As you come on down through the
   crowd you can just make out some blue railings there? -
   A. That's right.

Q. In fact they do go right across, although the gates are
   open, some of the gates are open.   So you must have come
   through those gates and you probably came towards the
   camera and made your way round the corner where in fact
   you can see those people are advancing.    We don't know
   where they are going but I can tell you that they are
   going through an open gate in that brick wall just out of
   sight off the picture and that is where you went into the
   ground. - A. Where is the actual tunnel from that point?

Q. That is inside the gates.   Have a look at the model.
   Now where the officer is pointing now, that is the gate
   which is just off the picture to the right. - A. Is that
   the gate that was actually opened?

Q.   That is right. - A. Yes.

Q.   There is the tunnel which you are being shown now.         - A.
     That is where I went down.

Q. That's inside the ground.   Now what I want to ask you is
   about what happened outside the ground and about the
   police attempts to control the crowd.   I want to do it
   by looking at that photograph.   Now that is five minutes
   to three, so that might be within five minutes either way
   of when you went through Gate C.   It's round about that
   time. - A. So what you are actually saying now that at
   five to three, this is the actual gate that was opened,
   was it?   Is this the actual gate that was opened for the
   people to come down to walk in?

Q. Where you are pointing... - A. Is that the actual gate
   that was opened?
                                                             19



                                        R.   J.   THOMPSON


Q. That is one of the perimeter blue gates. - A. What I am
   asking is, is that the gate that was opened because from
   that point on I can tell you that the gate is not on
   there.   All I know is - I am giving an example now,
   wherever the turnstiles ate;-..  The turnstiles are not
   on this.

Q. Mr. Thompson, just follow the question, please, because I
   want to ask you about a particular point about attempting
   to control the crowd outside because you have told the
   court that the crowd was not organised into queues to
   queue up for the turnstiles.   That is the point I am
   asking you about.   If you look at that photograph I want
   to just have a look around and see what the police are
   trying to do.   In the very foreground, there is a
   policeman who looks as if he is running or advancing - on
   the left hand side of the picture.    That one.   He has
   got his back to us.   Now he is going towards the crowd.
   If you look on the right   hand front corner youcan see  a
   policeman's helmet. - A. Yes.

Q. I think there is one right on the edge there.   There are
   two policemen there.   Now they are on foot. - A. Yes.

Q. If you look into the crowd in the middle of the picture
   you can see some police helmets standing up above the
   crowd.   There is one there, that is in the crowd.
   There are some policemen which the officer is pointing
   to, actually embedded in   the crowd. - A.   Yes.

Q. If you move the pointer over to the left we cometo the
   horsemen.   There are about five there in the group
   there. - A. Yes.

Q. There is a policeman right on the corner there.   Now
   let's go out to the perimeter fence, and they are by the
   blue gate.  There is a dark patch, we are not quite sure
   what that is.   Oh, yes, it is a policeman facing us.
   You can see his white helmet and his shoulder flash and
   he is looking towards the camera.   Do you see that? " A .
   Yes.

Q. Immediately behind him, slightly above his head, there is
   another policeman on another horse.  Do you see that? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Now you can follow the line out to the left. - A. Yes.

Q. Another line of policemen there, so it looks as if it is
   outside the perimeter fence.   You have got five,
   possibly six, policemen and they are sitting on a line of
   horses, do you see that? - A. Yes.
                                        R. J .   THOMPSON


Di'd you see that yourself? - A. No.   The only reason I
am going to say no - I am not disputing they might have
been there...

They might have been? - -A. ...or are there, fair enough.
All I am trying to' say is all I recall of the situation
was walking up, trying to get through the turnstiles.
Now I could have been sat in the middle of that lot, of
those people.    I don't know because I was actually
worried about myself there, never mind inside the ground.
I am not arguing the point.     they probably were there.
Also, I am saying - you can imagine, now I don't know how
many people are there, you people probably do know.     I
mean, all that lot there being crushed and one thing and
another, but to me it seemed a lot more.     Maybe it
wasn't - people I am talking about, I am not talking
about policemen.    What I am saying is I might have been
stuck in the middle of that particular crowd.     All I
know is I said to my son, "Let's get out and we will go
in later."

A witness has told the Inquest that although we can't see
it, there is also there a police Land Rover with a loud
hailer system over which at about this time a policeman
was calling instructions to the crowd and different
evidence has been given about what the instructions were.
One witness said that the crowd was being asked to ease
back because people were being crushed and another
witness said that the loud speakers were shouting, "Take
your time."   Did you hear anything like that? - A. I
don't recall it, no.

If the jury accept that evidence, then somebody was
shouting to the crowd through a loud hailer at that time
trying to...

     THE CORONER: Mr. Payne, I think I ought to
disallow that question because he said he did not hear
it. We have heard the evidence from other witnesses.
The jury will make their own mind up.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I am grateful.      As you please:

Now the question, Mr. Thompson, which I would like to ask
you is this: with the situation as it is there and with
the police manpower which you didn't notice but is in
fact there and the loud hailer which you didn't notice
but also is there, did it appear to you that it was
practicable that it could be done to get the people at
the back to move back to make an orderly queue? - A. Are
you asking me ourselves or the police?
                                                                  21

A
                                              R. J .   THOMPSON


    Q.   Ye's, could it have been done? - A. It most certainly
         could have been done, but I suggested that in the first
         place.

B   Q.   I know that is what you suggested and that is why I am
         asking you about it. - A. Certainly with that amount of
         people there, the police could move them back, yes.

    Q.   Have you seen the video film of the same scene we have
         got there in a still but on a moving picture?   Have you
         actually seen that after the event? - A. No.

    Q. In a news programme or anything on the television? - A.
       No.

                     Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING;

    Q.    Mr. Thompson, can you tell us a little about the walk
         down Leppings Lane itself? - A. In what way, like?      It
         was straightforward.     There was no crowd.    There were
         obviously people, but there was walking room, if you know
         what I mean.     It was quite pleasant to walk.
D
    Q. Walking room on the pavement or on the road? - A.
       Actually I was on the road.

    Q. Would you accept that at the time that you were walking
       down that in fact the crowd, walking in the same
       direction as you, was occupying both of the pavements and
       the road? - A. I would say yes.   There were that many
       people, yes.

    Q. So if we heard earlier in this Inquest from a witness who
       had been up at the roundabout, who said there was such a
       flow of people that it was impossible then to confine
       them just to pavements and that they took over the whole
       road as well, you would accept that in fact that was the
       situation, you were one of the people who was actually
       walking down the road? - A. Oh, yes, I was on the road.

    Q. Now you have described the the crowd as being happy? - A.
       Yes, jovial.

    Q. Hoping, obviously, for a win? - A. Yes.

    Q. However, other people who seem to have been in the same
       place as you, and at the same time as you, seem to have
       described it in. a different way.   An atmosphere that
       worried them. * A. I don't know what they were worried
       about if they were just walking along the road trying to
       go to the ground to get in.    I don't see what they were
       worried about.   At that particular point there was
       nothing to worry about.    You were just walking down the
       road heading towards the ground.




H
                                       R. J .   THOMPSON


A Witness, for example, said, "I didn't get the
impression of good humour." - A. Well, it all depends on
a person's sense of humour, I suppose.   It all depends
on where you are at that particular point.  As far as I
was concerned most people seemed to be jovial.   I heard
people singing, the usual chants, "Liverpool" and all the
rest of it.

It was described as "perhaps it was the glow of drink". -
A. I wish I had had some of what he had!   As far as I
can say, "the glow of drink", I mean, you go to any game,
even myself if I go to Liverpool and I am a licensee, the
lads all naturally have a drink but there is a difference
between drink and I am a person who can tell if you are
drunk or not.   I wouldn't say they were drunk or
anywhere near drunk.

A lady who had lived in the area since 1981 said she had
never felt an atmosphere like there was on that day.   Is
that your experience of being with Liverpool crowds, or
not? - A. Well, I don't know, it all depends on the
people's point of view.   I don't know really what she is
trying to say.  Is she trying to say she was frightened
or what?   I don't know.   What are you trying to ask me?
Was she frightened?   Are you trying to ask me whether
they were frightened, or what?

When you gave your evidence in answer to the learned
Coroner, you suggested that you had not really seen the
police taking any active part in the management of the^
crowd? - A. No.   As I say, I am telling you just walking
along the road with my son there were no problems
whatsoever up to the point of getting to there, none
whatsoever.   Now there were plenty of police around all
round the roads and even down the road, that particular
road to the actual going into the ground, but all I am
saying is that actually when I hit that crowd, from
thereon in I don't recall seeing any police.   Now I am
not saying there wasn't, it is quite obvious there was.
All I am saying is what I saw, that's all.




                  Q. Because you see
                                            R. J. THOMPSON

Q. Because you see your words originally were, "I only
   saw one either Police Constable or Police Sergeant on
   horseback"? - A. That is quite correct.

Q. So -you walked through the Leppings Lane gate? - A.
   No, no. Can I just go back on that one? I am not
   saying I didn't see Policemen.    I am saying at that
   particular point of me trying to get in that area.
   We will say for example, we will say for argument's
   sake, you have got to remember when I actually got
   there there was this mass of people there. Obviously
   when we got to the actual corner there was Police
   there.   I am not disputing that.   I am not disputing
   any of it actually but what I am saying is that there
   was definitely Police on that particular corner. All
   I am saying is that the area where I was the only
   Constable I seen was on horseback.    It is in them
   people I am talking about.   I am not talking about
   anywhere else outside or anywhere else.    I am just
   talking about that particular point.    I was actually
   commenting on the actual situation and I am just
   giving them as I was in that position.

Q. I think we are only trying to clarify the point? - A.
   I am sorry, I am sorry.

Q. It just sounded from what you said, you see, as you
   will appreciate from what I have read to you, that
   the only Police Officer you had seen was one either
   Sergeant or Constable on horseback. Clearly in
   answer to my learned friend, Mr. Payne, you have
   acknowledged there were a lot of Officers around? -
   A. There is no question about it. I am talking about
   the particular point of view of trying to get some
   sort of order, that is all I am trying to say. What
   you have got to remember, even looking at that
   photograph, I was probably stuck in the front of that
   lot anyhow.  I wouldn't see them Policemen even at
   the back of the actual crowd.

Q. The Policeman who was on horseback, is that the
   Policeman whose horse is just at the side of the gate
   there.  Is that the one we are talking about? - A. To
   be quite honest with you, I will describe personally
   myself a photograph of this. The actual horse and
   rider probably just before - I wouldn't like to say
   how long before, maybe a minute or two minutes, time
   does hot matter at that point - the horse nearly went
   down amongst the crowd. He was actually in the crowd
   and the horse nearly fell as I was more or less
   alongside of it.
                                           R. J. THOMPSON

Was that because of the crush of the crowd? - A. Oh
yes, yes, that was because of the crush of people.
He was trying to control it, you see.

You will, I am sure, have experienced Policemen with
their horses in crowd situations? - A. Certainly,
yes.

Ordinarily a Police horse is able to move a crowd to
create a break in a crowd? - A. Most certainly, yes.

To even influence a crowd in moving backwards? - A.
Certainly, yes.

But the combined efforts of horse and man in this
instance was to no avail? - A. No, I had to feel
sorry for the horse and rider actually.

I just want to ask one more question.  I skip a bit
of time now, Mr. Thompson, in doing it but I just
want to be sure we are all being fair about the
particular point. You will remember when you were
saying you were trying to make the Police Officer
aware that your son was in there and the Police
Officer was trying to suggest he should go backwards
rather than, as you wanted, to pull him out of the
crowd? - A. I never suggested to the Police Officer
he should pull him out. My son was shouting, "Pull
me out".

Your son was shouting, "Pull me out"? - A. I never
even spoke to the Officer.

You said these words and I just wanted to check them
through with you, "I don't think the Officer
understood what was happening"? - A. I appreciate
that, yes.

             Cross-Examined bv MR. KING:

M r . Thompson you yourself told us that you arrived at
the ground about twenty to three or quarter to three?
- a . Yes.

Did you regard yourself, before you got to the
turnstiles and before you saw the mass of people, did
you regard yourself as someone who was -arriving late
at the game? - A. For that type of game, yes.

When you got there, before you got to the mass of
people, when you were walking down Leppings Lane, and
I think it was Leppings Lane because you have told us
                                                                 2b




                                                    R.   J.   THOMPSON

         there were a lot of terraced houses on the left? - A.
         Yes.

B   Q.- You were just walking along? - A. Yes.

    Q.    Was that the way other people were approaching the
         ground with you just walking along? - A. Just normal
         walking, y e s .

    Q.    You gave a description, and perhaps tomorrow when the
         Jury go they will see it for their own eyes, of how
         you were going along the road and you turned back to
         the turnstiles? - A. As I say, it might have been a
         bend, I don't know.    It might not have been a left
         turn.   It might have been a bend in the road, if you
         know what I me a n .

    Q.   There was a bend at the end? - A. Yes.

    Q.    Then you realised there were also people coming to
         the same point from the opposite direction.     You used
D        your hands as if there were two pincer movements if I
         can put it that way? - A. To be quite honest with
         you, I did not even know you could come from the
         other direction.

    Q. You realised that when you got there? - A. Not really
       because you are not looking around.  You are just
       looking for the entrances.  Being quite honest with
       you, I did not even know you could come from the
       other direction.

    Q. The picture you got is that you are walking along the
       road and then you would have to turn before you saw
       the mass of people? - A. Yes.

    Q.    As you were walking along the road with all  the
         people you were with, were there any Police which you
         could see at that stage when you were walking along
         the road before you reached the mass of people? - A.
         Oh yes, definitely.    Actually I think there were
         places where they probably have their wirelesses in
         and all that sort of thing, crowd control, that type
         of thing, and a vehicle was there as well, you know.

    Q. They could see you walking along the road? - A. Yes.

    Q. At that stage - I am not talking when you have turned
       left to the mass of people - was there any attempt
       made to stop you walking along the road going towards
       the ground? - A . N o .




H
                                                         26




                                            R . J . THOMPSON
    /
Q. You did not realise until you turned left that you
   were going to hit the mass of people? - A. No.

Q. That is the position, is it not? - A. That is quite
   correct, yes.

Q. What I am trying to get at is that there was not any
   sort of clue given to you as you were walking along
   Leppings Lane of, "Wait a minute.  If you go any
   further you are going to hit a whole mass of people".
   You just did not know this? - A. No.  You are going
   to a football ground and you naturally when you turn,
   whether you turn or whether you go straight, you are
   expecting to walk up and get in a queue.

Q. When you did, however, turn left and you saw this
   great mass of people was it obvious to you that it
   was going to be very difficult for all those people
   to get into the ground before kick-off? - A. It was
   quite obvious no one could get in, as I stated
   before.  As I stated before, I said to my son, "Lets
   get out and we will go in later".  There was no way
   them people would have got in for the kick-off
   anyhow, not actually going through turnstiles.  They
   could not have handled it.

Q. can you give an impression in your own mind of how
   many people were outside at the turnstiles at that
   point? - A. It is a difficult question to ask because
   you are not particularly looking.   All you know is
   that there is a crowd there and you are trying to get
   i n . You are not thinking of how many people are
   there, you know what I mean.

Q. The impression was that there was a great mass of
   people? - A. There was a fair old few people trying
   to get in , y e s ,

Q. You were asked this question about whether or not
   people of their own initiative might have said, "I am
   not going to join the crowd" and you said that
   sitting here that is a fair point but putting
   ourselves in the situation on the day, the impression
   I got from your answer was that the position was
   different as everyone was trying to get in the ground
   before kick-off? - A. It is obvious, isn't it? I
   mean to say when you are going to a football match
   you are trying to get in.

Q. If the kick-off had been another half hour later from
   your experience, do you think that would have made a
   difference? - A. I suppose at the time, even if they
                                                            27




                                              R.   J.   THOMPSON
      /


     cancelled that match, it would have obviously let
     everybody in but from the point of view of trying to
     get in it would not have made any difference because
     people are trying to get in.

Q. People are trying to get in because they know the
   match is about to start? - A. That is correct.

Q. If people think that the match is not going to start
   for another half hour or another hour does that have
   an effect from your experience on people? - A. Yes,
   certainly because you know you are going to see the
   mat c h .

Q. You said that you had no choice but to go forward.
   Could you explain that? - A. In what way?

Q. When you were outside that mass of people? - A. I
   could not get out.  There was no way I could get out
   because I said to my son, "Let us get out" and at
   that particular point he said, "Dad, they are opening
   the gate".

Q. If you had wanted to go back you could not? - A. I
   think I might have been able to fight my way out but,
   by gum, there would not have been much left of me
   when I got out.

Q. The photograph, just to put it into context, if we
   can have that back up, 34A, C.295? - A. Yes.

       MR. KING:   Sir, I do not want to have to prove this
through a whole series of photographs but it is clear from
the photographs that that photograph was taken after the
gate had been opened, that is Gate C, and after the crowd
pressure had been relieved.  To that extent it is a false
picture of the situation before the gate was opened.

     THE CORONER:   What I think you are saying is that it
was presumably worse than what is shown on the photographs?

Q.        MR. KING:  Take it from me, Mr. Thompson, that
     that gate was opened after people had been allowed in
     through that big gate and so that does not
     necessarily tell us of the state of numbers of people
     outside were like or where the Police were positioned
     before that was opened, do you understand? - A. Yes.

Q. Because your impression was one of no organisation,
   is that right? - A. I would definitely say no
   organisation whatsoever.
                                                             28




                                               R.   J.   THOMPSON

Q. When you got through the big gate which was open? -
   A. Yes.

Q. You say you went to the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you know yourself that had in fact you not gone
   through the tunnel but you had say gone to the right,
   if you look at the model and if the Officer could use
   the stick to trace the gate you went through which is
   Gate C, the stick §oes through so to speak, and you
   then went through the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q.    If the stick were to go to the right of someone
     coming through the gate, instead of going through the
     tunnel, if you had gone to the side of the West
     Stand, you would in fact have got to the outside
     pens.   Did you realise that? - A. Is that actually
     after you get on the pitch or more or less on to the
     thing? Are you trying to say we could have moved as
     we got to the bottom of the tunnel? We could have
     moved?

Q. No, no.  Before you went to the tunnel, did you
   realise that when you came to those turnstiles you
   could have turned right, gone round the side, and
   gone to the side terraces that way? Did you realise
   that? - A. No.  There was nobody there to say any.

Q.   So you went the route which seemed to you the obvious
     route to go? - A. People were walking and so you
     naturally follow,

Q. Putting it very simply, you go through that tunnel
   and you hit a whole mass of people? - A. Yes.

Q.   Already     in those pens? -    A. Yes.

Q.   Did you realise yourself when you got there that
     there was plenty of space on the outside pens? - A.
     At that particular point to be quite honest with
     you - I don't - I do now but I do not at the time and
     I was fighting for my own life.

Q. When you were crawling on your hands and knees over
   people's heads to get out through the gate, did you
   see any Police Officers on the perimeter fence, by
   the perimeter fence, by the pitch? - A.. There was
   certainly one on the gate and there was one or two,
   some standing about, on the perimeter, you know what
   I mean.  There was definitely people standing in that
   area.
'7

                                                                    29




                                                     R.    J.   THOMPSON
            ✓
         Q. Did they have their faces to the crowd or their backs
            to the crowd? - A. As I say, I am just crawling and I
            was not bothered.
     B
         Q. So be it.  The picture I have got is that when you
            were crawling out clearly there was a reason for you
            wanting to crawl out.   Could you see at that stage
            when you were crawling out anything happening to help
            you out or were you just doing it off your own
            initiative? - A . I was just doing it for myself.
            There was no way anybody could help you.   I mean they
            could not help you if they wanted to, you know what I
            mean.  They could not even put their arms up to push
            you over or anything.   I was kicking people's heads
            in as I was going.

         Q. When you saw the Officer apparently indicating to
            your son to gave back, you gave a very graphic
            description of the situation? - A. Yes.

         Q. You, I quite understand, would have been very angry
            in that situation? - A. Yes.

         Q. Did you say a Policewoman came up? - A. Yes.

         Q. And helped him out? - A. Yes.

         Q. Did you get the impression that the Policewoman had
            realised something was going wrong? - A. Yes, X think
            so definitely.

         Q. And helped him out? - A. Yes.

                       Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:

         Q. Mr. Thompson, you say that when you were walking down
            Leppings Lane you say you did not notice anybody
            particularly drunk? - A. No, I would not say I had
            seen anybody drunk, no.

         Q. You would say the main reason people were going in
            that direction was so that they would be able to
            enjoy a Semi Final match? - A. Yes, yes.

         Q. It would be obvious that they would not want to get
            too drunk because they would not be able to
            concentrate, would they, if they had too much to
            drink.  The main thing was to watch the match? - A.
            Certainly, yes.

         Q. When you got to the turnstile area it was mentioned
            that if there had been portable barriers instead of




     H
                                                               30




                                                R.   J.   THOMPSON
     ✓
     turnstiles I think you said they would have given
     way? - A. I do not really know what sort of strength
     you are talking about.  If they are just ordinary
     things they can pick up they would not have lasted
     five minutes.

Q. If there would have been only portable barriers there
   instead of the strength of the turnstiles, do you
   think it would be dangerous if that crowd outside had
   got in that way? - A. I think it is obvious that you
   are going to get a surge of people going forward.  It
   is obvious that it is going to become dangerous at
   some poi n t.

Q. You say you managed to get into the ground very
   quickly and so you got to the ground quite late? - A.
   Quite correct.

Q. You did not expect this to happen at all? - A. It got
   to a stage where there was no chance of people
   getting through that turnstile.   The people at the
   front could not even get through because they had got
   to such a point that the pressure on the actual
   turnstile itself was that people could not move to
   even get through i t . It was quite obvious that what
   people were getting through were in trickles. It was
   just the situation where somebody had to do
   something.

Q. Would you have been annoyed if you had heard that the
   kick-off was delayed? - A. Most certainly not.  I
   would not have been annoyed, no.

Q. You would have been quite happy to wait longer? - A.
   Y e s , and I think everybody else would have b e e n .

                 Cross-Examined bv MR. RUSSELL:

Q. Mr. Thompson, can I be clear about this;  had you
   been to a match at Hillsborough before? - A. I have
   been to Hillsborough before, yes.

Q. When? - A. I think it was the year before actually.

Q.    You went to the 1988 Semi Final? - A. Yes,     we were   in
     a different part.   We were n ’t in that part   of the
     ground.

Q.   Can you remember which part of the ground you were
     in? - A. Being quite honest with you, no.I was up
     in the stands the last time I went.
                                                                 31

                                          /

                                                  B.   .1.   THOMPSON
     ✓
Q. Had that been your first visit to Hillsborough? - A.
   Yes, that had, yes.

Q. Is that how you knew where to park for the 1989 Semi
   Final? - A. Not as such.  I am not sure really.  It
   was just the situation the way we come in. At the
   point we actually parked we were not even sure how
   far we were off the ground actually.

Q. You describe a walk along a main road? - A. Yes.

Q. And I think going under a railway bridge? - A. Yes.

Q. And parking opposite a Police Station? - A. Yes.

Q. You have a bundle of documents there and would you
   turn to page C.284 which is a map of this part? ~ A-
   Yes.

Q. Do you see the acknowledgement "Reproduced by
   permission of Geographers A-Z Map Co. Ltd."? ~ A.
   Yes.
Q. To the right hand side of that banner, underneath the
   word "Ltd" you can see the word "Halifax" going up
   from bottom left to top right, can you not? - A.
   Yes.
Q.    I am told that there is a Police Station on Halifax
     Road near where one can see the abbreviated word for
     school "sch".   Do you see that between the f and the
     a of Halifax? - A. Yes.

Q.       What I am suggesting is that that was the point at
         which you parked and it was down Halifax Road which
         you walked and you went underneath that railway
         bridge which we can see going over the road between
         the letters "nth" and the start of the word
         "Halifax"? - A. I have got the point, yes.




                                          /Q.   That would be.
                                                              32



                                            R.    J.   THOMPSON

Q.   Jhat would be consistent with the route that you have
     described in the statement? A., As I say, all I know
     was I walked along the main road.       J’

Q.   When you got inside Enclosure 4, you said that you
     were able to move to your left? A. No, I didn't say
     I was able to move.

Q.   Or you moved to your left?    A. No I said the surge
     pushed me to the left.   My son was shouting "Move to
     the left” , but you could not move anywhere.

Q.   But you have identified on the plan a position in
     Enclosure 4 where you arrived haying entered Enclosure
     4? A. Approximately, yes.

Q.    You then described a surgefrom behind you?         A. Yes.

Q.   And the force of the surge was to take you not
     diagonally across the enclosure, but down towards the
     gate? A. Down towards the barrier, not the gate, to
     the barrier.

Q.   But it was not a diagonal force behind you;  it was a
     force directly behind you, is that right? A.   You
     just don't know.  It is just a surge behind you and
     you just go whichever way it takes you.

Q.   The way that you were taken, as I understand your
      evidence, was not diagonally, but directly towards the
      pitch? A. No, I was stood at an angle. If you look
      at that again, the surge took me and moved me over and
      I hit the end of the barrier.  I actually hit the end
      of that barrier and fractured two ribs.  I was swung
      around with the next surge and I wound up at the back.
      I was swung round at that surge and I actually got
      swung round the other side of the barrier.  That is
      when I more or less wound up approximately straight
      down towards the gate.

Q.   That was a force then from the back.    A.        No.   I am
      sorry, go on.

Q.   It was a force from behind you?     A. That pushed me
      and I hit the barrier and swung round and ended up the
      other side of the barrier.

Q.   After you had got out of Enclosure 4 via the gate, as
     you have described, would it be fair to say that there
     was a caldron of noise, not only in the ground itself
     but in particular at that part of the ground? A.
      There was just one heck of a din going on all over the
     place.
                                                             33


                                             R.   J.   THOMPSON


Q. ' Would you forgive    me for saying that a caldron of
     noise is the same    as saying "A heck of a din"? A.
     Yes.

Q.   You described shouting to your son, and the position
     of your son you have identified on the plan is some
     considerable way back from the pitch? A.   That is
     correct.

Q.   I think the effect of your evidence is  that he could
      not hear you? A.   I said it was quite obvious he
      couldn’t hear me.

Q.   Because of the heck of the din?    A.    Yes.

Q.   You described a policeman shouting, "Get back"?          A.
     Yes, quite correct.

Q.   When you saw or heard the policeman shouting "Get
     back", how far away from the policeman was your son?
     A. Well, there is the gate, he is stood up against
     the gate and my son is approximately 12 or 18 inches
     with his arms outstretched.

Q.   Would it be fair to say that you do not know whether
     the policeman was saying "Get back" directly to your
     son, or whether he was saying "Get back" to anyone who
     could hear him who was in a position to get back who
     remained in Enclosure 4? A. I suppose that is quite
     possible.  If you are shouting to a policeman to help
     you out and if someone shouts "Get back", you
     obviously take it for granted it is you.

Q.   But you do not know whether the policeman was having a
     conversation with your son, for want of a better word?
     A. He wasn't having a conversation.

Q.   Exactly.  As far as you know, his words "Get back"
     were addressed not directly to your son but to those
     members of Enclosure 4 who were in a position to get
     back? A. Let me put it this way, he was the only one
     trying to get out, so who was he saying it to?

           MR. RUSSELL:   Thank you, Mr. Thompson.


                    Further bv THE CORONER

Q.    Can I just ask you one or two questions.  I think you
      said that you were at the match in 1988, but you were
      not in the terraces, you were in one of the stands?
      A. Yes.
                                                               34



                                            R.   J.   THOMPSON


Q.' It is not terribly important, but can you remember
    were you in the stands above the terraces, or were you
    in the stands on the north side? A. To be quite
    honest, I wouldn't swear to it.

Q.   But you came in that year as aLiverpool supporter,
     would that be right? A. Yes.

Q.   This is really the point I want to ask you, or two
     points.  What time did you arrive that year? A.    It
     is no use asking me, I haven't got a clue.  I couldn't
     honestly answer that sort   of aquestion.

Q.   Secondly, you said you did not recollect the layout,
     but in fact in 1988 the same end had been allocated to
     Liverpool, so you would have had to get through one or
     other of the gates? A.   It is quite possible, yes.

Q.   But are you telling me that you cannot actually
     remember very much about the 1988 match at all?           A.
     No.

Q.   Are you saying you can remember, or you cannot
     remember? A.   I can remember the match, but not the
     actual ground.

Q.   You can't remember how you got in?    A.     To be honest
     with you, no.

Q.   But would it be fair   to say that you have no
      recollection of any similar problems in 1988 as in
      1989? A. No, I most certainly didn't have any.

Q.   You were   not crushed outside or anything?      A. No.

Q.   Did your   son come with you that year as well?      A.        Not
      that particular son, the other one.

Q.   I see.  Can you remember anything in 1988 about Police
     presence or organisation?  If you can't just say. "I
     can't remember", and that's it. A. No.

Q.   You cannot remember?    A.   I can't remember, no.

Q.   It is difficult sometimes, one does not know which way
     the answer goes.   I obviously misunderstood you in
     relation to a reply which you gave to Mr. Russell at
     the end,  but my impression was when you were shouting
     to your son, "Get out", or something, and he could not
     hear you because he was that far back, are you saying
     that he then did manage to move forward by some means
     or other, and arrive fairly near the gate, at which
     point you saw the policeman say, shout, communicate to
     somebody, "Get back", or was it still when he was high
                                               R.   J.   THOMPSON

     /

         up? A.   It was still when he was right at the back.
         I was shouting "Get out" and it was quite obvious he
         could not hear me anyhow.

Q.       What the policeman was shouting, when he shouted, "Get
         back" was at the same position? A.   I see what you
         mean. When the policeman was there at that particular
         point, I mean he wasn't shouting "Get back" to   ^
         anybody.  It was me that was shouting to my son, "Get
         out".
Q.       What you are saying is that your son then did manage
         to move from that position forward, is that right? A.
         He rolled.  He actually rolled right down people's
         heads.

Q.       I think you did actually say that.    Thank you.
         A. Yes.

         THE CORONER:  Thank you very much indeed.             We
will rise for quarter of an hour.

                        (Short Ad journment)
                                                                           36




                                                   D.     P.   LOWE


                     DAVID PETER LOWE Sworn

                          By THE CORONER

Q.   You are David Peter Lowe?         A.   Yes.

Q.                     , is it?   A.                 •



Q.                 Mansfield in Nottinghamshire?               A.     That is
     right.

Q.   On 15th April 1989 you travelled to Hillsborough
     intending to support your club, which I think is
     Liverpool, is that right? A. Yes.

Q.   You went with various people including Alison Bennett?
     A. That is right.

Q.   She is your     girlfriend, is that            right?            A.        Yes, that
     is right.

Q,   Is that Alison sitting there?          A.     Yes.

Q.   We will hear from her in a moment or two. You drove
     up in your friend’s car and you      parked,   and I think
     you arrived   at about 11 o ’clock, is that right? A. I
     am sorry?

Q.   At about 11 in the morning you got to Sheffield?                       A.
     That is right.

Q.   It is right to say that none of you had tickets, is
     that right? A. That is right.

Q.   So there were how many of you, five of you in fact?
     A. Yes.

          MR. KING:  I am awfully sorry, sir, but it is
     very difficult to make out the words.  It is not
     coming over very clearly, sir, from yourself.

           THE CORONER:  From me?
Q.   I was saying that you arrived in Sheffield at 11
     o ’clock, and that there were five of you in your
     party? A. Y e s .

Q.   And that none of you had any tickets?                A.    Yes.

Q.   In fact, you did eventually manage to buy some tickets
     at the Spion Kop.    I d o n ’tknow    how you pronounce it,
     but be that as it   may.    Isthat right? A. Yes.

Q.   Did you know that      that wasthe Nottingham Forest end
     of the ground? A.        Yes, Idid.
                                        D.   P.   LOWE


You did know that?     A.   Yes.

In fact, they cost you a fair bit, about £20 a throw,
is that right? A.   That is right.

As a matter of interest, what end of the ground had
you thought you had bought tickets for?   A. Iknew we
had bought them for the Spion Kop.

You knew it?   A.    Yes.

So it was not that you said Leppings Lane and they
gave you the opposite? A. No.

But that, as far as you were concerned, was thewrong
end, was it not? A. Yes.

So what were you intending to do then? A. After we
bought the tickets I thought we would try to get into
the Leppings Lane end.

Did you think you would succeed, or did you think you
would have difficulties? We know you got in, but I
want you to tell me what you thought?  A.   I thought
we would have got in, yes.

Had you been to the 1988 match, as a matter of
interest? A. Yes, I had.

Where were you in 1988?   A. It was alittle         paddock
on the corner of the Spion Kop.

I see, so   you were there the previous year?        A.   Yes.

You did not like it up there, I think that is right?
A.  That is right, yes.

You felt you would be happier with your      own
supporters, and so on? A. Yes.

So you went round to the     Leppings Lane end?     A.    Yes.

We will come to that in a moment but, tell me, why did
you buy the Spion Kop ticket, or tickets, for the
party when you wanted the opposite end? Was it that
you could   not get them, or that you did nottry, or
what? A.     We could have got them but they were a lot
more expensive.

One has to cut one's cloth, that is right.   So the
first thing you did was to get the tickets, andhaving
got the tickets I think you went off to the pub, is
that right? A.   That is right, yes.
                                       D.      P.    LOWE


 The White Horse?    A.   Yes.

Where is that approximately?  I do not mean exactly,
but how near to the stadium is what I am trying to
find out? A.   I would say half a mile, a mile.

Fairly close.  Can you recollect - I don't know where
it is - was it on the Nottingham side of the ground or
the Liverpool side? A. On the Liverpool side.

Were you   the   only supporters in the        pub,orwere there
others?    A. There were quite a few.

Can you just guesstimate how many supporters were in
there? Are we talking about 10s, 50s, 100s? A.
Perhaps 50, 50 to 100.

That is good enough.  Were they, as far as you could
tell, Liverpool supporters? A. The majority of them
were, yes.

Whilst you were in a pub, you had, I think, 3 pints
and a bottle of lager.  Was it a pint or half-pint
lager bottle, can you remember? A.   I can't remember.

Were other people drinking in the pub as well?              A.
Yes.

Were you worried or concerned about    their behaviour in
any sense of the word? A. None at all.

Not at all?   A.    No.

You did not notice anybody who was either drinking
obviously excessively, or anything of that nature?               A.
No.

You left the pub at about 1 to 1.30 - no, 1 o'clock I
think you left? A. Yes.

You went towards Leppings Lane,, is that right?             A.
Yes.

So you got there early, did you not?      A.        Yes.

Because presumably you thought you had a better chance
of getting in? A. Yes.

With tickets for the other end?   A.   Yes.

  think it is right that you first of all approached
the Police at the south stand, there was a kiosk or
something there? A. Yes.
                                                  D.   P.     LOWE


You explained that you had tickets for the wrong end,
and that you wanted to get into Leppings Lane, is that
right? A. Yes.

What were you told? A.   I was told to go and see a
steward outside the Leppings Lane.

So you took the advice?        A.   Yes.

And went down to Leppings Lane?             A.     Yes.

Did you, in fact, see a steward?             A.        Yes.

Inside or outside the ground?          A.        He was outside.

Where was he?   A.   He was just level with the blue
gates.

The perimeter gates?      A.    Yes.

Go to the model and just show us where he was.    I see,
so he was standing outside the perimeter gates to
turnstiles 1 to 16.  I take that as being correct,   it
is just for the record.  It was a middle-aged man, I
think? A. Yes.

You told him the story     again? A.             Yes.

What did he tell you?      A. He toldus to                  go to one
turnstile.

Which one did he actually point you to, can you
remember? A.   The left-hand one, I think it was.

Not opposite the ones where you had been standing.
Was it in the other quadrant? A.    Yes, it was.

Can you just show us.   I think you said it was
Turnstile A,   but just show    us. Yes, that isright.
Stay there,   I am going to     ask you another question and
it saves you walking backwards and forwards.     You
approached that turnstile? A. Yes.

You showed your tickets and what happened                      toyou then?
A.  They refused us entry.

He just said no?     A.   Yes.

And you turned round and came back.                     Then did you go
back to the   same steward? A. Yes.

What did he   tell you this   time? A. We toldhim that
we had been refused entry at that turnstile and he
told us to go to the right-hand one.
                                                                                   40




                                                                D.   P.    LOWE
      ✓
     Q.     The exact opposite one?           A.     Yes.


     Q'     t h « would be G? T        in Ye“ h 7 ° Ur S tlC k -          lh e end one '

                      C?me forward.        I just want to know this                     The
           Yesyaquite°friendly!^e ^            ^    ™                             ^
 Q.         In fact, he was trying to help you?                 A.     Yes.

 Q*         tnheen n
                   i^A
                     a. 8°Thf»v
                          They ? % the
                               let  us second
                                       straightturnstile,
                                                 in.                   what happened

 Q.        Did you have to negotiate with him in any way?                          A.


 Q.         Did you plead? A.        No.

 Q*         anH i w         Z ° Y tlckets in to the Turnstile N o .8
           vou I
           you           S or what?
               a half back,       ? ±d he A.tear them in-half and give
                                               Yes.

 Q.        And you just walked in?          A.      Yes.

Q.        Happy, as it were, at the tine?                  A.   Yes.


Q'        you^wanted “ " e f        I ^ ' Y e s ! " 3 " 1 6 ’ 7 ° U were n01' »*«<>

Q*        Yes.°f 7°U W€nt ± n ’ 311 f±Ve °f y o u ’ 1 take it? A.

Q.        You went down the tunnel?            A.       That is right.

Q.        Had y°£jjee£e to this ground before?                  I can't remember.


Q*        haH ^ « * kn°W the layout? A *       I had been before I
          tunnel     S°n6 Straight in and straight down that


          YesfaCt* y°U had been several times, I think?                       A.


Q'        «ayf o L r t S Ut « ^ c^ g r T d ’ Y e s .f a C t ’ th a t * “          the

Q' £2cE? kA?WS s . T S i d ! " 8 Wa3 diVided by radlal
              v-U ®V6r ?n 3 Previous occasion, not this year - I
             skipping about a bit, forgive me.  On a previous
                                     D.   P.   LOWE


occasion had you always stayed in the pens immediately
behind the goals? A. Yes.

So you had never attempted to move anywhere else?          A.
No.

You did exactly the same this time.  You went down the
tunnel and you went, I think, into the left-hand
entrance, is that right? A. Yes.

We call that Pen 4, but it does not matter. I take it
this would be just after 1 o'clock or so? A. Yes, it
was.

Was it full or empty at that time?   A.    There were a
few people in, but not a lot.

So you had plenty of room at that stage?       A.   Yes.

You looked across and you could see the Spion Kop.
Did that look full or empty at that point in time?         A.
There were quite a few people in there.

But did it appear to you that there were more people
in there proportionally than at your end? You
probably did not think about it, and if you do not
know, just say, "I have no idea". A.   I have no idea.

Where did you position yourself? You had plenty of
time, you could select exactly where you wanted to be?
A.  It was about three-quarters of the way up the
stand.

Up the stand?   A.   Yes.

Behind or in front of the barrier, or was there no
barrier where you were? A.   I can't remember.

You and your friends stayed then.  I don't know what
you did, chatted and so on, and I take it as time went
on more and more people came into the terrace? A.
Yes.

What time would you say it really began to fill up?
A.  I should say round 2 o'clock, just after 2
o'clock.

Then what happened after that? A. • It just gradually
began to fill up and we started swaying about, like
you normally do.

I am interested in this. You are the first person who
has actually mentioned it in so many words.  Tell me,
is this an involuntary action, the sway, or do people
0 i'h                                                                     42

        A
                                                        D.    P.   LOWE


                 generate the sway, or what?    What happens,       tell me?
            A.   It is involuntary.

        B   Q.   Are you saying that It just happens?        A.    Yes.


                                           Q.   Nobody s tar t s i t




        D




        H
                                                                  43

                                                        D.   P.   LOWE




Q.    Nobody starts it anywhere? - A. No.

Q.    What actually occurs, tell me? - A. You just      like take
     a step forward and then a step back.

Q. Yes, but wny should you do that? Something must induce
   you to take a step forward,  what is that makes you
   take a step forward? - A. It is just the movement of
   the crowd, people being tightly packed together, they
   all move about like.

0.    So what you are saying is, if you are in position "A",
     crowd movement fro® around you causes you to take a
     step forward? - A. Yes.

Q. would it be right to say that this movement is coming
   from the back mainly that is inducing you to suave
   forward, or is it coming from the 3ides or where is it
   corning from? - A. It comes from every direction really.

Q. But not from the front? - A. Not usually, no.

Q. Then what you are saying is when you sway the crowd
   goes forward and then after a while it goes back.   It
   is like a wave? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. Were you being pusned forward with these aovaments? -
   A. Yes, we were.

0. Did you finish up against the barrier? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you recollect about what time that would have been?
   - A. I couldn't tell you, no.

Q. Because aave looked at your watch, I realise that,- or
   even if you did you may not remember, but can you
   recollect any events on the field?  Were there any
   players on the field? - A. A few of the players did
   come out for a warm up.

Q.   Did they go away again? - A. Yes.

u.    Did you see them return to the field? - A. i^o,    I
     didn't, no.

Q. Did you see the match - did you see any playing? - A*
   Ho, I didn't.

Q. You can't remember any of it? - A. No.

0. Any of the play.  Were you saying that this swaying and
   tne being pushed back against the barrier was when they
   came out, when you saw them come out, and then saw them
                                                D.   P.   LOWE




go in again, or was it later than that? - A. It was
later than that.

And I think one of your group starting feeling
uncomfortable? - A. Yes.

Got a bit frightened - one of the girls? - A. Yes.

And in fact it was, I think, Dave and Julie, is that
right? - A. Yes.

They aren't here, but did they move away froa you? - A.
Yes, they tried to get through a gate onto the pitch.

So they moved forward? - A. Yes.

And you stayed as near as   you could where you were? -
A. Yes.

In fact, is it right that you actually tried to get
under the barrier, to try and getthe barrier between
you and the people at the back? - A. That is right,
yes.

That is coaiaon practice, isn't it? - A. Yes.

On terraces because it protects you, the barrier? - A.
That is right.

At this position, when you were standing in front of
the barrier, how near to the perimeter fencing were
you? - A. Only a few yards.

A few yards, and did it ease off a bit when you got
onto the correct side of the barrier? - A. It did for a
while and then it started getting ....

How long did it ease off? - A. Hot very long, perhaps
five minutes.

This was after Julie and Dave had really left you? - A.
That's right.

Do you know whetner or not - you never saw theoi again?
- A. Ho.

Until later on, of course, but you didn't see them
exit? - A. No.

You have got no idea when they got out? - A. No.

Then did it begin to get tight again? - A. Yes.
                                                                 45


                                                      D.   ?.   LOWE




    Q. What I asa interested in at this point is for you to
       describe to rae the way the tightness - I have used that
       word, it niay not be a word you would choose, but you
       understand what I mean? - A. Yes.
B
    Q. I ara trying to find neutral words which don*t imply
       anything.   What I want to know is did this tightness,
       as I have described it, corse on gradually or did it
       coiae on in surges, in pushes? - A. It cane on
       gradually.

    Q. It just got generally tighter and tighter? * A. Yes.

    Q* Did you feel any surges when you were in this position
       which you are now describing? - A. No.

    Q. You didn't feel any? - A. Ho.

    Q. It just got closer and closer? - A. Yes.

    Q. Tell nte what you saw, or wnat happened? - A. It was
       just gradually getting tighter and tighter and people
D      were trying to climb over the fence.

    Q. Were these the people that were in front of you that
       were trying to climb over the fence, or were they
       people who were coming from the back? - A. In front of
       us.

    Q. So people in front of you were trying to climb? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. And assuming for a none nt that everything had been
       stationary behind you, if they       had managed to getout
       there would have been space in front of you? - A. Yes.

    Q. What sort of noise level was there in the enclosure in
       wnich you were? - A. It was very noisy, people
       shouting, trying to get out.

    Q. Did you have the impression, were these the people
       lnuaediately around you, in front of you, at the side or
       at the back,    or all of them? -   A, All of then.

    Q. All of them,   including the people in the front? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. Were they chanting and singing in a happy sort of way?
         A. Sorry, the chanting and the singing were right,
       right behind us.

    Q. That is wnat I was saying, sorry, I misunderstood you.
       So you are saying that the chanting and singing was
       further back? - A. Oh, yes.




H
                                                D.   P.   LOWE




&hat were the people doing in your area?- A. Just
trying to get out.

They weren't chanting at this point? - A. No.

So are you then saying that the people at the back were
still happy and content and enjoying whatever was
happening, and didn't realise what was going on at the
front? - A. It seemed that way, yes.

It seemed like that to you? - A. Yes.

You were still luckily with Alison at this point? - A.
Yes.

And she wanted to get out, not surprisingly? - A. Yes.

I expect you wanted to get out as well, but did she in
fact - she will tell us herself in a moment, but did
she actually get out? - A. Yes, she did.

During this time, you have mentioned the people wanted
to get out and they were shouting, I think you said.
Were you able to shout at that stage? - A. Yes.

Were you at any point unable to shout? - A* Ho.

Gan you recollect whether the people around you were
shouting as well?  I ara not saying every single one,
but the bulk of the people? - A. Yes, they were.

In fact, I think you were shouting across to your
friend or to somebody, "Are you okay?" or something
like tnat? - A. My brother.

Your brother? - A. Yes.

And he wasn't too happy, I think, at that time? - A.
No.

I tiiink you got almost to the point where you - or
perhaps you could toucn the front fence, is that rignt
- A. Yes.

Were there people between you and the front fence? - A.
Yes, there was.

So you were never personally crushed against it? - A.
No.

And how did you out? Were you lifted out or did you
climb out, or did you manage to get out? - A. There
weren't so many people, after a while there weren't so
many behind me.
                                                                  47

                                                       D.   P.   LOWE




Q. Yes. - A. And I forced my way back up the stand.

Q. You went out through the tunnel, the same way that you
   came in? - A* Ho I climbed over the side fence. I got
   nelped over the side fence.

Q. Towards the left, was it?        Towards the raised portions?
   " A» Yss*

Q. As a matter of interest, did you know that there was a
   gate at the back between your enclosure, and if you
   were going back you could have just walked out, and not
   have to climb the fence? — A. Ho, I wasn't aware of
   that.

Q. I want to ask one other question, an interest question
   - yours, Mr. Maxwell, so to speak - before you went to
   tne match had you considered whether or not the ground
   had any licence or permission to operate? - A. Wo.
   Before I went I thought it was a very good ground.

Q. Yes, and you were not aware of any procedures for
   licensing grounds, or anything like that? - A. No.

Q. It was not a thing that crossed your mind, in fact? «*■
   A. Wo.

Q. when people were climbing over - I think you mentioned
   tnat as you were going forward people were cliabine
   over the fence? - A. Yes.

Q. Gan you remember, and if you can't you must say so,
   what if anything was going on, on the piten, at that
   time. - A. I just can t remember.

Q. You just can't remember. Gan you remember whether the
   gate was open? You may not even have seen the gate? -
   A. I didn't see it.

Q. You didn't see it, so you don't know? - A. No.

Q. Could you recollect whether there were any Police on
   tne far side of the ...? - A. There were Police, yes.

Q.    ivhere were they in relation to the fencing? - A. They
     were stood in front of the fence.

Q. What were they doing, if       anything, at that point? - A.
    nere was one Policeman,        there was a lad in front of
   us, he nad got his hands       on the fence, and he were
   p u s n m g him back off the   fence.

Q.    Did you then see other people being    helped over? - A.
     After that, yes.
                                                                 47fy

                                                        D. P.   LOWE




    Q. How long after that? - A. A few minutes.

    Q. I see, a short period of time? - A. Yes.
B           THE CORONER:     Mr. Maxwell?

           MR. MAXWELL:   Sir, I have no questions, but if I
      can reciprocate and throw a point back to you, I don't
      know whether you want the Witness to mark an acetate?

            THE CORONER:   Yes, thank you very much, I am much
       obliged to you, yes I do:

    Q. What I want you to do, in a sense you have moved around
       a bit, so can you go to the acetate.  That is a plan of
       the terracing, and I think you went into the left one,
       didn't you? - A. Yes.

    Q. Can you mark with a cross the position you took up when
       you first went in at 1 o'clock approximately, insofar
       as you are able.  Do it with a cross.  Then I think you
       said you got in front of the barrier - can you remember
D      that? - A. Yes.

    Q* Can you mark with a circle the position that you
       finished up in front of that barrier? That will do*
       Thank you very much.

            MR. JONES:      That is C296.

            MR. KING:   Sir, when the Witness was marking, he
       had his back so that those sitting here certainly could
       not see where he was marking.

            THE CORONER:   Yes, put it back up. We were just
       putting the number up. Can you see where the cross is?
       That is, as I understand it, the first position, and
       then the circle is where he finished up, in front of
       the barrier.

            MR. KING:      That is very helpful, sir.

                    Cross-Examined by MR. PAYi*E

       Just one matter please, Mr. Lowe.  Can you tell the
       Court, please, for how long you have been a Liverpool
       supporter? - A. All my life.

       Yes, and how often do you attend football matches? - A.
       Whenever I can, I would say about a dozen matches a
       year.

       And is that supporting your team? - A. Yes, that is
       right.




H
                                                                  48

                                                       D.   P.   LOWE




    Q. Do you normally stand in the crowd of supporters of
       your own team? - A. Yes.

    Q. So that is about 12 matches a year for, how long have
B      you been doing that? - A. Ten years.

    Q. In the course of your evidence you said that the pen
         really began to fill up after about 2 o'clock? - A.
         Yes.

    Q. You started swaying about like you normally do? - A.
         Ybs •

    Q. You explained when the Coroner asked you that the
         swaying came because of the pressure on you from
         different directions? - A. That is right.

    Q. An^      seeaec* to be involuntary movements of the crowd?
         - A. That is right.

    Q. You sway, do you, because you are so close to the
         people on each side that when they move you are beina
D        pushed by them? - A. That is right.

    Q.            you, are so close to the people in front and
         behind you that if the sway comes from that direction
         it is tne actual pressure of the people that makes you
         sway with them? - A. That is right.

    Q . So you are so close together that a movement of the
         crowd pnysically forces your body to move one wav or
         the other? - A. Correct.

    Q. This is quite a normal experience in the crowd, is it?
         T ”•    1S at a match like that where there will be a
         lot of supporters there, yes.

    Q . Quite, at a big match? - A. Yes.
    Q. You have experienced this sort of thing on other
       occasions, not just the one you are talking about
       here?- A. Yes.

    Q. In a way this is part of the fun, isn't it? - A. I
         suppose it is, yes, really.

    Q. Nobody is worrying about it? - A. No.
    Q.             enjoying it, well they are doing it as part of
         team? - A ^ Y e s   are snouting and cheering for the

    Q. So from the point of view of somebody looking at the
         crowd from the outside what they would see would be the




H
*                                                                     49

                                                           D.   P.   LOWE




             cirowd standing closely together and swaying all
             together? - A. Yes.

        Q. And that is a normal event at big matches? - A. Yes.
    B
        Q. Thank you very much.

                        Cross-Examined by MR. MAiiNI&G

        Q. Mr. Lowe, do you have any recollection of seeing a
           beach ball being ping-ponged around? - A. Yes, I have.

        Q. One assumes that somebody in your end of the ground had
           brought that with them and it was being, whatever
           expression one uses, patted back and forth around the
           crowd? - A. Yes.

        Q.   And it would      be easy to envisage with that tightly
             packed crowd that if one were to either jump up, or
             even lean forward to give the ball a push either
             upwards, downwards or in whatever direction, that
             person would be very likely to lean onto the person in
    D        front of or to the side of them, causing the swaying in
             that sort of way? - A. That is right, yes.

        Q. Is it right to say that in that particular instance
           that is what occurred? - A. Yes.

        Q.    Take another    scenario.  Say there are three or four
             chaps at the back and they are larking about in some
             way, not in any mischievous or deliberate attempt to
             cause havoc, but just three or four lads having a bit
             of a laugh and one pushes into the other or stumbles or
             something like that, they have only got to move one
             step forward, and that again creates a cascade where
             you see, sort of like a step, upon step, upon step of
             people going forward down the crowd itself? - A. Yes,
             you would.                                            ’

        Q. Again something which happens, and happens regularly
           and just is recognised as one of the things that
           happens in a crowd? - A. That is right.

        Q. Did you feel for the most part that what was going on
           there was that sort of scenario? - A. Yes.

        Q. One other question then please, Mr. Lowe, and it is an
           hour and a half or so earlier.    I am not quite sure of
           the timing of it and you may be able to help, you had
           arrived at the ground at about 11 o'clock, and within
           what period of time had you purchased your tickets and
           gone off to the public house? *■ A. I would imagine we
           got the tickets by half-past- 11.




    H
                                             D,   P.   LOWE




So at the White Horse by something just after half­
past-11, 20-to-12? - A. Yes, something like that.

And you stayed there until 1 o'clock?'— A. Yes.

When you got there at about 20-to-12 were there a
number of supporters already in there when you arrived?
- A. There was a few, yes.

And did it build up towards the 50-100 or so shortly
afterwards, or are you saying by 1 o'clock it was up to
50-100? - A. By 1 o'clock.

We have heard a lot of people saying that the crowd
seems to have for some reason stayed either in public
houses, or not arrived, but at least arrived at the
ground very late. You, of course, went down to the
ground very early? - A. That is right.

Is it right therefore to say that the majority of the
people that you saw in the public house you left in the
public house at 1 o'clock when you went down to the
ground? - A. That is right.

So although you can say what you had to drink, naraely
three pints and a bottle of lager, and that nobody else
appeared in any way to be misbehaving, of course you
don't know what sort of amount of drink was consumed
after that, by how many people, and how long they
stayed? - A. No, I don't.




         /Q. When you said
                                                                  51


                                              D.   P.   LOWE



      When you said you expected to be able to get into the
      ground, what would have happened if the gate man hadn't
      let you in? - A. I would have gone back round to the
      Spion Kop.
B     You would have gone back.   The previous year when you
      had gone as well, had you again gone without tickets? -
      A. No, I had got some.

            MR. PAYNE:   Before Mr. King cross-examines, may I
       be permitted to ask another question which I had
       overlooked?

                Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

       It's about the packing of the crowd at a normal match.
       I am not asking you about this particular event. When
       you are packed in at an ordinary match and swaying as I
       was asking you about earlier on, from the point of view
       of somebody looking from the outside at the crowd when it
       is like that, can you confirm that it would appear to be
       that you were packed shoulder to shoulder, is that a fair
D      way of putting it? - A. Yes.

    Q. And front to back?   That's a fair way of putting it? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. That is how it would seem? - A. Yes.
                    Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

       Mr. Lowe, the Coroner asked you whether you were aware
       there was a gate at the back of the pen you were in and
       you said you didn't realise it? - A. No, I didn't.

    Q. Can I just show you where the gate is on the plan?         It's
       at the back, do you see that? - A. Yes.

    Q. So the jury can take in the scene themselves, I just want
       to show you three photographs which we have to see the
       position of someone like yourself and what they can see
       when they go into the ground on the route you took, you
       see. - A. Yes.

    Q- I am concentrating on this gate for the moment,         Can I
       just show you photograph 267. - A. Yes.

    Q. Mr. Lowe, you don't know this, but the jury are going to
       look at the ground tomorrow so this may help them through
       you as to the way in you took.   Do you see in the middle
       of the photograph you see the entrance of the tunnel on
       to the ground with a wall on each side of it, a small
       wall? - A. Yes.




H
                                                               52


                                            D. P .   LOWE


Q. That wall juts out on to the terracing, doesn't it? - A.
   It' does.

Q. So when you enter from the tunnel on to the terracing you
   are not entering right at the back you are entering a way
   down the length of that wall? - A. Yes.

Q. Now the gates which are from the pens at the back of the
   pens, are shown on the photograph - in fact, the one
   which is easier to see is the opposite pen to you, pen 3.
   You see on the left hand side there is a gate between the
   two pens?    That in fact is the gate between pen 3 and
   pen 2.    Now that gate is right at the back of the
   terracing? - A. Yes.

Q. If you look carefully to the right of the tunnel you can
   just see the gate which unknown to you was the gate from
   your pen into the next area? - A. Yes.

Q. In order to get to that gate for somebody coming down the
   tunnel and entering it from the tunnel, you would have to
   go back on yourself.   Do you see that? - A. Yes.

Q. You would have to turn and go back.     Could I just show^
   you two more photographs?    First of all C.265.    That is
   a view of somebody about to enter the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q.   Can you confirm that you can see there     twogates at   the
     side of the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q.   Clearly they are open there? - A.   Yes.

Q. Obviously when you went through the tunnel they were open
   when you went through? - A. Yes.

Q.   Can you confirm that when you go through the tunnel it         is
     on a gradient?  That is, you go down? - A. Yes.

Q.   So you start high and you are going down towards the      •
     pitch, so to speak? - A. Yes.
Q. If we have a little look at 266, there is the view of
   somebody perhaps like yourself just about to enter the
   centre terracing? - A. Yes.

Q. One can see the wall on the right and the left jutting
   out down on to the terracing? - A. Yes.

Q. You went through there and you moved to your left? - A.
   That's right.

Q. Of course you didn't look to your back to see what was up
   there to your back? - A. No.
                                                               53


                                              D.   P.   LOWE


Q. When you got in the ground you say the ground began to
   fi'll up roundabout two o'clock? - A. Yes.

Q. You are talking about the pen you were in? - A. That's
   right.

Q.    You were in what we know is pen 4.    Were you aware that
     the terracing went across the length of the stand? -A.
     Yes.

Q.   Did you ever look to your left to see what it was like,
     the state of the crowd to your left, the pens to your
     left? - A. No, I cannot say I did.

Q. Can you help us at all whether to your left it looked
   full or not.

          THE CORONER:      He just said he   didn't.

          MR. KING:      So be it.

Q. You were just telling us, therefore, about your pen? - A.
   T h a t 's right.

Q. Did you ever look to your right to see what it was like
   to your right? - A. No.

Q. In your pen you say it gradually built up? - A. That's
   right.

Q. Did there become a time when it became more tight than it
   normally is? - A. Yes, it did.

Q. You have been asked about what it was normally like and
   you have given your answer.  When it became more tight
   than it normally was could you describe to us what it was
   like being there.   What do you mean by "more tight"?
   What was it that was different from normal?   What was it
   you couldn't do which perhaps you could do when it was
   normally in the position it was in? - A. Well, I couldn't
   move my arms or anything like that.

Q. When it is in the normal situation, the sortMr. Payne
   was talking to you about, what can you do with your arms
   normally? - A. You can move them about, lift them up.

Q. When it became more tight than that, the position was
   that you couldn't move? - A. Yes.

Q. Did that position of becoming more and more tight get
   worse and worse? - A. Yes, it did.
                                     D. P .   LOWE


The worst position it was ever like before it was
released, what was that like?   How tight was tight?
Was it that you were just absolutely jammed? - A. Yes.

So it would not be a matter of being able to move, you
would be totally solid? - A. Yes, you would.

Is that normal for a crowd to be like that? - A. No.

You were being asked about the view of somebody looking
at the crowd and you were being asked whether it would
look normal to somebody looking at the crowd.

     THE CORONER:   I don't think Mr. Payne actually
asked that. What he said was would somebody looking at
the crowd be standing shoulder to shoulder and back to
chest.

     MR. PAYNE:   I was asking about normal circumstances
when the crowd is packed so tight that they sway
together.   That is what I was asking about.

     THE CORONER:   I don't mind you exploring this, the
point you are making...

     MR. KING:   With respect, sir, I may have it wrong.
It may be my fault,

     THE CORONER:   I am always prepared to be corrected
because you have taken a note and very often I haven't.

     MR. KING: Sir,    if I have misunderstood Mr. Payne
it is my fault.   I understood him to be asking the
witness before about shoulder to shoulder, which was his
most recent question, when he was questioning for the
first time, that he was asking the witness to give his
view of what the view would be of somebody looking at the
crowd, given the description he had given.    If I am
wrong on that I am wrong, but that is how I understood
it.

     MR. PAYNE:   I wasn't meaning to ask that.   I was
asking - the word I was interested in was "normal".
That is what he used when he was answering questions to
you, sir.   What I was trying to follow up was how it
would look normally, for obvious reasons, so that it can
later be compared with what the police saw here.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I appreciate that.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I understand from those behind me
that their note is that he was asked the question,
"Somebody looking into the crowd seeing swaying, that
would be the normal crowd."
                                        D.   P.   LOWE


      MR. PAYNE:   Yes, that's right.
  /

     MR. KING:   So questions were directed, sir, to what
somebody looking into the crowd would see and what would
 be normal and not normal.

     THE CORONER:   I am not saying that...   It was just
the way I thought you were introducing your question
wasn't quite the way Mr. Payne had put it and that is all
I am concerned about.   I agree there was a question as
to what people could see.

     MR. KING:   The normal crowd, the normal swaying
crowd, they can move their shoulders, they can move their
arms? - A. Yes.

If somebody is looking into the normal crowd the swaying
they can see is the swaying of people who can move their
shoulders and move their arms? - A. Yes.

However, you tell us that there came a time with this
crowd that it became abnormal? - A. Yes.

It became abnormal because people couldn't move their
arms, couldn't move their shoulders? - A. That's right.

They were absolutely solid? - A. That's right.

You say it was very noisy and the people were shouting to
get out, the people in front of you? - A. Yes.

Was it just one person shouting to get out? - A. No,
everybody was doing it.

Was this at the time when you were so tight you couldn't
move? - A. Yes.

The position at that stage then was that you saw somebody
trying to get out and did you describe somebody having
his hand on the fence, is that right, and the policeman?
- A. Yes, that's right.

Was that a boy who was on the fence? - A. Yes, it was a
boy.

What was he doing? - A. Trying to climb over the fence.

How far had he got? - A. He had got his hands on the top.

Was this at the time when everybody was so tight they
couldn't move? - A. Yes.

That was the time when the crowd, you say, would be
abnormal? - A. Yes.
                                                             56


                                            D.   P.   LOWE


Q. What was the policeman doing at that stage? - A. He was
   trying to push his hands back off the top of the fence.

Q. In order to get him over? - A. No, to push him back in.

               Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

Q. Mr. Lowe, how many people were there in the pen when you
   first arrived?   Just a handful? - A. No, there were a
   few more than that.

Q. Could you see the barriers, for example, dotted around in
   between people? - A. Yes.

Q. You could see the fence in front of you and to the side?
   - A. Yes.

Q. You were asked a number of very positive questions by Mr.
   King.   Something along the lines of, "So when you came
   into the ground you weren't aware there was anything
   behind?   You didn't look behind you?" - A. That's right.

Q. There is a difference between asking someone if they
   definitely did not look behind them and asking them
   whether they actually remember everything that went on.
   Is it the case that what happened on that day was that
   you went into the pen, you were probably looking around,
   you had a couple of hours to kill, what you are telling
   us today is that you don't really remember seeing the
   gates, you don't really remember what was going on around
   you.   You remember some instances but not others, is
   that a fair assessment? - A. I didn't see the gates,

Q. You would accept that you would not expect to remember
   every single thing that happened on any particular day in
   logical sequence so you could set it out the time you did
   this, the time you did that? - A. No.

Q.   Is that the answer? - A. Yes.      *

Q.   I imagine this must have been one of the worst
     experiences of your life, being in those pens on that
     day? - A. That's right.

Q. It can get, I imagine, very confusing as to what
   happened.   One naturally gets confused about times,
   about events, about even the order of events?    That is a
   natural thing, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. I am not trying to criticise, I am just trying to point
   out what a person goes through after an event like this.
   It is very difficult. When you come out of something
   like that in your own mind you want to try and get it
   straight what happened? - A. Yes.
                                                            57




                                                   D. P. LOWE
      /

Q. There will be blanks and   there will be things that
   confuse and you will try   and rationalise it down and
   you will try and get the   logical order of what
   happened, would you not?   - A. Yes.

Q. You went through this with Alison. Did you discuss
   it with her, talk it through and see whether any of
   the recollections agreed or disagreed and talk it
   through like that? - A. Yes.

Q. I assume you would also that everyone could hold a
   mistaken but absolutely genuine belief about what
   occurred.  I am sure you have been in a situation
   where you have been discussing something you have
   seen with a friend. You have seen exactly the same
   as them but you both have completely different
   recollections of what happened but you both believe
   you are right? - A. Yes.

Q. You try and persuade your friend that that is what
   happened. What I am leading up to is that there may
   be evidence brought before this Inquest that there
   was in fact no steward positioned outside the
   Hillsborough ground at all on that day. What I am
   going to put to you is that you may be very honestly
   but genuinely mistaken about the nature of the
   gentleman you spoke to outside the ground who
   directed you to the turnstiles.  Is it possible - and
   I emphasise this - that you are mistaken about the
   steward you spoke to? - A. There was a steward there
   definitely.

     THE CORONER:   Perhaps to save me asking, could you
ask him how he knew he was a steward?

Q.     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Could you describe what he was
     wearing? - A. A steward's jacket.

Q. Did it have any writing on it? - A. Yes, "Steward".

Q. Whereabouts? - A. Either across the front or across
   the back.

Q. What colour was it? - A. Yellow.

               Cross-Examined bv MISS ADDELMANN:

Q. You have described that you saw a Police Officer who
   was pushing back a young man who was trying to get
   over the fence? - A. That is right.
rz.
                                                                    58




                                                           D. P. LOWE
              ✓
          Q. Would you agree with me that it was a very short time
             after that, Mr. Lowe, that you saw Police Officers
             attempting to assist fans out of the pen? - A- I
             didn't see no Police Officers attempting to assist
      B      fans.

          Q. Forgive me if I am wrong about that but I think you
             told the learned Coroner that it was a short period
             of time when people were helped out of the pens,
             after you saw this incident? - A. There were fans on
             the fence helping other fans out.

          Q. Are you saying that never at any time did you see
             Police Officers helping fans out of the pen? - A. I
             didn't see any, no.

          Q. Do you accept in fact that it did occur but you just
             did not happen to see it? - A. Yes.

                        Cross-Examined bv MR. RUSSELL:

          Q. Do you know what is meant by an all-ticket game? - A.
      D      Yes.

          Q. Do you know that this Semi-Final was an all-ticket
             match? - A. Yes.

          Q. What proportion of matches that you go to are all­
             ticket matches? - A. They all are now.

          Q. You say that they are all now but I am interested in
             the position before April 1989? - A. Quite a few or
             mo r e .

          Q. Was it the first time you had ever been to an all­
             ticket match without a ticket? - A. Yes.

          Q. So the previous all-ticket matches you went to you
             had had tickets? - A. That is right.

          Q. As far as you knew was yours a common experience?   In
             other words, was it the first all-ticket match with
             other fans arriving without tickets or do you not
             know? - A. I don't know.

               THE CORONER:   I am sorry, could you just repeat that
          question? My mind has strayed.   Could you repeat it or
          shall I get it read to you?

                          (The shorthand note was read)




      H
                                                          59




                                                    D. P. LOWE
      ✓
Q.       MR. RUSSELL:  You have described the normal
     experience of being on a crowded terrace, of being
     shoulder to shoulder and being front to back with
     other fans and swaying when the force of the person
     next to you moves you in a particular direction? - A.
     Yes.

Q.    On this day you have described being on the full
     terrace and you have referred to one incident already
     when a beach ball was being bounced around? - A. Yes.

Q.    At the time in April of the season 1988/1989 was that
     a common phenomenon? Had that happened before? - A.
     I had never seen it before, no.

Q. The evidence that you gave, and as I understand it
   your recollection, is that those on the terraces with
   you were able to take part in that game of pushing
   the beach ball around? - A . Yes.

Q. I am sorry, did you say yes? - A. Yes.

Q. We know from the video which you have not seen what
   time that was happening.  Can I move on to another
   incident? It is common before any match for the
   teams to be read out. First one team and then the
   other? - A. Yes.

Q. Will you try and keep your voice up? That happened
   on this occasion, did it not? - A. I could not tell
   y o u . I d i d n ’t hear i t .

Q. When the teams are read out that is one of the
   rituals that happen before a game and there is
   something in which there is a certain degree of crowd
   participation in that part of the proceedings, is
   there not? - A. Yes.

Q. What happens often when a team is read out is that
   with each name for your own team there is a cheer for
   the member of the team, is there not? - A. Yes.

Q. Often with the cheer in response to the name the
   people on the terraces and elsewhere in the crowd
   punched the air so that there is some rhythm to it.
   In answer to the names being read out the fans will
   punch the air with a cheer in response to that member
   of the team, will they not? - A. Yes.

Q. We can look perhaps at the video evidence ourselves
   but do you remember on this occasion when the
   Liverpool team was read out at nine minutes to three
   that happened on these terraces? - A. I cannot
   remember.

Q. If that is right there would have been enough room
   for those people who did punch the air in response to
   the ....

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Russell, I have got to be fair.  I
did not let Mr. King pursue a question to which he did not
know the answer. He says he does not remember the teams
being announced.  I have got to accept that this witness
does not remember that and I do not think you should pursue
it with him.  I have allowed you twice to ask him in a
sense but I think we have got to stop at this point.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, my only reason for pursuing it is
the evidence elicited by Mr. King about being unable to use
one’s arm.

     THE CORONER:   I appreciate the reason why you are
asking it but if he says he cannot remember the incident
then he cannot possibly tell you whether or not he did or
did not do it.

     MR. RUSSELL:    Sir, we have the video.

     THE CORONER:   There will be other people I am sure
who will be able to help you.

                    Further bv THE CORONER:

Q. I have one or two points. The first is this; I want
   to revert to the normal when you are shoulder to
   shoulder, back to front and you are swaying? - A.
   Yes.

Q. I am not talking about the abnormal, all right? - A.
   Yes.

Q. I take it that there are gradations even in that, in
   other words, when you first went on to the terrace
   there was not anybody near you in order to sway? You
   would have had to brush up to somebody, would you
   not, and lean on it, so to speak? - A. Yes.

Q. As things happened it got tighter and you might have
   begun to sway but there is a gradation, is there not?
   You can get a degree of tightness where you begin to
   sway and that will go on up to a certain point where
   you would say "Well, it is tight but it is still
   normal" but then it goes beyond and you say, "My
   goodness me", that is right, is it not? - A. Yes.
                                                                61




                                                          D. P. LOWE

Q. What you said was that the way you would distinguish
   the normal from the abnormal is that in a normal
   situation you can still lift your arms and do things
   of that nature. As you can see I have just lifted my
   arm and I am totally unimpeded by my colleague.
   Would I be right in thinking though that in certain
   circumstances I am in a situation where I am in a
   crowd and I could lift my arms but before doing so I
   would have to readjust my body, do you see what I
   mean? - A. Yes.

Q. That I might have to twist a bit in order to get it
   up? - A. Yes.

Q. Is that a situation which occurs within the normal?
   You are saying have always got so much room between
   you and the next person? - A. Usually, yes.

Q. And freely get your arm up without having to make any
   adjustment? - A. That is right.

Q. Nevertheless you are so close to them that you have
   to move if they move? - A. Yes.

Q. You   are quite sure about   that? -   A. Yes.

Q. You have told     me, and you have    toldMr.Manning, when
   we were talking about shouting and calling out, do
   you remember? - A. Yes.

Q. Was   there a lot of noiseat thismatch?          - A. Yes.

Q. Because people were cheering, chanting and shouting
   as well? - A. Yes.

Q. You presumably could hear what people were saying
   next to you but could you distinguish what people
   were saying some distance away from you? - A. No.

Q. Because of the overall noise level? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you said that you and all the people around
   you near the front were all shouting. Do you know
   what you were saying? - A. Just "Get us out".
Q. "Get us out"? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you continue with that right up to the point when
   people actually started being helped over the side? -
   A. Yes.
                                                                        62



%

                                                               D. P. LOWE
             /

        Q.        In order to shout I take it that you have to take a
                 breath, is that right? - A. Yes.

        Q.        You have got to breathe in, then you have to shout,
    B            and thenyou have to breathe in again, is that right?
                 - A. Yes.

        Q. Do you agree with that? - A. Yes.

        Q. Are you saying that although you could not move your
           arms and you were hemmed in you were still able to do
           that? - A. Yes.

        Q. You had enough room between you and the back and
           front that you could expand your chest an inch or
           whatever it might be, two inches, or whatever it
           would take? - A. Yes.

        Q.       That is right, is itnot? - A. Yes.

        Q.    You have told us you saw somebody climb up and you
             saw a Police Officer push that person back, you are
    D        unable to relate it to any event on the field. That
             is right, is it not? - A. That is right.

        Q.    Are you able to say that when that happened it was
             happening when you were shouting? - A. Yes.

               THE CORONER:   We are going to rise for lunch.
        After lunch we are going to listen to Alison. There is
        another witness we have got to have today because it is the
        last opportunity to have this witness before she is off
        somewhere. Then we have got a young lady who is actually
        the sister of one of the deceased.  Is Stephanie here? No.
        We might get to her later because I hate to keep relatives
        waiting but we must take the witnesses we need to take, so
        to speak.

               MR. KING:   Sir, could you tell us the name of the
        witness we must take?

               THE CORONER:   Alison Bennett because she has come
        with David Lowe and I know they want to be together. Alan
        Jones is the witness I must take and the only other one
        listed for today is Stephanie. We rise for lunch now.

                                 LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT


    G




    H
                                                                63


                                              P.P. LOWE



          THE CORONER:    Could we have Mr. Lowe back for a moment?
     Ladies and gentlemen, the Jury have sent me a little note in
     which they put five questions which they thought I should have
     asked.  I can read the questions out to you or I can put them
     to the witness.   I think you would be satisfied if I put them
     to the witness?

                         PAVIP PETER LOWE Recalled

                         Further By The Coroner.
                                               -

Q.   Mr. Lowe, it won'ttake very long. These questions all relate
     to the tickets you bought. The first question the Jury have
     asked is, and I will take them in the order in which they have
     given them to me, were the tickets bought genuine? - A. They
     were bought off a fellow outside the Spion Kop.

Q. You thought they were genuine? - A. Yes.

Q. (2) Who did you buy the tickets off?        Had the person an
   accent? - A. I could not tell you.

Q. (3) Were there many people buying tickets off this person,
   and which fans? There are two questions. Were there many
   people buying tickets off this person? - A. I didn't see
   anybody else, no.

Q. So you can't say which fans they were because there were not
   any as far as you were concerned. Next question:    did you
   see how many tickets he had for sale? - A. No, I didn't.

Q. And finally, would it be possible to trace these tickets? - A.
   I gave my tickets up for the Taylor Inquiry, the Taylor
   Report.

Q.   So you have handedthem into the West MidlandsPolice Inquiry
     team or something? - A. Yes.

          THE CORONER:  Those were the things you wanted me to
     ask. Anything else you want to ask arising out of the
     questions? Anything any of you want to ask arising? Yes, Mr.
     Payne?

          MR. PAYNE:    Following the line of interest which the
     Jury have expressed in this, I wonder if it would be helpful
     if I was to_ ask Mr. Lowe about his attempts to purchase
     tickets at the Leppings Lane end as well, because he did
     mention that, and it was not followed up by anybody, but
     clearly the Jury are interested in this subject.

          THE CORONER:      Yes, I think that is fair enough.   Go
     ahead and ask.

                Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q. In your own words, describe your attempts to buy tickets at
                                         P.P. LOWE


the Leppings Lane end? - A. I did not attempt to buy any at
the Leppings Lane end.

Oh, you did not? - A. No.

      MR. PAYNE:     That deals with that then.   That will teach
me.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   May I mention, sir, if the Jury are
interested, I know certainly at one point Sheffield Wednesday
did have a list of numbers of tickets that were found to be
fraudulent.  They had a list of numbers of tickets found to be
fraudulent, and I think it was very, very low, collected at
the turnstiles, but I believe we have still got that in our
possession.  If the Jury would like it I am sure we could t r y
to find out how many enquiries were made. There was one
person going round if there was a query about the ticket. As
I remember, the number was very low.

     THE CORONER:   We may have this information somewhere.
In fact, I am sure we have it. We will check it. If we can't
get it out of our system we will turn to you for help. Thank
you.

     MR. MANNING:  Sir, can I press the button on my new
erect pedestal?   I am not going out for lunch any more in
case anything else arrives. (Laughter)

      THE CORONER:    What   do you think of this one?

     MR. MANNING:     This   is greeted with euphoria.   Basically,
we like it.

      THE CORONER:    Thank you. It does look more convenient
forwriting and much easier for speech.    Let us hope it will
help.

     MR. MANNING:   I rose not rally just to test the button
but to make a serious point, if I may, sir, because it follows
from what my learned friend, Mr. Payne, put, having not had
the advantage to look at his note, but I looked at mine at the
same time.  I think there is another question that needs to be
asked of Mr. Lowe,   if he is here, because the note I had is,
"I could have got Leppings Lane tickets ,-but they were a lot
more expensive".

     THE CORONER:     Yes, he did say that. You are quite
right. Come back,   Mr. Lowe. The problem is, when I ask the
questions I cannot take a note at the same time.

     MR. MANNING:    Of course, sir.     That is one of the
reasons we are here.

      THE CORONER:     Go ahead and ask him.
3>
                                                                     65


                                                      P.P. LOWE


                        Further Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:
               /

         Q. Mr. Lowe, from where was it that you could have obtained
            Leppings Lane tickets? - A. From the same person.

     g   Q. From the same person? - A. Yes.

         Q. So when you answered the Jury's question as to whether that
              person had more tickets to sell and you said you did not know,
              in fact that same person did have some more tickets because he
              had some Leppings Lane tickets? - A. Yes, he said, "How many” ,
              and I don't know many.

                   MR. MANNING:   I don't know whether it is necessary for
              you, sir, to go back over those questions and see whether ■
              there is anything more needs to be done.

                                  Further By The Coroner:

         Q. I don't   want to labour this point too far, but I realise you
            may not   be able to say how many, but did you see him hold
            tickets   in his hands or not? - A. No, he told me that he had
            tickets   for the other end.
     D   Q. But he did not give you any indication of how many? - A. no.

         Q.   But the impression was he could have produced at least five
              because there were five of you? - A. Probably, yes.

         Q. He didn't say, "Oh, dear, I have only got three of those"?
            That was not the reason you did not buy Leppings Lane tickets?
            - A. No.

         Q.   It was the money, really, or the cost? - A. Yes.

                   THE CORONER: Anything else arising? I don't want to go
              too far down the line in this direction, but the Jury were
              interested.

                   MR. MANNING:   It was simply that the Jury were
              concerned, and it was clear from my note which my learned
              friend has confirmed that that was not the impression we had,
              which was why my friend asked the question.

                   THE CORONER:     Indeed, yes:

         Q. There is no question, you did not attempt to buy tickets at
            the Leppings Lane end? - A. That is right.




                                     /ALLISON JANE BENNETT Sworn:




     H
                                                               66


                                                 A. J .   BENNETT




                  ALISON JAME BENNETT Called

                        By THE CORONER

Q. You are Alison Jane Bennett? - A. Yes.

Q.                                   Mansfield in
     Nottinghamshire? - A. Yes.

Q. You certainly were and I assume still are the
   girlfriend of David Lowe, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Are you a Liverpool supporter? - A. Yes.

Q. On Saturday, 15th April 1939, you, David and three
   others decided to come to Hillsborough? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you confirm that, in fact, all of you came and none
   of you had tickets? - A. That is right.

Q. As a matter of interest, did you know it was an all
   ticket match? - A. Yes.

0. But - I didn't ask this of David but I will ask you -
   what made you think that you were going to be able to
   get a ticket when you got here, knowing it was a semi­
   final? - A. You normally can, any match, if you are
   prepared to pay.

Q. Had you been before without a ticket to an all ticket
   raatcn? - A. Ho.

Q. No, but that's the intelligence that you gathered from
   friends? - A. You know, yes.

0.. Is it right that you arrived, in fact, fairly early,      at
    about 11 or so? - A. Yes.

Q.   And you went to the Spion Kop    first? -   A. Yes.

0. Did you got there first or did you go to the pub first
   as far as you remember? - A. Yes, we went there first.

Q.   To the pub? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you see somebody who was selling   tickets? - A. Yes.

Q.   was it obvious or were you saying, "Anybody got
     tickets?".   How did you find him? - A. You can always
     pick them out.

Q. And five tickets were purchased? - A. Yes.

Q. For the Spion Kop? - A. Yes.
                                                           67


                                             A. J .   BENNETT




Q. And David has told us that be bought those, although he
   didn't really want them, because they were just that
   much cheaper. They were expensive enough .... - A.
   Yes.

Q. But they were that much cheaper, is that right? - A.
   Tnat's right.

Q. Did you think that you would have to go into the Spion
   Kop or did you think tnat you would manage to get into
   Leppings Lane? - A. I thought if we didn t get into
   Leppings Lane we would go in the paddock where we went
   last year.

Q. How come that you were in that area last year? - A.
   Because we had tickets for the Spion Kop.

0. I see. Did you do the same last year? - A. We asked a
   Policeman.

Q. Ho, last year, in 1988, did you come without tickets
   also or did you ...? - A. Ho.

Q. You had bought Spion Kop .... - A. Ue had bought
   tickets, yes.

Q. Did you know in 1988 that that was the Forest end of
   the ground, or did you not know that? I aa talking
   about 1988. - A. No, I didn't know.

Q. You didn't know. You thought you were going to the
   Liverpool end? - A. No, I knew it was the away end.

0. Well they were both away ends, weren't they, if you
   think about it? - A. Wot our end.

Q. Not your end, yes, the other side? - A. Yes.

Q. Why did you, in 1988, not buy a Leppings Lane ticket? -
   A. Because David's friend got us two tickets.

Q. I see, so in a way that is what was available and you
   took it, and that was it? - A. Yes.

Q. Well, we are not too worried about 1988 anyway.  Having
   got the tickets everybody was happy, I take it - at
   least you knew you would get in, that is really what
   you were saying? - A. Yes.

Q. And off you went to the pub, is that right, and you got
   there about what, 12, 12.30, something like that, can
   you remember? - A. No, a bit earlier.

Q. 11.30 — - pardon? - A. It was earlier than 12.
                                                             68


                                               A. J .   BEHWETT




Q . B e tw e e n 11 and 12? -   A. Yes.

Q. And I think it started livening up with customers from
   when onward? - A. After 12.

Q. After 12, and how many would you say were in the pub
   when you left? t*hat time was it that you left? - A.
   About 1 o'clock.

Q. How many would you say were in then? - A. About 100.

Q. And I think you, in fact, didn't drink anytning, apart
   from perhaps lemonade or something? - A. I had one
   orange.

Q. Orange, yes - no alcohol anyway? - A. No.

Q. Did you see, at the time that you were in the pub,
   anything that alarmed you as far as drinking was
   concerned? - A. No.

Q. And no misbehaviour of any sort at that time? - A. iio.

Q. But you left at 1? - A. Yes.

Q. And you set off and you went to Leppings Lane, and is
   it right that after a few false starts you presented
   yourself at turnstile G? - A. Yes.

Q. That is the right hand turnstile, and you presented
   your tickets and you were let in? - A. Yes.

Q. Spion Kop tickets but they were used at the Leppings
   Lane end. - A. Yes.

Q. Did you have any difficulty at all in getting through
   that turnstile? - A. No, not after we had been turned
   away from the other one, no, we got in straightaway.

Q. One turned you away and the second one let you through,
   he didn't stop you and say, "Wrong ticket but I'll let
   you tnrough", or anything like that? - A. Ho.

Q. He just took the ticket and let you through? - A. Yes.

Q. Did he look at it, can you remember? - A. I can't
   remember.

Q. Anyway, you didn't have to plead with him? - A. No.

Q. You didn't have to give him any money, you didn't nave
   to do anything, you just went straight through, is that
   right? - A. That is right.
                                                                 69


                                                 A. J .   BENNETT




Q. Then how did you know to go to those turnstiles? Who
   directed you to them? - A. To the turnstile where we
   went in?

Q. Yes. - A. Well David had been before so he knew where
   the turnstiles were.

Q. No, sorry, you have misunderstood me.     When you turned
   up at Leppings Lane. - A. Yes.

Q. You had   the wrong tickets, didn't you? - A. Yes.

Q. And I tnink you approached somebody and said, "Can you
   help us?" - A. Before?

Q. Who was that person? - A. That was a Policeman round at
   the kiosk.

Q. Yes, and what did he tell you? - A. He told us to go
   round and see somebody on the turnstiles.

Q. And when you got there who did you speak to? - A. A
   steward on the gate.

Q. Pardon? - A. A steward.

Q. Where was he? - A. On the    gate on the outside of     the
   fence.

Q. Outside the perimeter gate? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you tell me, 1 know you heard what David said
   because you were here, but think back to exactly what
   he said - how did you know that it was a steward? - A.
   Because he had got a vest on.

Q. He had a vest on. Can you describe it? Girls are
   usually better at describing clothing than fellows in
   my experience.  Could you describe waat it was like? -
   A. It was fluorescent yellow.

Q. Fluorescent yellow, good, and did it have any writing
   on it? - A. I wouldn t be sure.   I couldn't say
   definite it had got writing on.

Q. You can't remember.  Did it have any emblems of any
   sort on it? - A. I wouldn't say.

Q. You don't know, all you remember was that it was
   fluorescent yellow? - A. Yes.

Q.   So he has better recollection   than you of it? - A. Yes.

Q.   You went into Enclosure 4, is that right? - A. Yes.
                                                                                           70


                                                                         A. J .    BENNETT




Q. T h a t i s   th e l e f t   h an d p e n ,   is   th a t r ig h t?   -   A. Yes.

Q. And you took up a position where? - A. Halfway to
   three-quarters up.

Q. Yes, and this was at about what tinie? - A. 2 o'clock-
   ish, perhaps before.

Q. Pardon? - A. Perhaps before 2.                       It was early.             We was
   there ever so early.

Q. Was it crowded or uncrowded? - A. No, not crowded at
   all.

Q. Not crowded at all, and how long did it remain in this
   uncrowded state? - A. It was quite a while and then it
   started to fill up.

Q. What time would you put it that it started filling up?
   - A. Between, really full between quarter-past and
   half-past-2 when it was really full.

Q. So between quarter and half-past-2 it was really full?
   - A. Yes.

Q. No fuller than --- are you a regular attender at
   matches? - A. Yes.

Q.   Do you usually stand on the terraces? - A. Yes.

Q.   At 2.30 - we will pick that point - was it as full as
     you would normally expect the terrace to be? - A. Yes.

Q. Had you ever been, excluding 1989, on a terrace which
   was fuller than it was at 2.30, that you remember? It
   is difficult, this, because you have got to sort out
   what it was like afterwards from what it was, so be
   careful, think hard. - A. No, I would say that it was
   the fullest it has ever been.

Q. Okay, and after 2.30 what happened as far as you were
   concerned? - A. We had started to move forward by then
   because of the people coming in from behind.

Q. Are you saying then that you were being moved by
   pressure from behind? Is that what you are saying? -
   A. Yes, we moved down a step and then we just kept
   going.

Q. Was there, in fact, more space in front for you to move
   down? - A. Yes, there was at first, yes.
                                                                  71


                                                A.J .   BENNETT



     Q. S6, in fact, what was happening was - what you are saying is
        that there was gaps in front of you? - A. Yes.

     Q. And you were moving at that point down because people were
B       coming in behind you? - A. Yes.

     Q. Was this movement at this stage, say between 2.30 and 20-to-
        or quarter-to-3, voluntary? In other words, were you able to
        say;, "People are coming in . We will move forward"? - A.
        Yes.

     Q. You could do that yourself? - A. Yes.

     Q.    You are quite sure about that?It was not that you  were being
          pushed and had no control over your movements? - A. No.

     Q. At that time? - A. At that time you could have moved around.

     Q. You could have moved around, and then did you come up during
        this period, up against the barrier? - A. Yes, which we went
        under.

1}   Q. You went under it.    That is because it is more comfortable? -
          A . Yes.

     Q. On the right, or the wrong side of the barrier, but it is
        actually the right side, is not it? - A. Yes.

     Q. You had enough space to duck under and stand up? - A. Yes.

     Q.   Was there a bit of space in front of you then? -A. Yes.

     Q.   I think at that point you were not worried? - A. No.

     Q. As far as you were concerned this was just a normal football
        match, a big important match? - A. yes.

     Q. Would that be right, or am I putting words in your mouth? - A.
        no, that is right.

     Q. That is right? And then I think Dave and Julie and you got
        separated? - A. Yes.

     Q. Can you remember that? - A. Yes.

     Q. What time approximately was that? - A. About quarter-to. 10-
        to-3.

     Q. 10-to-3 approximately. - A. Between quarter-to and 10-to-3.

     Q.    Why did that happen? Can you remember? - A. Julie had never
          been to a big match before, and she was worried. She started
          to worry.  It was pretty normal at that time.

     Q.    It was pretty normal? - A. Yes, but she was worried, so they
          said they would try and take her out somewhere else. So Dale



H
                                                                 72


                                              A . J . BENNETT


   took Julie.
    /
Q. Where were they hoping to go to,       do you know? - A. I would not
   like to say. Perhaps to another        pen.

Q. But they were able at that point to move freely away from you.
   Is that right? - A. He had to push justa little but not....

Q. It was not too bad? - A. No.

Q. In other words, he could make his way? - A.       Yes.

Q. And they sidled off? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did they go left, right or frontways, as far as you remember?
     - A. I would say right.

Q. And you and Dave stayed where you were, so to speak? - A. Yes.

Q.   Because you had been before to big    matches and you were not
     worried at that stage? - A. No.

Q.   Dave thought they were going to the little gate atthe front
     in order to get out. Can you remember whether that was so?
     If you can't, say so. - A. I can't really remember.

Q.   You can't remember. OK. Having separated,       what time do you
     say this was that you and this other couple     separated, about?
     - A. About quarter-to, 10-to.

Q.   You stayed in the position by thebarrier.        For how much
     longer? - A. Not very much longer.

Q.   I assume you did not actually look    at your watch throughout
     this? - A. No.

Q. So the times are guesses, are not they? Can you remember
   anything about what was happening on the field, because
   sometimes you can piece it together from that? - A. No, not
   really.

Q. Can you recollect, did you at any time see the players on the
   field? I don't mean playing the game but may be for the warm
   up earlier, because you were there quite early, were not you?
   - A. Yes, earlier on, when they came out, yes.

Q.   Did you see them come out pre-match? - A.    No.

Q.    Did you see them play at all, any part of   the game? - A.      No,
     nothing.

Q. If you did see it you can't remember it? - A. I can't
   remember. I would not say I did, n o .

Q. So what happened then, as far as you remember? - A. Then we
   just got shoved further to the front.
                                                                73


                                               A .J . BENNETT


    Q. In other words,   there was pressure from behind? - A. Yes.

    Q. You say "shoved over". Does that mean this was a sudden
       movement that pushed you forward? - A. It built up. You could
       not go back. With being pushed forward you couldn’t go back.
B
    Q. What you described earlier was that people were coming and
       pushing you, but you could voluntarily move forward in order
       to get out of their way. Are you saying this was now
       different? - A. Yes.

    Q. You could not have stopped? - A. No.

    Q. And what happened then? Did you get frightened at any point? .
       - A. Yes, I wanted to get out.

    Q. Now, think hard. Can you think whether at that point the game
       had started or was in play? I know you told me you can't
       remember, but I want to be quite sure. - A. I can't remember.
       I would think it would have started



D




                              /Q. What makes you think,




G




H
                                                                       74



                                                   A.   J.   BENNETT



         What makes you think that? - A. Because you could hear
         the crowd shouting round the other end of the ground.

B   Q. So there was a noise as if the game was in play? -A. Yes.
    Q. Were people shouting in the pen you were in? - A. Yes, to
         get out.

    Q. Where you were? - A. Yes.       They weren't shouting for the
         football team.

    Q. Did you hear anybody at the back shouting and chanting at
         all? - A. I would not like to say.        I can't really
         remember.

    Q. Did you see people begin to climb out? - A. Yes.
    Q. It is very difficult because time in a situation like
         that...   Can you give me any idea how long it took, what
         the time intervals were before you began to see people
         beginning to climb out? - A. About three or five minutes
         at the most.
D
                MR. MANNING:    After when, sir?

    Q.        THE CORONER:   Three to five minutes after you...? -
         A. After I was really shoved to the front.

    Q. Did you finish up right at the perimeter fence or were
         there people in between you? - A. There was Steven in
         front of me.

    Q. Steven was protecting you from the wiring? - A. Yes.
    Q. Were you facing the pitch or were you facing the other
         way? - A. I was facing the pitch.

         Was he looking at you or was his back towards you? - A.
         No, I was looking at his chest.

    Q. He was facing you? - A. Yes.
    Q. You think from the noise that the game was in progress at
         that point? -A. Yes.

    Q. Was that the point when people were climbing out? - A.
         Yes.

    Q. Was that the point - I mean, people climbing out for a
         long time.   What I am trying to find out is when you
         first noticed people climbing out. Was that when the
         roar of the crowd indicated to you that the game had




H
                                                                 75



                                              A. J .   BENNETT


       already started or was it after or before?   It's very
       difficult. - A. I would have said it was before.

    Q. Before the game...? - A. Yes.
B   Q. By about how much? - A. Not very much - a few minutes.

    Q. A short period of time.

             MR. KING:   I am awfully sorry, what was before?

            THE CORONER:   The people climbing out. As I
       understand the witness to say, was that she had been
       pushed forward.   It was very tight.  She thought in that
       position the game was in progress but people had begun to
       climb out shortly before she thought the game was in
       play, but she isn't certain because she was basing it on
       the roar.   That is my understanding:

    Q. Is that what you are saying? - A. Yes.

    Q. I am interested in the people who were climbing out.
       Where were these people coming from? - A. At the side.
D
    Q. Next to you? - A. Yes, and before Steven ended up on the
       fence somebody got out in front of Steven.

    Q. So they were further ahead of you, the people who were
       climbing out? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did people climb out who were further back from you?     In
       other words, did people come from the back, forward, that
       youremember? - A. No, because you couldn't move.     You
       were packed that tight, nobody could have come before
       anybody else.

    Q. So people were climbing who were immediately on the
       fence, over the top of it if they could and then the next
       one tried it and so on and you kept on being pushed^
       forward.   Every time there was a gap you moved a little
       bit further.   Is that what you are saying? - A. Yes.

    Q. Were you shouting? -A. Yes.

    Q. It was hurting you, your chest was hurting you I assume?
       - A. Yes.

    Q. David was shouting as well? -A. Yes, he was telling the
       two  boys at the side to get me out.

    Q. Did   they respond in any way? - A. They did, yes.




H
                                                                  76


                                           A.    J.   32NNETT


Q. What did they do or say? - A. One made ever such a small
   gap and he told me to get there and he helped me with
   another boy, pulled me on to the side fence.

Q. The railings that divided... - A. Yes.

Q. Then you went into...   It is a very narrow little
   enclosure, the one next to you, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you go into that one? - A. Yes, they threw me down to
   another boy and I went out on to the pitch.

Q. David was still inside at that point? - A. Yes, and
   Steven.

Q. Could you see him? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you run up to the fencing to try and speak with him?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Did you manage to communicate with him? - A. Yes.

Q. What did you say to him? - A. Kept telling him to get
   out.

Q.   What did he say? - A. Told me to get away        from the fence.

Q.   He told you to get away? -A. Yes.

Q. How close to the fencing was he at that point? - A. Quite
   close.

Q. Right up to it or was there still somebody in front of
   him? - A. No, there was somebody in front.

Q.   One or two or three people, how many? - A. One/two.

Q.   One or two.  Then he has told us he managed to get         back
     and over the side? - A. Yes.

Q.   He joined you eventually? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you see any other girls or children coming out of the
     pen? - A. Yes, they were trying to get the girls and the
     kiddies out first.

Q. Were these already in the front or were they being sort
   of got from other areas? - A. There were some at the
   front but they were trying to pass the little children to
   the front.

Q.   How    did they do that? - A. I think they just had toroll
     them down and just hope somebody caught them because
     there were people on top of the fence by then.
                                        A.   J.   BENNETT


The reason I ask this question is because the impression
we have been given is that everybody was standing, you
know, arms really tight, they couldn't move.   How did
they get the children up to roll them down?   Who did
that and how far back did it initiate? - A. It was quite
a way back.   They were sending them from a long way back
down the sides.

     THE CORONER:    Can you put the plan of the terrace
up for a minute?    We will give it a number.   (C.297):

That will be yours, Alison Bennett's.        Can you see it? -
A. Yes.

Sergeant Griffiths, just point to pen 4, please.            That
is the enclosure you were in? - A. Yes.

Concentrate simply on these children and girls who were
being moved, or rolled I think you said, forward.    You
can see rows of barriers there.   Start with the one
right at the back and then the next one down and then
there is another larger one across and then you have got
another one.   How far back did this movement of people
towards the front begin? - A. From about the second big
one up.

That one? - A. That one there.

So that is the third row of barriers across? - A. Yes.

You may not be able to answer this question: was it
right across the whole width of the terrace that this was
happening or was it just from selected areas? - A. Just
selected areas.

Can you remember which areas that might have been? - A.
No, you could just see children being thrown forward.

Are you confident that this - I will call it the movement
of the children - originated at about that level? - A.
From what I could see, yes.

Did you see any police at the perimeter fence? - A. They
were there at the front, yes.

When you first noticed officers, how many were there? -
A. I don't know.   I could only see those in front where
I was.

Yes, you are quite right.  Did you only see one officer
or did you see more than one officer? - A. There was more
than one in front of us.
                                                               78



                                           A.   J.   BENNETT


Q. Where were they standing?   Were they standing on the
   track or were they standing on the fence, or where were
   they? - A. Just in front of the fencing.

Q. What, if anything, were they doing? - A. Not a lot to
   start off with.

Q.    When you say "not a lot to start off with", at what point
     was that? - A. That was when they were starting to try
     and get children out, telling people.     They were
     shouting, "Get us out," and they just didn't do nothing,
     they just stood there.

Q. Did they appear to shout, "Go back," or wave their hands
   or anything at all? - A. I didn't hear them.

Q.   How close were you to the fencing at that time?      - A. Two
     or three people away.

Q. So this was when you were already quite tightly squashed?
   - A. Yes.

Q. But you were still able to shout? - A. Yes.

Q. In fact you were able to shout throughout this, is that
   right? - A. Yes.

Q. At what point did they appear to you to be doing
   something? - A. It was after I was on the pitch, after I
   had got out, when I saw them helping people.

Q. By that time you are saying the match had finished
   because there weren't any players on the field? - A.
   There were no players on the pitch.

Q. You did not see anything before that? - A. No.

Q. Then when you looked back you could see thera was
   activity going on? - A. Later, yes.

Q. I want you to mark for me your first viewing position
   where you went and then the position after you ducked
   under the barrier.   If you put a cross for the first
   viewing position and put a circle where you ducked
   underneath the barrier.  (The witness marked the plan)

                  Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE;

0. One point in the story which I just ask you about.   On
   your arrival at the ground, when you were eventually let
   in through the turnstile, did you see some policemen
   about at that point? - A. One checked us going in.

Q. Was that inside or outside the turnstile? -A. Inside.
                                       A. J .   BZNNETT


What did he do to check you? - A. They always feel down,
don't they?

Searched you? - A. Yes.

Were there a number of policemen doing that just inside
the turnstiles to fans as they came through the
turnstiles? - A. I didn't see a lot.   There were a
couple there, a few.

The next question is this: can you tell the court what
is the extent of your experience of going to big football
matches? - A. I have been going to football matches for
about five years with David.

He said about twelve times a year? - A. Yes.

So that is about right for you as well, is it? - A. Yes.

You have been to other big occasions, have you, big
football matches? - A. Yes, I have been to Forest because
that is local.   That is quite a big match.

Normally you follow Liverpool? - A. Yes.

Whereabouts do you go to watch them play? - A. I have
been to Liverpool, Everton.   I have been to Anfield,
Forest.   I have been to Everton, Forest, Anfield,
Sheffield, London.




                Q. I assume you have
                                         A. J. BENNETT

I assume you have normally stood, have you, with the
Liverpool supporters? - A. Yes.

You have been in Court this morning, have you not? -
A. Yes.

When your friend was giving evidence? - A. Yes.

However, please give this evidence from your own
experience and not from anything he has said? - A.
Ye s .

I want to ask you very much the same questions that I
asked him but I want you to say it from your own
point of view. What may seem normal to some people
may not be normal to others? - A. Yes.

I want to ask what is normal from the point of view
of a keen supporter like you standing in crowds on
big occasions watching a football match.  Do you
understand that? - A. Yes.

Have you experienced this swaying in the crowds
yourself? - A. Yes.

Is that caused because the crowd is packed tightly? -
A. Yes, but not uncomfortable, not so that you cannot
mov e.

I understand that.  It is because you are standing so
close to the people round about you that when they
sway you have got to sway as well.  Is that so? - A.
Ye s .

Do you agree with him, your friend, that the fair way
to describe that is that you are standing shoulder to
shoulder and front to back with the people? - A. Yes.

Who are tight up against you but not so tight that it
would be a crush? - A. Yes.

On this match the pen that you were in gradually
filled up? - A. Yes.

The note I have got I may have got it wrong and so
can you tell me? The note I have got is that up
until about quarter to or ten to three from your
point of view it was pretty normal at that time? - A.
Yes.

Meaning it was crowded? - A. But not uncomfortable.
                                                                      81




                                                         A. J. BENNETT

               hurtSaSt n0t the Way yOU See it? ~ A * Yes' not so Lt

         Q.    What? - A. It didn't hurt.
B
     Q. .      It worried your friend Julie? - A. Yes.

     Q. .      I do not know whether we are going to hear her
               b u t ....

                 THE CORONER:   No, we are not.

     Q.           MR. PAYNE:   is she an experienced football
               supporter? - A. No.

     Q.        So she has not had this sort of experience of an
               event? - A. No.

     Q.       But you had and so far as you were concerned it was
              pretty normal? - a . Yes.

     Q.       So that where it went wrong was after about quarter
D             or ten to three? - A. Yes.

     Q.       Just help please; from the point of view of somebody
              looking at the crowd from outside, using your
              expression of normal judging by other matches,
              anybody looking at the crowd up to that time would
              have seen it in a normal condition? - A. Yes.
    Q.        As you know it? - A. Yes.

    Q.        After that you just got more and more squashed
              together? - a . Yes.

    Q.        That is how you felt it? - A. Yes.
    Q.        However, you have mentioned the Police who were on
              the perimeter track? - a . Yes.

         . By which time, when you were giving your evidence
           you knew that it had gone beyond normal and was now a
           crush? - a . Yes.

    Q.
                     seem to you that the Police did not realise
              that? - A. No, they didn't.
    Q.        You are agreeing with me? - A. They didn't know what
              they were doing.

    Q.        They obviously did not realise it was dangerous? - A.
                                                                82




                                                  A. J. BENNETT


    Q. You are agreeing with me, are you? - A. Yes.

H   Q. Just to arrive at that time you said that about three
       to five minutes after you got shoved to the front
       people started to climb out? - A. Yes.

    Q. Can you be any more accurate about this? We left you
       about quarter or ten to three.  Can you help when
       this time was when people started to climb out so far
       as you were concerned? - A. No, not really.  They
       just started to get out the best way that they could.

    Q. When the Police realised what was happening they then
       tried to help people to get out? - A. It was quite a
       while.  There were quite a few people on the fences
       and out on the pitch by the time that they tried to
       help people out.

    Q. You do not know what but to start with I suppose they
       thought it was a pitch invasion? - A. They should
       have listened to people.  People were telling them
D      what was happening and they wasn't listening.

    Q. No, quite.  The people at the back of the pens were
       still shouting for the team.  I do not suppose you
       could hear that, could you? - A. I would not like to
       say, no.

                    Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING:

    Q. I will try and remember what I asked this morning as
       well.  There was the beach ball? - A. Right.

    Q. Do you remember the beach ball being pinged around
       the ground? - A. Yes, vaguely.

    Q. It seems to be pushed or hit backwards and forwards
       up and down the crowd? - A. Yes.

    Q.   It seemed to be fun at the time? - A. Yes.

    Q.    Did it cause people to come off balance, can you
         remember, so that there was movement in the crowd as
         people were either trying to stretch up to or behind
         the ball? - A. They would sway a little bit.

    Q.    I also talked about other sorts of sway when perhaps
         three or four lads I put it as, but I do not see why
         there should not have been some girls as well, were
         perhaps larking about in good humour and perhaps they




H
NXf.


                                                                     83




                                                        A. J. BENNETT

             caused a sway as well,   Is that something within your
             knowledge? - A. Yes.

           Q. I imagine in terms of this tumbling effect which you
       B      have seen and possibly even been part of, a cascade,
              coming right down from the back when it seems almost
              the whole of the crowd moves down two or three steps?
              - A. Yes.

           Q. Those are all things that happens at football matches
              and, if you like, part of the thrill of standing in
              that sort of crowd? - A. Yes.

           Q. You remember hearing a noise from the other end of
              the ground which suggested to you at a time you are
              not quite clear about that the match must have kicked
              off? - A. Yes.

           Q. Could you not hear a similar sort of   noise coming
              from behind you of the supporters at   your end also
              acknowledging the kick-off? - A. No,   all I could hear
              around me was the people shouting to   get out.
       D
           Q. So there may very well have been different
              appearances of sound around the different parts of
              the ground.  You were conscious notwithstanding the
              shouting going on around you that there was a mighty
              roar somewhere else? - A. Yes.

           Q. Equally what you cannot say is whether there was a
              mighty roar behind you either? - A. That is right.

           Q. You were in the midst of a rightly very excited bunch
              of supporters who were happy that the match was then
              being kicked off and hoping that their team was going
              to win? - A. The people around me were not too
              excited.

           Q. By that time they were not? - A. No.

           Q. David was asked about the people in the public house
              and you confirmed that whilst you were there you saw
              no unseemly behaviour? - A. No.

           Q. David told us that he had three pints and a bottle of
              lager in the time that he had been there from your
              arrival up to one o'clock? - A. Yes.

           Q. Can you confirm that the vast majority of people were
              left by you in the pub? You went off to the ground
              very much earlier? - A. Yes.




       H
N <5


                                                                     84




                                                           A. J. BENNETT
                ✓
           Q. I suppose it would be helpful of me to ask you as far
              as the questions the Jury are concerned with.
              Sometimes the perception may be greater than the
              person actually doing the wheeling and dealing.   Do
       B      you know whether there was any identification by
              either colour or voice of the person who was selling
              you the tickets? — A. No, I couldn't say where he
              came from.

           Q. Would it be right, as we now seem to have
              established, that he had five tickets that he was
              able to sell you for the Spion Kop end? - A. Yes.

           Q. But that he could have sold you five tickets for the
              Leppings Lane end but they were more money? - A. Yes.

           Q. Did you actually see those tickets or not? - A. I
              thought that I had seen tickets.

           Q. You thought you had seen tickets.  Could you say at
              all in that scene of the tickets whether he appeared
              to have more than the ten tickets which he ultimately
       D      did have, in other words, the five for the Spion Kop
              end and the five for the Leppings Lane end? Were
              there more than that, do you think? - A. I think he
              had more, ye s .

                             Cross-Examined bv MR. KING:

           Q. It was suggested to you that perhaps the Police
              thought it was a pitch invasion? - A. Yes.

           Q. That is what was suggested to you. Am I right in
              saying to you that when there is a pitch invasion
              fans run on to the football pitch? - A. Yes.

           Q. In this instance were the fans climbing out and going
              on to the perimeter area and staying on the
              perimeter? — A. When I was there a lot was on the
              track.  There wasn't any on the pitch.

           Q. Let me go back to 2.30 because I am interested in
              this answer of yours. In fact, you go back earlier.
              You say that at about 2.15 and 2.30 it was really
              full? — a . Yes.

           Q. That is what you said? - A. Yes.

           Q.   By "it" do you mean the pen you were in? - A. Yes.

           Q.    You were pressed on that very properly by the learned
                Coroner and you said in answer to the learned
                                            A. J. BENNETT
 Coroner, "it was then" - and this was 2.30 - "as full
 as I had ever experienced it to be" or words to that
 effect? - A. Yes.

  It was the fullest it had ever been in my
 experience" or words to that effect? - A. Yes.

 Can you convey to us, therefore,   what it was like
 even at 2.30 to have been in the   crowd which made you
 have the opinion that it was the   fullest it had ever
 been in your experience at 2.30?   - A. It was full
 fuller than if I had been to the   Kop.  It was full.

 From your experience did that pen at 2.30 appear that
 it could take many more people? - A. No.

If someone had said to you at 2.30, Miss Bennett, "We
are going to introduce a few more hundred people into
this pe n ”, what would you have said to them? - A. I
would have told them they would have been mad.

Let me go forward to the position later on. You have
told us how Julie had wanted to get out? - A. Yes.

You were asked questions about swaying and crowds
which sway.  From your experience of being in
football crowds am I right in this that when a crowd
sways it sways forward and then it sways back
again? - A. Yes.

It goes forward and back? - A. Yes.

If a crowd moves forward and stays forward that is
not a sway, is it? - A. No, it is not.

That is a surge because of people coming behind
causing the people in front to go forward? - A. Yes.

Is that what happened to you? — A. We were sent
forward and we couldn't go back.

You were not in a sway.  You were in a crowd which
was compelled forward? - A. Yes.

So that you could not go back? - A. That is right.

You say that you wanted to get out at this stage? -
A. Yes, later.

What was happening around you which made you want to
get out at that stage? - A. I couldn't move.  It was
really hurting.
IN 7

                                                                      86




                                                           A. J. BENNETT


            Q. What was the    condition of the people around you? - A.
               I would have thought if I was hurting they were
       jj      hurting.

            Q. Was it at this stage that people were shouting that
               they wanted to get out? - A. Yes.

            Q. These were the people in front of you? - A. Yes.

            Q. At this stage you were at the point you marked on the
               plan with a circle? - A. Yes.

            Q. At that stage could you see signs of distress on the
               faces of the   people around you? - A.Yes.

            Q. Did you have any difficulty in realising they were in
               distress? - A. No.

            Q. You say that people started to try and climb out
               about three to five minutes after you had been shoved
               to the front? - A. Yes.

            Q. In your recollection you first have to shove into the
               front which is not a sway? - A. No.

            Q. Very different from a sway and then three to five
               minutes pass and people are trying to get out? - A.
               Yes.

            Q. At that stage you say that the Police you could see
               were not in any way recognising the problem? - A.
               That is right.

            Q. It may be suggested that they were so far away they
               could not have seen. How close from you in that
               circle was the nearest Police Officer you could
               see? - A. There was Police all in front of the fence
               where we were.

            Q. Could you give an estimate in distance from where you
               are now? - A. Perhaps just past this lady here
               (indicating).




                                     /Q.   Just past the....




       H
                                                                                         87



                                                  A.   J.   BENNETT


/ Q.   Just past   th e   la d y   s h o rth a n d w r i t e r ?    A. Yes.

 Q.    Who is sitting at the desk immediately in front of
       you? A. That is right.

             MR. KING:      I have nofurther questions,                           thank
 you, sir.

                   Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

 Q.    Miss Bennett, when David's friend got tickets for the
       1988 semi-final, and they   were for the Spion Kop, that
       is the Notts Forest stand, how did the Notts Forest
       supporters treat you that time? A. Not very well.
       We were in a paddock at the side of the Kop and when
       Liverpool scored the Forest supporters tried to get at
       the Liverpool supporters.

 Q.    So you did not find it comfortable?                         A.    No.

 Q.    So really you would not have wanted to go that end in
       1989? A. No.

 Q.    Though you did buy tickets for that end?                              A.     Yes.

 Q.    Would you say that conditions were quite normal for
       you up to 4.50 in the pen? A. Pardon?

             THE CORONER:          2.50 you mean, 14.50.

             MRS. McBRIEN:          I am sorry, 14.50.                  A.        Yes.

 Q.    But they suddenly changed afterwards?                        A.       Yes.

 Q.    What time did you get onto the pitch out of Pen 4? A.
       About quarter-past 3, perhaps a bit earlier.   I didn't
        really look at my watch because I was looking at David
        inside.

             MRS. McBRIEN:          Thank you very much.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

 Q.    I am a long way from you and I did not hear one or two
       of your answers. You gave an estimate for the number
       of Liverpool supporters, or football supporters, who
       were in the pub.  I didn't hear whether you said
       "About 200" or "About 100".  A. About 100.

 Q.    David told us how much to drink he consumed.  Do you
       think, looking back on it, that he was drinking any
       faster than the people he was with? A. No.
                                                              88




                                     A. J. BENNETT


 Q'     theUsame? 3ame’ °r ”aS he drlnkln« slower?      A.    About


 Q'     abouta2e45°io 2S^ hai y01J “®r\ " ith y°uc friends until
        Yeg   ^*45 to 2.50 when Julie became worried? A.


 Q.     And she was taken away, or moved away?    A.   Yes.

 Q.    You have told us several times that up to about 2.45
       to      it was a normal big match terrace crowd? A.
        I6 S •


 Q.    Would it be right that at a big match there is a
       crescendo of noise before the kick-off? By crescendo
       Yes6311 Xt WaS l0Ud anyway» but it: Sot even louder?        A.

 Q.    Would I also be right in suggesting that there are
       certain events that give notches to that crescendo of
       noise? A. Yes.

Q.      The first one, I suggest, might be the   announcement      of
       tne teams that were to play the game?     A. Yes.

Q.     We know that, as far as Liverpool is concerned, that
       happened at 9 minutes to 3. The next event or a
       further event which contributes to the crescendo of
       noise would be the arrival of the teams on the field’
       A. Yes.

Q.    No doubt the Liverpool supporters would have reserved
      a cheer for when the Liverpool team came onto the
      field? A. Yes.

Q. That,   we know, happened at about 6 minutes to 3.
    Would it be fair to say that from the time of the
    arrival of the teams on the field until the kick-off
    there is perhaps, to use David's words, one heck of a
    din? A. Yes.

Q.    Have you heard the expression "So much noise you can't
      hear yourself think"? A. Yes.

Q.    Is that the sort of volume of noise that there was in
      that crescendo? A.   It was noisy, yes.

Q.    There was not only noise from the enclosure in which
      you were, but noise from all round the ground? A.
      X6 S •


Q.    One final matter: have you ever seen the ritual, as I
       escribed it to David, of when a team is announced the
                                  A. J. BENNETT


 ai?PwhAnrfh«f that.team cheer each name and punch the
 air when the name is read out? A. Yes.

 Do you remember seeing it happen on this occasion’              A
 I can't remember.

 T1laT,tM R * RUSSELL: We can look at the video for that.
 Thank you very much.

                 Further by THE CORONER

 Just a very minor point. When Julie moved away, iust
 remind me what time that was when she decided she did
 n°5 u         because you told meshe was inexperienced
 and she was   not used to it? A.  About quarter-to.

      THE CORONER: Thank you very much.    Perhaps I
 , _       say this.   It is not evidence. We have
 looked at the system.   As far as we can tell, the
 tickets that Mr. Lowe had were genuine.   I do not
 think it is   worth going down that lineany further.
 The next witness is Mr.   Jones.


                 ALAN PAUL JONES Sworn

                       By THE CORONER

Good a f t e r n o o n . You are Alan Paul Jones and vou arp
based
n D . Q A H is
            i e i
                i ft ________________ I            I I

*n Cornwall? A.             It has changed at the moment. I am
in                                          ~
                                            Scotland.

1 fo6 ** Y °m^are ln the R°yal Navy, in fact, are you
not? A. That is right.

On 15th April 1989 did you go to Hillsborough?         A.
X6 S •


Are you a Liverpool supporter?       A.   I am.

You are?   A.   Yes.

I think you went by coach which was organised by the
Woodcutter Social Club at Garston, Liverpool? A. That
is correct.

So it was an    official party? A.      Yes.

                with> 1think, your      brother and   a friend
called Chris,    is that right? A.      Yes.

So there were three of you in your group?   A.There
were a few more, but they were the main three.
                                         A. P. JONES




 'Q. They were special mates            so to speak?A.          Yes.

 Q.    Was the coach full?         A.   Yes.

 Q.    Was it a single-decker job?             A.   Yes, single-decker.

 Q . You left Liverpool at about 10, is that                     right?   A.


 Q.    What time did you get to Sheffield?    We were a bit
        ate getting into Sheffield.   We arrived at about 20-
       pdsc   j. •



 Q*    redirecteddWOrkS> °r Wh3t held 7°U Up?                   A* We were
 Q.    I see.        In fact, you got to Sheffield at 20-past 1
       I i r s t astop?nV   “      t       t0 3 10031 pUb 1 th ln k
 Q     And it was The Fox, was it not?              A.    Yes.

 Q*           UP t litJle hJ 1:L- Had you been to Sheffield
      before* pe aps    ougbt to ask you? A. The year


Q*    aboutUThSd^ eeni,tS the Previous ^ t c h . Did you know
      about The Fox, had you been there? A. Yes sir.

Q.     So you wanted to go back to the same place?                 A.     Yes.

Q*    n P r ^ o i ? eai d.C°?plimentary things about yo u > n°t you
                  v7         ?      ±n general from the publican
      right? A?U Yes              abOUt 1 ‘30, 1 believe> is that


Q*     p a s t ^ t ^ S I - t o 11? 111 ab°Ut What tlme?    A*     Ab°Ut half_

Q*     ^ i ? ad f b±t t0 drink> ls that right? A. Yes.   We
                 g6t fccess to the P ^ .  We went to the local
           licence and got a couple of cans.

Q‘    f° ai'f;0“ ?h    TOut to the pub, it was too crowded
           you to get in? A. We were in the garden.

Q.    What would your estimate be of the number of people in
                        never actually got inside the pub
      because it was absolutely full.


Q
- xii ssirs&iEf*outslde? A
                         -1                                             .b«.t
                              A. P. JONES




Were most of those in your position, that they had to
go to the off-licence to buy cans, or did some of them
get in to come out with pint glasses, sort of thing?
A. Most of the people that were inside came out into
the garden after they had been served because it was
too packed inside.

How many cans did you drink?        A.        There were 6 cans
between 3 of us.

So 2 each approximately?     A.     Yes.

You were happy and so were your friends?                A.     Yes.

What about the rest of them?        A.     Fine.

Did you see any boisterous behaviour? A. The lads
were having a laugh, but nothing, no jumping about or
anything like that.

Nothing too serious as far as you were concerned?                     A.
No.

Because you were one of the lads with them, were you
not? A. Yes.

Then you left the pub at about 2.35 or thereabouts, I
think you said? A. Yes.

You walked to the ground, I assume?             A.     We did.

What time did you get to the ground?              A.        I would say
between about 12 minutes to and 5 to.

You said 2.55 you thought?     A.    Yes.

Would that be right?   A.    Yes.

So just shortly before kick-off really?                A.     Yes.

Just as a matter of interest, you must have known what
time it was? A. Yes.

Before you saw anything of the turnstiles as you were
walking down Leppings Lane, and you looked at your
watch and said, "Good grief", did you think you were
going to get in in time at that point? Never mind
what you saw afterwards, I am just interested whether
you thought you would get in? A. Yes.

You did think you would get in?          A.     Yes.

Is it because you thought that everybody would have
already been through, or what was the reason for that,
                                    A. P. JONES




because you had not left yourself much time, had you?
A. When I go to a match at Anfield, we usually do not
arrive at the gate until about 10-to, or 5-to, and we
get in, no problem at all.

When you were going along at this time, you were
coming down, I think, passed the social club and then
by a roundabout, is that right? Can you remember the
route? A.   I think we pass under a bridge and there
was a social club on the right-hand side.

Then did you come down Leppings Lane? Were        there
terraced houses on each side? A. Yes.

You then go along and could you see the turnstiles
from a distance at all? A. The first thing we
noticed was a crowd gathering.

Could you see the markings of the turnstiles?        A.
Yes.

How big was the crowd when you saw it?       A.   It was
increasing as we walked towards it.

So it was getting bigger at that time?       A.   Yes.

Could you see the perimeter gates? Do you know what I
mean by the perimeter gates? What is the number of
the perimeter gates? It is 258. This is just to
remind you, I do not want to go into great detail.
Can you remember seeing any gates like that? A. Yes.

That crowd which you saw, was it this side of the
gates or the far side of the gates when you first
noticed it? In other words, could you see the gates
when you approached? This is what I am asking.    A.
The gates that I saw, there were two white walls
either side.  There was like a large wall either side,
and there were people sitting on the walls.

Can you see there is a dividing wall there.  Would it
have been people sitting up on that, or can you not
remember? A. I am not so sure.

You do not know. Okay. Did you see a Police Land
Rover? A. No, not that I can recall.

Did you hear any announcements over a loudspeaker at
all? A. No.

None whatsoever?   A.   No.

You are sure about that?      A.   Yes.
                                                            93

                                               A.   P . JONES




Q. You never saw any vehicles or any loudspeakers at all?
   - A. No.

Q. Did you hear any announcements of any sort? - A. No,
   not that I can recall.

Q. When you were approaching the crowd what happened, what
   did you see or do? - A. We stepped up to the crowd and
   we just stood around waiting, expecting the crowd to
   dissipate into the ground.

Q. What happened? - A. It just wasn't.

Q. It stood.  It appeared not to be moving? - A. It didn't
   seem to be moving at all.

Q. Did you at tnat point see any Police Officers? - A. I
   seen one Policeman on a horse and I can't really recall
   seeing any others.

Q. You reoember seeing one.  Wo doubt we have pictures we
   could put up showing you dozens of them, but you can't
   remember - well not dozens, but more than one - you
   can't remember seeing more than one, is that right? -
   A. Mo, not on horseback.

Q. Did you see any foot Officers? - A. I can't really ....

Q. Did you see any Officers as you were walking from the
   pub towards the ground? - A. we got stopped by the
   social club because we had drunk one can by the Fox,
   and we thought it was getting a bit late so we started
   walking down, and we were walking down with a can.

Q. Are you telling me that in the hour that you were at
   the Fox, in fact over an hour, all you did was drink
   one can of beer? - A. when we first arrived at the Fox
   we never really bothered. We didn't even know that the
   off licence was there until about quarter-to-2, 10-to-
   2 , and by the time someone went over and got sone,
   because there was a bit of a queue in there, by tne
   time someone went over and got served it was turned 2
   o'clock before we started ....

Q. You knew the Fox was there but you couldn't get in? -
   A. Yes. We had met a few other friends off the coach.

Q. Yes, I am with you. Let's get back to the turnstile
   area. Did you notice people climbing over gates or
   walls? - A. I see a few people sitting on walls, and
   like they weren't really moving. They weren't climbing
   down, climbing up and then climbing down, they were
   just sitting on the wall.
                                                               94

                                                   A . P . JOHES




Q. Did you see any Officers speaking or shouting at any of
   these people? When I say see, did you hear them? You
   can't see people shouting. - A. No, not really.

Q. Pardon? - A. Not that I can remember.

Q. You can't remember. How close were you to the
   Policeman on horseback? - A. I was about ten feet away.

Q. So you were quite close to that particular Officer.
   Where was he? Look at that picture - was he on the
   inside or the outside of those perimeter gates? - A. He
   was on the outside.  It was actually on the road.

Q. What did he appear to be doing? - A. With the crowd he
   wasn't really doing much.  He had the horse right
   alongside the crowd.

Q. Sideways on? - A. Sideways on, yes.      I never really
   paid that much attention.

Q. You were, in fact, trying to get round hiia, is that
   right? You went to the right, I believe? - A. No, I
   was more to the centre of the crowd at the back.

Q. Did you take any avoiding action to miss the horse? -
   A. He wasn't really that close to me.  He wasn't
   exactly coming in oy direction.

Q. You see the reason why I ask this is because in your
   statement you seem to suggest that it was a Police
   norse that actually pushed you into the crowd, but are
   you saying that that is wrong? - A. Ho, with the
   moveraent of tne Police horse the crowd moved anyway.
   We just got carried along with the crowd.

Q.   So what you are saying is   that the horse was moving
     about? - A. Yes.

Q. Caused tne crowd to move? - A. Yes.

Q. And then the crowd moved you? - A. Yes.

Q. Were the crowd, you or anybody else, pushing forward at
   that point? - A. I can't really remember,  riot that I
   noticed.

Q.   It was packed in front of   you, wasn't it? - A.   Yes.

Q.   It wasn't moving as far as you could see? - A.     No.

Q. Not much point in pushing into it, was there? - A. No.
                                                          95

                                              A.   P . JONES




That you could see, and then I think you saw the big
blue gate open, is that right? You happened to be able
to see it over the heads of the crowd, isthatright?    -
A. Well, I remember --- I can*t remember exactly what
happened but I remember going through and corning to
like a large enclosure in front of the —   well, we
went through and the next thing I can remember is like
going, I was in a lot of space. The crowd had spread
out and I was in a lot of space, and I was able to go
to the toilet and I actually hung round waiting for
someone that I knew, waiting for my brother.

You didn't go through a turnstile? - A. No, I still had
my full ticket in my pocket.

Are you then saying that you at the moment have no
recollection how you got from outside those gates near
where the horse was, to into the ground where there was
more space? - A. Well, all I did was follow the crowd.
As soon as the crowd —   as soon as we started moving I
just went where everyone else was walking.

It wasn't that you   were carried? - A. Ho.

You just went with   them? - A. Yes.

Once you were inside the crowd dispersed and you looked
around and you saw a toilet and you went and used it? -
A. Yes.

Then you came back and waited for your friend, is that
right? - A. Yes.

How long did that take, while you were waiting for your
friend? - A. I think it had turned 3 o'clock before we
actually entered the tunnel.

I see, so did you know the match nad kicked off by
then? - A. Well, I wasn't too sure.  As we moved into
the tunnel we could see that players were on the pitch,
but we weren't really looking at our watches,   we
didn't know whether it had actually kicked off.

But you could see the players on the pitch? - A. Yes.

That is good enough. You went down the tunnel towards
the left, is that right? - A. Yes.

The tunnel was obstructed or clear? - A. Obstructed.

At what point? - A. We had just come down, we had
walked mid-way through the tunnel, as we got
approximately half-way through we come up against like
a wall of fans, and then it just sort of, it was going
                                                           96

                                               A . P . JONES




   forward slowly but then it just stopped and more people
   were coming behind us.

Q. So initially the tunnel was clear then I think the
   tunnel begins to slope downward? - A. Yes.

Q. Was it as it was beginning to slope? - A. No, it was
   just at the bottom of the slope.

Q. At the bottom of the slope, and there was a crowd of
   people there? - A. Yes.

Q. Which was in fact blocking the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. And that crowd at that point was stationary? - A. Yes.

Q. And you could just see the players on the field at that
   point, is that right? - A. Yes.

0. Can you remember whether they were actually playing or
   not? - A. I can't really recall.

Q. But they are definitely on the field? - A. Yes.

Q. You stopped, right? - A. Yes.

Q. What happened then? - A. Well, we were stationary and
   more people were coming in behind us, and it just got
   tighter and tighter and tighter.

Q. Within the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. What happened then? ~ A. Well, it got to a point where
   I was literally getting - I had no control of where I
   was going - I was literally getting like lifted and
   pushed to certain areas.

Q. So in other words what you are saying is that initially
   the crowd was stationary? - A. Yes.

Q. You joined them and you were quite prepared to be
   stationary as well? - A. Yes.

Q. People came behind you and then pressure built up from
   behind, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. So there was pushing from behind, not to put too fine a
   point on it? - A. Well, yes.

Q. And you lost control of your movements? - A. Yes.

Q. And you were carried with a mass of people forward onto
   the terraces? - A. Yes.
                                                             97

                                                 A.   P . JONES




Q. And I am not saying that you went, but you finished up
   on, was it the left-hand one? - A. Well, everyone was
   shouting - like, I had met my brothers outside, my
   brother and my friends, and they said go to the left as
   soon as you get in, we will meet you round there.

Q. So you tried? - A. I tried to go to the left, but I
   ended up getting pushed that way anyway.

Q. So as it happens you got where you wanted to? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you hear anybody yelling or shouting as you entered
   onto the terrace? - A. Hot that I can recall. The fans
   were like shouting.

Q. What were they shouting? - A. Well, I can't really
   remember.

Q. Chanting? Was it the usual sort of chants and shouts
   of football crowds if a team is playing? - A. I can't
   really remember.

Q.    Because you are right at the back, aren't you, at this
     point? When you first enter you have got to be at the
     back, haven't you? - A. Yes.

Q. You might finish   up at the front, but as you enter.
   What I am trying   to find out is what was happening as
   you entered onto   the terrace. Can you remember
   anything at all?   - A. No, not really.

Q. No. - A. At that point I was thinking about other
   things because it was getting really tight and it was
   getting to a point where  it was beginning to hurt.

Q.   And this was still quite  a long way back? - A. This was
     as we were coming out of the tunnel.

Q. As you were actually coming out of the tunnel? - A.
   Yes.

Q. And in fact people started falling over, is that right?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Even at that high level? I call it high level because
   the terrace has got a slope - that is right, isn't it?
   - A. Yes.

Q. In fact, you fell over yourself, didn't you? - A. Yes.

Q. And people were standing on other people, including
   yourself - I mean, you were being stood on? - A. Yes.
                                             A.   P . JONES




feut your friend fortunately saw you and managed to get
you out, is that right? - A. Yes.

Having got you out, where were you in this terrace? -
A. Ue had come out of the tunnel and we were to the
left.

Hr. Griffiths, can we put our usual acetate up? We
will show you a plan of the terrace and I want you to
tell me where you were after you had fallen and when
your friend Chris managed to get you up? Put a cross
there.  (The witness illustrated his evidence on
Exhibit C29&) I think that was where you were when you
had fallen and been picked up, right? - A. Yes.

Then I think something else happened,  What else
happened? - A. The fella in front of us dropped to his
knees and he was falling over, so people were trying to
get him up, but with him being on his knees people were
standing on the back of his legs, because it was tight,
and we couldn't get him up, and I held his belt, trying
to lift him up, but he was very big man. We got him so
far up, to about chest height - I had my hands above ray
chest height - and everyone let go and he slumped
forward.

You just couldn't hold him, is what you are saying? -
A. Yes.

Was there another surge after tnat? - A. That was
actually when I fell. As he went down he sort of
dragged me down.

Then your friend picked you up? - A. My friend picked
me up.

What happened after that? - A. I moved down onto this
barrier here.

Which side?   In front of it? - A. Right in the very
corner.

How did you get there? Did you just walk down? - A.
No, it was just, it was just where the crowd directed
me.

Was this a new push or was it the same push just
continuing? - A. It was the same push.  I never seen it
cease.  It just seemed to be there all the time.

Did you then continue moving even further forward? - A.
I got caught on the end of this barrier on this corner
and my right leg and my groin area and my stomach got
                                            A.   P . JONES




caught on the corner, but I managed to get round it, to
come down and get caught on this barrier here.

This was all involuntary? - A. Yes.

Pressure from behind? - A. Yes.

Did you get past that barrier as well? - A. My mate
Chris, I was caught again on the very corner, and he
managed to pull me round.  Someone was on it and I was
behind this fella and he managed to squeeze in himself
around it. As he moved I got crushed onto it and
caught the full power of it onto my stomach and leg,
and Chris was by this time in front of the barrier, and      .
with it being in front of the barrier it was starting
to slacken off a bit and he could move his arms, and he
managed to reach round and grab hold of the inside of
my leg and pull me round.

Come back, because I can understand you better when you
are down here.  I can hear you better.




                 /Q. So when you had got down
                                     A.   P . JONES



So when you had got down to that next barrier, did you in
fact get any nearer to the perimeter fence at all? - A.
After Chris pulled me round the very last barrier, it was
getting to a point where a lot of people had actually
vacated the area then and they were on the pitch - well,
the perimeter track.   You were getting a bit of free
movement, so Chris managed to lift me up and a fellow who
was sitting on top of the fence managed to grab hold of
my hands and place them on the fence so I managed to
climb out.

Had the match stopped by then? - A. I never really paid
much attention.

You don't know? -A. No.

In fact you were one of the people who were helped over
the fence by somebody? - A. Yes.

Did you see any police officers on the front of that
area, down by the perimeter fence? - A. By the time I was
lifted out there was a policeman standing up.   The fan
who lifted me up and put my arms on the fence, there was
a policeman standing on like a small wall where the
fences were.   He was on that and he was trying to get
people down off the fence.

In other words, the point in time when you were being
helped by a fan, there was a policeman helping somebody
else? - A. Yes.

Then I think you helped yourself a bit and is it right
you eventually you were asked to move off by a police
officer and he said, "We'll do this"? - A. I climbed on
to the fence and I was trying to get Chris, my mate, to
come up but he stayed in and he was trying to lift other
people up. We were trying to get him out as well. The^
policeman who was helping the person down, had helped him
down, he turned round and told Chris to get out so Chris
after a while came out. Chris stepped up on to the
fencing and helped us.

So you are saying that Chris actually stayed inside in
order to help people? - A. For about two minutes after I
got out.

You can't help me at all with regard to what was going on
on the field? - A. Not really.   I noticed a police woman
- I am not sure whether it was a police woman or a St.
John's Ambulance woman - giving resuscitation to someone
by the goal but on the track side of the goal, not
actually on the pitch.
                                                        lOl




                                       A.   P . JONES


             Cross-Examined by MR. HALE:

Mr. Jones, did you say you set off from Liverpool at
10.00 am? - A. I think it was slightly before ten.

You arrived in Sheffield at 1.20? - A. 1.20.

What were you doing in that four-odd hours? - A. Well, we
were stopped outside Sheffield and searched by the police
for alcohol.

Yes, but how long did that take? - A. I cannot remember
exactly but I think it was about twenty or thirty
minutes.

It is a very long time to come from Liverpool to
Sheffield, four and a half hours almost.   Did you stop
anywhere on the way? - A. No, not that I can recall.

Ten o'clock to 1.20 is - I'm sorry - three and a half
hours.  I am a solicitor, not an accountant!   You didn t
stop anywhere else on the way? - A. Not that I can
recall.

You went to The Fox and just hung about waiting to get in
and you say you didn't have any drinks? - A. I had a
couple of cans.   No drinks from the actual public house.

Were there others in your party? - A. Yes.

Do you know what they did? - A. I am not too sure.

             Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

How do you know that   when you were stopped outside
Sheffield the police   were searching for alcohol? - A.
Well, it was just an   observation.    I thought that was
the only reason they   had to stop us.

Did the police come on to the bus? - A. Yes.

What did they do? - A. They checked into people's bags.

Looked into people's bags? - A. Yes. Well, first they
asked if there was any alcohol on board and then they
said, "Do you mind if we have a look in?"   When we said
no they opened the bags.   They didn't rummage through
the baggage, they just looked in.

That was a police officer? - A. Yes.

You arrived at the ground, you have given the time at
about five minutes before three? - A. Yes.
                                                              102




                                           A.   P.   JONES


Q. There was a large crowd outside the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q. The way you described it is that you stood there with
   your friends waiting for the crowd to disperse into the
   ground? - A. Yes.

Q. But it didn't? - A. No.

Q. The evidence is that the people at the front of that
   crowd were getting badly squashed and crushed by the
   turnstiles.    From your position could you see any of
   that? - A. No.

Q.    Your evidence is that you and your friend did     not push at
     all?   Have I understood that correctly? - A.      Yes, you
     have understood.

Q. Did you see anyone else pushing? - A. No, not that I can
   recall.

Q. No-one at all? - A. No.

Q. You have mentioned seeing one police officer on a horse?
   - A. Yes.

Q. But no other policeman? - A. Not that I saw.

Q. You didn't? - A. I can't remember.

Q.   I would like to show you some pictures of the time you^
     are speaking about, five minutes to three, beginning with
     294.    Can we try 294, which is about a minute different
     from that one?    I think these photographs are about the
     same time, a minute between them if anything.    I
     appreciate it is difficult with me asking questions.
     Can you turn and look at the photograph and can you see
     there are obviously a number of policemen there in the
     middle of the crowd on horseback in the middle of the
     picture?    There are about four or perhaps even five
     horses.    There are three in a group to the left and then
     two to the right.    Perhaps the officer would be kind
     enough to point?    There is a group of three there, can
     you see them? - A. Yes.

Q. Then over to the right of them there is one there and
   there might be one next to him to the right, I am not
   quite sure.   Anyway, there is that group there and then
   if you go to the left outside the ground, there is a line
   of police officers on horses there.   Can you see them? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Have you any idea which of those policemen on horses it
   could be that you are speaking about? - A. No, I am
   sorry, I couldn't.
                                     A.   P.   JONES


But it was somebody outside the ground? - A. Yes.

Now I would like you to look at a new one, it is
MWL.10/37.   That will be C.299.

     THE CORONER:   That’s right.

     MR. PAYNE:   Now this is about two minutes later and
the crowd is going in through the gate you went through,
which is just off to the right of the photograph.   Do
you recognise the scene?   Does it make sense to you as
you look at the photograph? - A. Not from that view, no.

I appreciate you are not familiar with the ground.   If
you look at the background you can see the gable end of a
building which has come out white in the photograph.
Below that there is a row of people sitting on a wall. -
A. Yes.

That is a feature you have mentioned yourself. - A. Yes.

Does that help you to line yourself up with where you
are?   You have come down the road which is in the
background there, where the rows of houses are, you have
come right down that towards the camera and then you have
come into the crowd which we can see in the foreground.
According to your evidence you then went through a gate
and that is just to the right of the photograph.   Does
that help you to make sense at all? - A. Not really, no.

Just look at the photograph and I want to pick out some
policemen.    In the foreground there is a policeman on a
horse with his back to us and then there is a group of
about three policeman quite close to the camera.    If one
then goes into the crowd you can then pick out their
helmets.    There is a policeman's white cap somewhere.
I appreciate they are engulfed by the crowd, those
policemen, but did you see any of them when you yourself
came through the crowd? - A. Not really, no, not that I
can recall.    I was a lot further away from that view.
I was over the other side.

Over the other side? - A. Well, from where this camera
is.   There is no way I would have seen them. There were
a lot of people in between where they are and where I
was.   The way they are positioned in the crowd I would
not have seen them.

You would not have seen any of those horses? - A. Maybe
the horses, but I can't recall, but the people on foot
definitely not.
                                        A.   P . JONES


If you look at the model which is over here, would that
help you to show the court how you got into the ground? -
A. I think so, yes.

Can you have a go please? - A. I came in through entrance
B. This is the compound area where I ended up.

How did you get in there? - A. As I say, I can't really
recall, but I remember coming through the main gate,
followed the crowd andI ended up in this area.

The way you have shown   it you went through the big bank
of turnstiles, which are numbered 1 to... - A. I followed
the crowd through.   I   am notsure whether it is the left
side or the right side,   but Icame through and ended up
in this...   I am not too sure which gate I came through.

Just pause there.    What you are saying is you don't
really know how you got into that big area?    I don't
want to lead you at all.    You say anything you want.     I
am iust trying to find out how much you know.   If you
don t know then say so.    If you do know then tell us
what you do know. - A. I remember coming down Leppings
Lane and coming to a large mass of people.    I could see
the gates.  I could see them sitting on the wall.     I am
not too sure when I actually went into the ground whether
it was the left hand side or the right hand side.     I am
not very sure.    I ended up on the large compound area.
When I came through the tunnel was here.




              Q. Whichever way it was
                                                            |05




                                                    A . P . JONES
       /

    Q. Whichever way it was you did not see any of this
       crowd outside the gates pushing at all? ~ A. A bit of
       bustling and jostling but not really a full front
H      push like.  You expect a little bit of movement in a
       crowd like that and if you are with that crowd you
       expect to be moved about a bit.

    Q. You certainly were not doing any pushing yourself? -
       A. No.

    Q. There is just one other point that I have missed
       along the way.  It is about the one Policeman that
       you did see on horseback. Your comment was that with
       the crowd he was not going to do much? - A. Well, he
       wasn't doing much.  I do not know what he had in mind
       b u t ....

    Q. There was not much he could do? - A. If he was
       intending to move the crowd, he didn't.  He moved.
       When the horse actually moved people were stepping
       out of its way and that is about it.

®   Q. You mentioned also that on your way down there, and I
       am sorry to go back in time, to the ground from where
       you had been waiting you got stopped by a social
       club? - A. Yes.

    Q. Do you know whereabouts that was? - A. I remember
       passing under a bridge.

    Q. Under a bridge, yes? - A. And it was on the right
       hand side of like a dual carriageway.  It was just on
       the left just as we went under a bridge.

    Q. That is just before you get to a roundabout, is it? -
       A. I don't remember.

    Q. If I show you a map would that make any difference to
       you? - A. It may do.

    Q. Do you know this area at all? I do not want to
       occupy time? - A. I have only been here twice, the
       two times.

    Q. You had better have a look at this map.  You can see
       the railway line which runs down from the top to the
       right hand side, the single line? - A. Yes.

    Q. Do you see it? - A. Yes.

    Q. It starts with No. 5 at the top and runs down the
       bottom of the page, bottom right? - A. Yes.
                                                                           10 b




                                                                  A . P . JONES


    Q.    That is   th e    r a ilw a y lin e ?   -   A.   Yes.

    Q.    Do you know whether that is the railway line you           went
B        under? - A. I am not too sure.

    Q. If you come up a bit further there is a roundabout.
       As you go down the map you come to a roundabout.  Do
       you see it? - A. Yes, I think so.

    Q. Leppings Lane goes off the roundabout? - A. Yes.

    Q. Does that help you or not? Do not say anything you
       do not know yourself.   Does that help you to say
       which way you went? - A. Not really, no.

    Q.    We do not know where this social club isthen?             - A.
         No.

    Q. Put the map down and just tell the Court what
       happened there? - A. I had like a quarter of a can
       still left because we were walking down.  I didn't
D      really want it. We were just walking along with it
       and he stopped us.

    Q. Who is "he"? - A. A Policeman.

    Q. Yes? - A. A Policeman stopped us and said, "There is
       a gash bag here. Ditch your cans" or "Finish them,
       the cans. You c a n 't approach any further than this
       with the cans".  So we stopped for a bit until it
       took time for the lads to finish their cans and ditch
       them and then just carried on walking down.

    Q.   Which lads are these? - A. Chris and my brother and               a
         few others that were on the coach.

                           Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

    Q. Mr. Jones, that tells us what happened to the second
       can that you had out of the six pack. What happened
       to your first can? - A. I finished that before I
       actually started walking down.

    Q.    What happened to the can? - A. I think they had an
         arrangement with gash bags outside the beer garden at
         the Fox.

    Q. You drank that at the Fox and left that there? - A.
       Yes.




H
                                                                 107




                                                          A . P . JONES

     Q . Did you think that your coach was late getting into
         Sheffield? - A. As I say, I am not too sure.      I
         didn't know the route into Sheffield and so I wasn't
         sure that we had actually been directed until someone
B        mentioned i t . I di d n 't know exactly how long it
         would take us to get there.

     Q. You knew the Fox from the year before? - A. Yes.

     Q. The Fox is half a mile from the ground? — A. Yes,
        three-quarters, half a mile.

     Q. Five minutes walk or so, ten minutes at the most? -
        A. Ten minutes, fifteen.

    Q. Were you not anxious at all to get to the ground and
       make sure that you got in? - A. As I said, I thought
       we had adequate time to get in.

    Q.    You thought that turning up outside the ground at
         2.55 knowing that there was a capacity crowd that you
         would have sufficient time in five minutes? - A. I
D        would have thought so, yes.

    Q.    You say that you ordinarily turn up at Anfield at
         2.55 or thereabouts? - A. About ten to.

    Q. You say that is what everybody does? - A. The reason
       we were slightly a bit later than what we thought was
       because we got stopped on the way down.

    Q . But that was a matter of two minutes only? - A . Y e s .

    Q. Just until the boys had finished off what was in
       their cans which in your case was a quarter of a can,
       two mouthfuls or so? - A. Yes.

    Q. Then you say that you just stood at the back of the
       crowd? - A. Amongst the crowd.

    Q.   You could not have got amongst the crowd unless you
         had pushed through the people who were in front of
         you? - A. No, there was more people walking behind
         us.

    Q. There were more people walking behind you? - A. They
       just joined the crowd and all.

    Q. Were they pushing? - A. Nothing I noticed.

    Q. Not that you know of but you see we have heard from
       Mr. Richard Thompson who is a publican from Liverpool




H
R .*+-


                                                                      108




                                                                A . P . JONES
               /
                and he arrived outside the ground at about 2.40 to
                2.45 and he says he stood at the back of the crowd.
                Then a time came when he was being pushed from
                behind.  You are shaking your head as if to say no.
         B      No, that did not happen or no, you do not know
                anything about it? - A. I wouldn't mind knowing what
                you are wanting me to say about it.

             Q. Are you saying that it did not happen, that he is
                mistaken about being pushed from behind? - A. Not
                that I know of.

             Q. Let us just take the words that you used because I
                think these have to be explored.  It is not good
                enough all the time to say, "Not that I know of".
                There was a bit of jostling, movement, nothing much
                at all? - A. If you are standing in any queue there
                is jostling and movement.

             Q. I am only trying to explore, as we all are, to find
                the facts of this matter.  You are saying that there
                is a very large crowd outside the turnstiles at five
         D      to three, a crowd which surprised you because you
                would have thought at that time that you would have
                metaphorically walked in? - A. I didn't expect to
                just waltz in there but I knew ....

             Q. Within five minutes you would not only have gained
                entrance to the ground but gained a position on the
                terrace to watch the kick-off? - A. I was surprised
                to see a crowd of that size there.

             Q. You intended to watch the match from the beginning,
                did you not? - A. Yes.

             Q. So from the 2.55 that you arrived at the ground you
                had five minutes to get inside the ground and to take
                up a position somewhere on the terrace? - A. Yes.

             Q. What you have described is being surprised to see
                such a large number of people there? - A. Yes.

             Q. The behaviour of the crowd was perfectly normal.  It
                was jostling and movement but nothing much at all? -
                A. No, apart from people sitting on the walls.

             Q. Then from that moment on you can tell us nothing at
                all about how it is that you got into a situation
                where you were following a crowd    through a gate. You
                cannot explain that at all? - A. No.




         H
                                                    A . P . JONES

Q. You cannot tell us about any Police Officers except
   one Police Officer and that Police Officer, if you
   remember, was trying to move the crowd with his
   horse? - A. No, I didn't say he was trying to move
   it.  I was saying that is what I thought he was
   trying to do.

Q. Have you seen mounted Police Officers trying to work
   crowds? - A. Yes.

Q. It is normal in that sort of situation that the
   Officers, with skill, manoeuvre their horses so as to
   cause the crowd to either hold back or to move in a
   particular direction? - A. Yes.

Q. Was that not your impression of what this Police
   Officer was trying to do? - A. Yes, but I didn't
   think he was going to do it on his own and I couldn't
   see any others.

Q. You did not think he was succeeding in what he was
   trying to do? - A. No.

Q. That the crowd were not being responsive to his
   attempts to move them? - A. No.

Q.        THE CORONER:   What was the reply to that?    I
     did not hear you? - A. No.

Q.        MR. MANNING:   Being fair and looking at it
     through your eyes at that time, this Police Officer
     was trying to do his best with his horse but he was
     not being successful of the crowd? - A. That wasn't
     what he was trying to do.

Q.   That is what you said you thought he   was trying to
     do? - A. Yes.

Q. Then you can say nothing much else until you get to
   the space inside the ground when you have got time to
   go to the toilet and to meet up with your friend or
   your brother? - A. Yes.

     MR. KING:   Sir, in the light of the questions as to
photographs I think it important I show a photograph of
events to this witness before the gate is opened.  What is
being shown the whole time are photographs of the position
after that side gate was opened, the crowd was dispersed
and what the Police were doing then.

       THE CORONER:   This is the one we have   not looked at
yet?
                                                              1*0

A

                                                       A . P . JONES


          MR. KING:   I do not know, sir, but I would like to
     look at MWL/10/30A and MWL/15/7A.
B        MR. PAYNE:   May I say that I certainly agree with Mr.
    King using other photographs and I only chose the
    photographs which we have used so far because they seemed
    to be dealing with the time which the witness was talkincj
    about?

         THE CORONER:   Mr. King I do not think is really
    criticising you.  You are quite within your rights and he
    is quite within his rights to want to look at the
    difference.

         MR. MANNING:    I have my learned friend's permission
    to intercede because I find myself, and I do not know who
    else is, at a great disadvantage. Whilst I know, sir, that
    you did not want a vast number of documents there is the
    world of difference between a photograph, which is mostly
    very helpful, and documents which can sometimes be long and
    deadly boring.   I have not got this album of photographs at
D   all and so every time a photograph is produced I have to
    crane my neck one way or the other until it is seen on the
    overhead screen.   Little by little, we are getting through
    this one bundle of the South Yorkshire Police photographs.
    We are not getting through any other photographs.    Not
    another one has been referred to and I wonder if I could
    intrude upon your generosity to produce those photographs
    from this bundle so that all of us who are down the bench
    could have the bundle? It may be that I am the lone man
    who does not have it.

         THE CORONER:   Let me let you into a secret.    I have
    already asked my Officers to try and get hold of this
    bundle and we were   going to get acetates from all the
    relevant ones so that they would actually be available.
    The answer is, yes, your wish is granted.    I do not think
    we have got them yet because we only got this machine
    yesterday and it obviously needs a little bit of adjusting
    and working in.

         MR. MANNING:     Thank you very much,sir.

         THE CORONER:     Is somebody going to lend us a bundle
    so that we can get it done? I am going to let them be
    produced now.

         MR. KING:   Sir it may be of assistance if I move on
    to something else?

         THE CORONER:   Yes, if you would.




H
                                              A . P . JONES


             Cross-Examined bv MR. KTKn?

Mr. Jones, I am going to move from the events before
you go through the big gate into the ground itself to
the events where you find yourself in this big open
space? - A. Yes.

You eventually went through or tried to go through
the tunnel. In that big open space before the tunnel
did you see any Police Officers? - A. I can't really
recall.

Was there anything preventing you getting to the
tunnel? Was there any barrier or any hurdle of any
sort? Was it difficult to get to the tunnel? - A.
Not that I can remember.

Why did you decide to go to the tunnel? - A. I
didn't. My brother decided he was going through
there and so I just went with him.

Did you see any stewards in that concourse area? — A.
I can't really remember.




                         /Q .   There was
                                                             112



                                     A.   P.   JONES


     0.    There was no one directing you which way to go by the
           sound of it? A. No, not really.

     Q.    When you actually enter the tunnel, as I understand it
B          you go part of the way down and then you come up
           against a wall of fans? A. Yes.

          Then my note was you moved forward and stopped, and
          moved forward and stopped, and sort of went in jerks.
          Is that right? A. No. We came up against them, and
          we were sort of like over not a very long period of
          time, we just came to a grinding halt.  When we first
          arrived there, we were moving really slowly and more
          people were coming in behind us, and then they just
          stopped and that is when it started building up. the
          pressure.

    Q.    Then what happened? A. That is when I got lifted off
          my feet and forced into the terraces.

    Q.    So clearly what was happening was from where you were,
          the tunnel was blocked ahead of you? A. Yes.
D
    Q.    Clearly those at the end of the tunnel were not
          getting out onto the terraces, as far as you could
          see? A. No.

    Q.    And then more people were being allowed in behind you?
          A. Yes.

    Q.    It may be an obvious point, but if no one had been
          allowed in behind you, you could not have been pushed
          any further forward.  That is right, is it not? A.
          Yes.

    Q.    Really the picture I get after that, and the problem
          after that, is simply the problem of more and more
          people joining in fans already on the terrace? A.
          Yes.

    Q.    As more people joined it, the problem got worse?   A.
          Yes.

    Q.    That is all I want to ask about that area and I will
          just wait for the photographs, if I may.

               THE CORONER:   Hopefully not for too long.

    Q.         MR. KING:  I can perhaps prepare for the
          photographs coming. You were asked what you could see
          as to the Police activity, and you say that you were
          at the back of the crowd, away from the turnstiles, if
          I can put it that way? A. Yes.




H
                                                   113



                           A.    P.   JONES


Just so that we can prepare for the photograph, do you
see the Leppings Lane model there? A. Yes.

Do you see the perimeter gates which are in an arc in
front of it? A. Yes.

Do you see the smaller group of turnstiles towards
you, that is not the arc you went through?  A. Yes.

Do you see how    that area is split into two with
another little   metal fence which is running down the
centre of that   smaller turnstile area, which is A to
G? See how it    is divided up there? A. Yes.

Where the officer had his stick then, just there, if
the officer could show where Gate C is on that, just
there, we are going to see a photograph in a moment
taken from that sort of area, you see, where that gate
is and where the stick is, and we will be able to see
on one of the photographs that barrier which «eems to
go down the middle of the area which cuts it into two.
Do you see it? A. Yes.

At the time ofthe photograph you were somewhere else.
I think you have already indicated to us, but perhaps
you could remind us, where were you when you were near
the crowd at the back? A. At the very outer fence,
the barrier, the fence towards the road.

Which part were you roughly, would you say, in
relation to the houses which you can see there? A.       I
can't really see.  I was facing towards the ground.

So be it.  If we have now got the photographs, might I
borrow the bundle which I handed in.

     THE CORONER: No, because I think you wanted two
photographs and the other one is still being done.
You will have to appeal to one of your colleagues.

     MR. KING:    This is 30A.

     MR. PAYNE:  I am sorry to interrupt, but I was
trying to follow this up and I may well have asked
these questions myself, but I stopped because the
evidence of Mr. Jones is that he does not know how he
got into the ground.

     THE CORONER:  That is right, but I do not even
know what questions Mr. King is going to ask, so let
us see what he asks.

     MR. KING: We know he does not know how he got in
the ground, but my learned friend has shown him a
                              A.   P.   JONES


photograph which is roughly the area we are seeing but
at a time when that gate to the right has been opened,
sir.  This is the Gate C area which we have already
identified on the plan.

     THE CORONER: Yes.   Can we please just number it
before we begin with the questions.  C.300.

     MR. KING:  Sir, this photograph is about 14.52.
I say that, sir, because my bundle has not got that
little sheet at the back which gives it exactly.

       THE CORONER:   Mr. King, 14.42 did you say?

       MR. KING:   Yes sir.

     THE CORONER:     So clearly well before he arrived,
is it not?

       MR. KING:   It is 14.52, sir.

     THE CORONER:  14.52, you said, I beg your pardon,
I thought you said 14.42.

     MR. KING:  Sir, I am not now going on the time
this witness said he arrived, but by reference to
events before the gate is opened, and we know, sir -
and there is no dispute, I do not think, amongst any
of us - that the Gate C was opened first at about
14.48 and then again at 14.52.

       THE CORONER:   I see. We have heard evidence of
that    anyway and nobody has disputed it.

     MR. KING:     So this is just before the   gate is
opened.

       THE CORONER:   For the second time.

     MR..KING: For the second time and it is a time
when - I do not think I am giving anything away - on
the evidence the main people go through. We have
heard evidence that the first time a few people went
through.

       THE CORONER:   Yes.

     MR. KING:  Do you see in the photograph, Mr.
Jones, that there are people on horseback? Do you see
them there in the foreground? A. Yes.

But they are just alongside the gate which is to be
opened, it has not been opened yet, do you see that?
A. Yes.
                                                             1#5



                               A.   P.   JONES


Q.   You can see that they are on the opposite side of that
     metal barrier which is dividing up the turnstile area,
     do you see? A. Yes.

Q.   On that photograph - it is a snapshot obviously - but
     those in the foreground are just standing there, those
     horses? A. Yes.

Q.   In the photograph those horses are not purporting to
     do anything, those in the foreground, to control what
     is happening beyond that metal barrier, do you see
     that? A. Yes.

Q.   To be fair, in the far distance you can see I think it
      looks like two horses in the far distance and beyond,
      which would be much further to perhaps at the
      perimeter fence stage.   There would be two officers
      there, perhaps you can see, but you gave evidence of
      seeing one? A.      Yes.

Q.   The point I am trying to put to you is on that
      photograph you see that the bulk of the horses we can
      see are well away from the position where you were.
      They are on the opposite side of the crowd, do you
      understand? A.     Yes.

Q.   If I could just   see thenext photograph,   if I may.

          MR. PAYNE: Actually, what   ishappening,   and the
     reason I interrupted before, is Mr. King is making
     quite a long speech based on these photographs dealing
     with something which this witness does not know
     anything about.   If I were to do the same, I can point
     to it.    My friend is drawing attention to the
     particular features of this photograph and the Jury
     can see it for themselves, but that is what is
     happening.   He is not asking this witness questions at
     all.   The witness was not even at the ground at 14.42
     - I am sorry, 14.52.

          MR. KING: With respect, I accept that this
     witness can only tell us what he saw, but my learned
     friend put to him a photograph.

          MR. PAYNE:  I can make speeches through
     photographs as well, but I am not going to do it.

          THE CORONER:  I am pleased to hear that.   Mr.
     King, just one moment.  My understanding of the
     position is this.  This witness said quite clearly
     that he saw just one horse and, as far as he can
     remember, it was outside the ground.  I allowed you to
     show him a photograph which demonstrated that at
     whatever time it was, 14.55 that you said, there were
                                                         1*6


                                 A.   P.   JONES


'   at that point in time about 12 or maybe 10 - I cannot
    remember how many horses but there were quite a lot,
    and that they were positioned both outside the
    perimeter gates and within the crowd, and he could not
    say whether that was true or not. He could merely
    note that there was a photograph at about the time
    that he was there.

         What Mr. King is doing is to say this:   "I agree
    that there were horses and various other people there,
    but at a slightly earlier time they were at a
    different position".

         MR. KING:    And at a time when the gate had not
    been opened.

         THE CORONER:  It does not add anything.  All he
    can do is say, "Can you see that?" to which he may
    reply "Yes", but you can't say, "Yes, that is true",
    or "No, it isn't", because you have already told us
    you saw nothing.

         THE WITNESS:     Yes.

         THE CORONER:    I suppose it is a convenient way   of
    introducing thesephotographs, but I think it is
    perfectly in order for you to go ahead.

         MR. KING:    I am obliged, sir.

         THE CORONER:  I think the point which Mr. Payne
    makes, which is that one should not make speeches, I
    am sure you will take on board.

         MR. KING:  I agree with that, and it was my
    learned friend who introduced the photographs to make
    the point he sought to make.

         MR. PAYNE:     I do not want to argue, but there is
    a complete difference.  The witness was talking about
    arriving at the ground at 5-to 3, so I showed him a
    photograph of 5-to 3. Now what Mr. King is doing -
    and this is a silly argument and I do not want to keep
    doing it - he is talking about something completely
    different that this witness does not know anything
    about.  That is my objection.

         MR. KING: With respect, my learned friend is
    taking 5-to 3 as the gospel time that this witness
    arrived.

         MR. PAYNE:     That is what he said.
                            A.   P.   JONES


     MR. KING: With respect, what he said was that
when he arrived there he arrived and then an event
happened and the event, we know, was the opening of
the gate and therefore we are identifying these
photographs just before that gate was opened and this
individual on his evidence went through.

     THE CORONER:     I have already said that you can go
ahead.

     MR. KING:  I am obliged. Just one more photograph
then, please, MWL15/7A.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   I am sorry, he appears to have
copied the wrong one.

     MR. KING:  Sir, perhaps I could just hold it up.
This is again 14.51, which is just one minute earlier
from the last photograph, and what we will see on it,
it is the same scene as the previous one, but it is
just a bit further back and we see a barrier which is
alongside that gate and we see officers standing
there, sir.

     THE CORONER: Would you pass it up to me for me
to just look at it. What number are we giving this?

     MR. JONES:     MWL.15/7A will be C301.

     THE CORONER: Just pass    it quickly round.    The
point is a simple   one, is it not?

     MR. KING:  The point is     a simple one, that the
officers who were   present on   that photograph are at
such a position and standing     in such a position that
they could not be visible to     this witness.

     MR. PAYNE: He was not there.   I do not want to
appear for a moment that I am stopping the photographs
going in.  I would like the Jury to have the whole
bundle, but what I am objecting to is the way Mr. King
is doing it a bit at a time through a witness who was
not there at the time the photographs were taken.  I
would like the Jury to have the whole bundle.

     THE CORONER:     I have already said that they will
not be produced.

     MR. KING:  Sir, I will not argue the point again
of whether the witness was there.  I am identifying it
not by the clock, but by an event, which is often more
accurate than the clock and people's recollection of
the clock.
                          A.   P.   JONES


     THE CORONER:It is a problem, I   agree.      Do it
shortly if you will, Mr. King, as far as you     are able.

     MR. KING:  Sir, I have really completed it.        I
just want to show   itto the witness.

     THE CORONER:    Iam not trying to stop you.       Give
it to the witness.

     MR. KING:  So, Mr. Jones, the point is a simple
one to you, that on the basis of that photograph at
1^»51 the officers you see in the foreground alongside
the Gate C are just standing behind a barrier well
away from where you would be? A. Yes.

You can actually see people standing there, can you
not? A. Yes.

Thank you, that is all I want to ask.  Can I just ask
you about Anfield for one moment.  You said that you
often do not get there until 10-to 3 to get in? A.    I
was a season ticket holder.

That is all right.  Tell me, does Anfield have
capacity games, that is to say a full crowd? A.
Sometimes.

What sort of crowd goes to Anfield when it is a full
gate? A.   I am not so sure of the number.

     MR. KING:   I will not take it any further.

         Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBRIEN

Mr. Jones, did you expect to have to wait for quite a
while when you saw so many people standing outside the
main entrance at Leppings Lane? A.   I wasn't sure at
that time whether they were actually moving through,
so when I found that we were stationary I thought we
would have to wait then.

So were you surprised to be allowed into a football
ground through a large gate? A. Yes.

Had you ever had that experience before?    A.   No.

You mentioned people sitting on a wall and maybe they
did not have tickets, I do not know,-you would not
know this, but did you notice if those people suddenly
moved forward when the gate was opened? A. No, I
never really noticed.
                                                           119

                                               A.   P . JONES




Q. There is just one little thing I would like to say.
   Don't you think you are a very fortunate person to have
   a friend like Chris? - A. Very fortunate.

Q. That is all, Hr. Jones, thank you.

              Cross-Examined by HR. 3USSELL

Q. Can we remind ourselves, it was a lovely day, wasn't
   it? - A. It was.

Q. And everyone sitting outside the Fox public house was
   enjoying the sunshine and anticipating a garae of
   football? - A. Yes.

Q. Were you one of the last Liverpool supporters to leave
   the Fox? - A. No, I don't think so.

Q. Were you one of the first to move off towards the
   ground? - A. I wasn't sure how many were still inside
   the pub, but there were a few still standing in the
   garden when we left.

Q. What time do you say you left? - A. About half-past to
   25-to.

0. And you knew that the ground was about 15 minutes walk
   away? - A. 15 to 10 ainutes walk, yes.

Q. That was knowledge that you had acquired through going
   to the Fox the previous year, 1S88? - A. Yes.

Q. On the way to the ground you were subject to a check
   and you were effectively told you could either leave
   your drink tnere or take it with you inside, is tnat
   right? - A. Yes, drink it.

Q. If I can just assist you with where that night have
   been, you described a social club.  Do you renember a
   public house called the Gate? - A. No, I act sorry.

Q. Do you think tnat it was about tne junction of
   Penistone Road Worth and Clay Wheels Lane?- A. I am not
   too sure.  I don't really know the area.

Q. We will hear evidence in due course about that. When
   you reached the approach to the turnstiles at the
   Leppings Lane entrance there was a vast crowd, wasn't
   there? - A. Yes.

Q. Would it be fair to say - we can see it on the video -
   have you seen the videos or anything? - A. No, I have
   seen nothing.
                                                             12.0

                                               A.   P.   JONES




Q. That it was difficult for either men or men on horses
   to get anywhere fast? - A. Yes.

Q. In seeking not to come between my learned friends Mr.
   King and Mr. Payne, can I ask you to look at photograph
   C294, which I hope is a time between the two that you
   have already been shown?  I understand the corrected
   time for that is 5-to-3 - sorry, 7-minutes-to-3, so
   between the times of the photograph you were shown by
   Mr. King and the one you were shown by Mr. Payne, but
   as I asked you a few minutes ago, neither men nor men
   on horses could aove very quickly in that crowd, would
   you agree? - A. Yes.

Q. In that photograph we can see a number of mounted
   Policemen, can*t we? - A. Yes.

Q. He can see one on the right in the foreground? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Ue can see a series of mounted Policemen between the
   turnstiles and the blue fencing in the middle distance?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Six in number? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you see any of those six mounted Policemen? - A. As
   I said, I only seen one.

Q. Once again outside, beyond the blue railings, we can
   see a further two mounted Policemen, towards the left-
   hand side of the picture, can't we? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you remember - I an sorry if you have already given
   this evidence and I didn't note it down - can you
   remember wnich of those eight or nine mounted Policemen
   that we can see were there, according to this
   photograph at 7-minutes-to-3, you saw? - A. I am not
   too sure.

Q. You don't know whether it was a mounted Policeman
   inside or outside the blue railings? - A. On
   approaching, I think it was outside the railings that I
   first seen the horse.

Q. You don't remember seeing any of the mounted Policemen
   of the six or seven that we see, inside the blue
   railings?- A. No.

Q. How large was the group in which you moved off from the
   Fox and down to the ground? — A. What, the people in
   the garden?
                                                            12.1

                                                A.   P . J03ES




Q. Yes. - A. I would say about 100 strong, 100 people
   maybe.

Q. So you moved off from the Fox with about 100 people? -
   A. No, the people I left with in the group, there was a
   group of three friends initially and there was five or
   six friends followed on.

Q. You all had tickets to get into the game? - A. Yes.

Q. No doubt you were keen to get into the game to see the
   start of the match? - A. Yes.

Q. A keenness no doubt shared with all the other Liverpool
   supporters with whom you were in a crowd outside the
   Leppings Lane entrance? - A. Yes.

Q. You have described that the crowd was jostling but
   there was no pushing? - A . I was never pushed forward
   or backwards, I was just like moved around.

Q. You were moved around? - A. As the crowd moves, you
   move with it. Wot really pushing, more just jostling
   about.

Q. You seem to distinguish between jostling and pushing? -
   A. Yes.

Q. But was there, for example, contact with other people
   in the crowd? - A. Yes. You were shoulder to shoulder.

Q. Shoulder to shoulder and front to back? - A. well, I
   wouldn't exactly say front to back but close.

Q. Was there not a concerted push towards the turnstile? -
   A. Not that I noticed.

0. If there was no concerted push towards the turnstile
   can you offer any explanation as to why other witnesses
   had reported evidence of severe crushing against the
   turnstile? - A. Maybe they were in a different position
   from where I was.

Q. Thank you.

                  Further by THE CORONER

Q. I just want to clarify one or two things, so that we
   know where we are. As I understand your evidence, you
   came down towards the ground and you arrived at around
   5-to-3, is that right?- A. Yes.

Q. There were a mass of people ahead of you? - A. Yes.
                                                              112

                                                A.   P.   JONES




Q. You joined the crowd, and in fact people came up behind
   you? - A. Yes.

Q. You did not perceive any particular push forward in the
   area in which you uete located at that time? - A. Ho.

Q. And you were at that point in time outside the
   perimeter gates, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. The only Police Officer, mounted Officer, you saw was
   one solitary Officer who was only, in fact, ten feet or
   twelve feet away from you? - A. Yes.

Q. Quite close?- A. Yes.

Q. But not that close that the horse obstructed you? You
   didn't have to manoeuvre round it, that's right? - A.
   No.

Q. You noticed the crowd moving forward? Initially it was
   stationary as far as you could tell, that is right,
   isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. And the next thing you actually remember is being
   within the concourse area? - A. Yes.

Q. Inside the ground? - A. Yes.

Q. You are unable to tell rae, is that right, which gate
   you went through, is that correct? - A. Well ....

Q. Or do you know which one it was? - A. I am not too sure
   but I still had my full ticket, and it was the only
   time I got into a game with a full ticket.  I don't
   recall going through a turnstile.

Q. Yes, but the point is that you didn't go through a
   turnstile, did you? - A. No.

Q. Nobody took a ticket off you and those "B"s were for
   the turnstiles, but you definitely went through a large
   aperture, do you remember that or not? - A. Not really.

Q. You don't even remember that? - A. I just remember
   getting into this large compound area.

Q. And all the photographs you were shown by Hr. Payne,
   Hr. King and Mr. Russell, of different times, none of
   that you saw? - A. Not really.

Q. You accept that they are photographs and you can
   identify people on them when people point them out to
   you, but you did not see any of that? - A. No.
                                                                            123

                                                              A.   P.   JONES




Q. T h a t is   r ig h t,   is n 't    it?   -   A.   Yes.

Q. You did very well. Don't worry, it is a very hard task
   this, to try and piece together first of all after a
   long period of time, secondly after a very traumatic
   event, and thirdly when one is trying to put into words
   something which is not easy to explain, so don't worry,
   you did very well. Thank you very much indeed. Off you
   go.

         THE CORONER:    (Addressing the Jury) I am going
    to let you go straightaway. Tomorrow morning 10
    o'clock here. Remember it is going to be a dull trip
    because you can't be chit-chatting.   I think I ought to
    say you should not even chit-chat between yourselves
    because we don't want Mr. Griffiths to hear what you
    are saying. We want to do a little round trip, taking
    in some of these pubs. You probably know most of them
    but it is just so you get the feel of the district, and
    then we will go into the ground. You will be on your
    own in the ground, and then when you have finished, be
    back here at 2 , okay.

                      (In the absence of the Jury)

         (Addressing the next witness) If I can turn to
    you, Stephanie, I am very, very sorry.  I knew I was
    taking a bit of a risk putting you on but I had hoped
    that we would have got to you. We will deal with you
    first tomorrow afternoon, and then we will have heard
    your evidence.

          Any submissions, please, or can we go?

         HR. HALE:   Sir, merely to say that I propose to
    excuse myself from the ground attendance tomorrow.

         THE CORONER:   There is no obligation on any of
    you coming. We have provided a vehicle so that if you
    wished you could see, if you like, what the Jury is
    seeing, but there is no obligation.  It is intended as
    a viewing for the Jury.

         MR. RUSSELL:   Can I just ask you to confirm the
    dates that you gave us at the business meeting for when
    you propose to rise for Christmas and re-assemble in
    the New Year?

         THE CORONER:   The intention is to rise on 19th
    December.  I think that is a Wednesday.

           MR. RUSSELL:               You will be sitting on the 19th?
                                                          12.4


                                            A,   P.   JONES




     THE CORONER:   I want to sit on the 19th unless
somebody --- are you trying to persuade me to change my
mind on that?

     MR. RUSSELL:   No, I am seeking to find out what
your plan is?

     THE CORONER:   My plans are to sit on the 19th and
hopefully not finish late and then the intention is to
resume on the 7th January - that is a Monday.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Thank you.




           /MR. MANNING:   Can I ask
     MR. MANNING:   Can I ask   a supplementary?    Do I
understand that there are now   no dates, at least so far
as you are concerned, between   now and the 19th of
December when we shall not be   sitting?

     THE CORONER:   That is correct.   The only problem
we have is on the 6th when we don't have the use of the
big room at the back, but this facility is available.    I
know it may inconvenience some people but I hope they be
able to...   I don't want to give us the day because we
really need to press on as much as we can.

     MR. KING:   There is a possibility that I myself may
not come on the view because I have been many times.

     THE CORONER:   That   is perfectly   all right.

     MR. KING:   Sir, it   is something  I should have
thought of before.   Perhaps, sir, at some point you
might tell the jury that the absence of any given
individual is something which is a matter of course.

     THE CORONER:   If I forget to do it when I address
them in the morning, if you would just remind me and I
will do it tomorrow when   we set off.

     MR. KING:   Rather like many of us, sir, it rather
depends on my clerk.

     THE CORONER:   I understand.   As I said, I don't
want you to feel in any sense obligated.    You are quite
right, I should point it out to the jury in case they
draw some inference from it.

     MR. MANNING:   It may be early days, sir, but there
may be a time if the funding situation does not^change,
that I, perhaps Mr. Hale, perhaps my learned friend Mr.
Russell, may all find ourselves either having to come on
days when we think it's more important than other days,
or, indeed, may not be able to continue to come at all.
Again, I would welcome the remark to the jury.
Hopefully things may change and proper representation may
be able to be afforded but at this moment in time I can t
say.

     THE CORONER:   I suppose technically speaking it
should be possible to conduct an Inquest without any
representation if you think about it, but it isn't easy.
I can see the point you are making.   I would prefer not
to say that tomorrow because there is no point, but I
have taken the point you make.   I can see what you are
saying.
                                                     126




     Well, thank you all very much indeed.   If you are
not coming on the view you don't have to be here in the
morning.   I will deal with that, but we will see you all
at two o'clock.

(The Inquests were adjourned until the following day)
