                                                                                             M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                 Date and tim e raised   M   l-D^I 3_Q.                Num ber

     -4—<2><S
T itle   /                 P T ~ ______ C _ J 3 —                                oCva

( Include source and any document number i f relevant)
                                                                      L
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                        Receiver




                                                                                                                        Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                    Statement Reader
S tatem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                        Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                               SIO
Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




                                                                                                                        Indexer
F urther action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master N um ber Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER
         ON THE 15th of APRIL 1999


           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                    SIMON BELL




                      Before

DR. S.L. POPPER,   LL.B, B.MED.Sci,    B M , B S , MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                        At

              The Memorial Hall,
                  City Hall,
                  Sheffield.

                        On

          Thursday,   19th April,    1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER             Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                          Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH              Medical and Dental Union of
                          Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                          Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN          Trent Regional Health Authority and
                          South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                          Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                    A


                                                       INDEX


                        PRDF A. USHER - Called
                    B
                          By THE CORONER


                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS - Called

                          By THE CORONER ...................................


                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                          By THE CORONER ............................          5



                    D                                ■oo — oo- -




                    E




                    F




                    G




                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                             PROF.   A. USHER

                        19th April   1990

                                       INQUEST   INTO THE DEATH OF SIMON BELL

                                   THE CORONER:   I believe Hr.       and M r s . Bell are here.
                           I have decided to know where they          are.    I cannot see you
                           because- of these lights and it is         eas ie r for me if I know
                           where the par tic ul ar family are.        Good morning, Hr. and
                    B      M r s . Bel 1.

                                This then is the resumed Inquest which was opened on
                           18th April 1989.  On that oc casion Neil Anthony Parkin,
                           Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

                                "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                                identified to PC 714 Bell of the South Yorkshire Police
                                as that of Simon Bell by C hri st op he r M. Bell, his
                                father.     He was 17 years of age having been born on
                                15th August. 1971 at Liverpool.     He was a single man and
                                he 1 ived at                                    Liverpool.
                                He was a YTiYTS worker by occupation.    He died at
                                Hills bo ro ug h Football Ground following an incident
                                there on Saturday, 15th April 1989.       PC 714 Bell caused
                                the body to be removed to the Medico-Legal Centre and
                    D           there he identified it to Detective Constable Simon
                                Wei goId who su bsequently identified the same body to
                                Prof. Usher.      It is the family wish that the body
                                should be cremated."

                           Then I adjourned it in the usual way.   You will notice that
                           the Police Off ice r is called Bell- That is pure
                           coincidence.   At the time, of course, they did not know the
                    E
                           name of your son.

                                            PROF.   ALAN USHER - Called:

                                                    Bv THE C O R O N E R ;

                           You are Prof. Alan Usher  Prof es so r of Forensic Patho lo gy          in
                           Sheffield, aren't you? - A « Yes*

                           And you are sworn,  Prof. Usher, just allow me to find the
                           page.  You did the post mortem on this young man, di d you
                           not? - A. Yes, he was identified to me as the others were.

                           Prof. Usher, could you help me in this way; the cause of
                           death and the relevant det ai ls ? - A. Yes, this young man
                           died of traumatic asphyxia.       He was a slimly built, auburn
                           hai red young man, 184 centi me tre s in height, weigh in g 68
                           kilograms.    He was normally dev elop ed and he althy and I
                           found no natural di sease to be present which would have
                           cau sed or co nt ri but ed to his death.  He had, in my view, an



                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                PROF.   A. USHER

                           average ex pe cta tio n of life for his age. There were a few
                           small grazes about the body and they are entirely
                           inconsequential in terms of caus ati on of death.

                                   THE CORONER:       Mr.   Fraser.

                                   MR.   FRASER:    The family have no questions,             sir,   thank
                           you.
                    B
                                  THE CORONER:        You have understo od that,           haven't you,
                           Mr.   and Mrs. Bell?

                        Q. Prof. Usher, I arn most grateful.  I believe you are not
                           appearing in any other cases today, are you,-1  A. I think
                           not .

                                THE CORONER:    In that case, you are obviously welcome
                           to stay, but. you are excused if you wish to leave.    Can I
                           say that the blood alcohol which was measured in this case
                           was less than 10 milligrammes per 100 mils.    You will
                           remember Dr. Forrest explained what the significance, if
                           any, of that was.   May I just check with Mr. and Mrs- Bell,
                           do you want  Simon described as a YTi^ worker or YTh> trainee?
                    D      It is semantics.

                                   MR.   FRASER:     A trainee,     sir.

                                   THE CORONER:       The other details were correct,              weren't
                           they'

                                   MR.   FRASER:     They were,    sir.
                    E
                                THE CORONER:          Can we now turn to the reporting
                           Officer, please.

                                     DETEC TI VE   INSPECTOR MATTHEW ROBERT S A W E R S ;

                                                       By THE C O R O N E R :

                           You have already been sworn as well but again if you would
                           just repeat your name and status for the record pl ease? -
                        A. Matthew Robert Sawers, sir, Police Inspector, West Midlands.

                           If you would please take me through the summary? - A . I
                           will, sir.      At 1 IOO hours on Saturday, 15th April 1939,
                           Mr. Ch ri sto pher Michael Bell saw his son, Simon, leave the
                           family home with the intention of travell in g to Sheffield.
                           Simon was known to be in p oss es si on of a ticket for the FA
                           Cup Semi Final football match which was to be played at
                           Hill sb or ou gh Stadium that day.   He travelled by car with
                           Mr. Alan Mur ph y and his son, Dav id Murphy.




                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                       D.I.   M ■ R. SAUERS

     Upon arrival in Sheffield, Mr. Murphy and his son
walked with Simon to the Le ppings Lane entrance of the
stadium.  Simon then left them and went to join a group of
friends who were wai ting to enter the ground.

     At about 4.45, together with Mr. James Thomas and other
friends, Simon ent ered the stadium through a turnstile
before going down the tunnel and into the enclosure behind
Gate 3.  Mr. Thomas states that they stood together on the
terraces for a few minutes before there was a surge from the
crowd behind which caused him and Simon to be forced down
the terrace.  Mr. Thomas was able to hold on to a crush
barrier but says that Simon was carried away in the surge
and became lost from his view.

     Shortly after 1505 hours, following the severe crushing
in the West Stand terracing, Police Con stables Holt and
Sykes were assisting to remove casua lti es from the enclosure
on to the pitch. The   Officers carried a man whom they now
know to be Simon Bell from the di recti on of Gate 3 and on to
the pitch.  They left him with others who attempted
resuscitation.  These persons have not been identified.

      At app ro xi ma tel y 1540 hours, Police Constable Bell,,
with assistance from spectators, ca rried Simon from the
Lepp in gs Lane goal area on a temporary stretcher across the
pitch and into the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had
been set up.

     At ap pro xi mat el y 1610 hours Dr. Matthew Bull examined
Simon in the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.
At 0125 hours on Sunday, the 16th, Mr. Christopher Michael
Bell identified the body of his son to Police Constable Bell
in the temporary mortuary at the gymnasium.

     At 0143 hours Police Constable Bell escorted Simon's
body to the Medico-Legal Centre where he confirmed the
identification to Detective Constable Weigold.

     On 16th April, following identification by Detective
Constable Weigold, Prof. Alan Usher carried out an autopsy
and has submitted a report giving cause of death.

     Evidence is included regar di ng the analysis of a blood
sample from the deceased where the presence of ethanol was
detected.  The witnesses pro vi ng con tinuity of the blood
sample are Mr. Dennis Chambers, Detective Sergeant Turner,
and Detectiv e Sergeant Fletcher.   Dr. Alexander Forrest
carried out the analysis.

     Found in Simon's personal effects was a ticket
counterfoil which confirms his entrance to the st adium via a
turnst i 1e .
                                                                        D .I - M. R. SAWERS

                        Q- Can I just ask you to help me on one or two little matters?
                           If you turn to page 13 near the top of the page, that is
                           James Thomas talking about en tering Pen 3, that is right,
                           is n 1t it  A - Yss.

                        Q.   I think he says at the point in time when he was still           with
                             Simon it was about, he says, between 2-50 and 2-55, is           that
                    B        right? - A- He does, sir, yes.

                        Q.   It was shortly after that that he was separated from Sirnon?
                        A-   It was, sir, yes-

                        Q. The other thing, and it may be that Inspector Layton will
                           deal with it but if you turn page 17 for a moment, Police
                           Constable Holt, 2618, identifies him se lf on a video rnap,
                           that is right, isn't it? - A. He does, sir, yes.

                        Q. And the time that he identifies hirnself is at           1528:51   or
                           there ab ou ts ? - A. That is correct, sir, yes-

                        Q. So although he entered the stadium to assist at 1505, which
                           I take it you have got from the statement, this is paragraph
                           four of the summary? - A. That is correct, s i r •
                    D
                        Q. The visual evidence which links him shows him actually with
                           Simon at 1528 or th ereabouts? - A. It does, sir-

                                   THE CORONER:      Mr- Fraser.

                                  MR. FRASER:     The only matter which arises, and it is
                             not a criti ci sm of the Officer, I think as he read the first
                    E        line of paragr ap h three of his summary he actually said
                             4.45 and I assume what he meant to say was 1445-    It may be
                             a matter of record and it may be that I have misheard but
                             timings are important.

                                  THE CORONER:   You are quite right.  I did not actually
                             hear that.  I have actually got it in front of rne. The time
                             was 1445.

                                   MR.   FRASER:    I can confirm,    sir,   it was 1445.

                                   THE WITNESS       I am grateful-     Thank you for that.

                                      MR- FRASER:   There are no other questions from the
                             f a m i 1y , sir.
                    G
                                      THE CORONER:      Any questi on s from any of you?  (no
                             r e s p o n s e ) Have you followed all that., ladies and gentlemen?
                             Can you hear all right?         Am I spea ki ng sufficiently clear?
                             If we can now ask Inspector Layton to come forward.           I am
                             sorry, I need you back for one moment-


                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                D .I . M. LAYTON

                        Q- You may remember that yesterday,             you were      in Court,    w e r e n ’t
                           you? - A. I was, sir.

                        Q. Dr- Forrest gave evidence and he read the names of all the
                           people whose blood he analysed ? - A- That is correct, sir.

                        Q. You will recollect that when we came to Simon Bell he,                       in
                    B      fact, read out a different name? - A. He did.

                        Q.   In fact, he read his father's name.?                 A. He read his
                             father's name.

                        Q- Now I think that this is an error which occurred and we have
                           obtained a correct in g statement, is that right? - A. We
                           have, indeed.

                        Q. The Of ficer who was involved with that, whose name is Dennis
                           Chambers, in fact, he was the Officer? - A- It is, sir-

                        Q. He has explained that he must have copied the wrong name
                           from one of the forms where both names will have appeared?
                        A. It seerns that is what took place, sir, yes.
                    D   Q.   I think it is right t.o say he is obviously very sorry that
                             an error of this nature has occur re d? - A. He apologises for
                             that error, yes.

                        Q.   The other thing he says in that statement is that he is
                             absol ut el y satisfied that the sample, of course, was
                             Sim on' s? - A . He does say that, sir, yes.
                    E             THE CORONER:        Is that clear?            It is only for the
                             record.

                                  MR.   FRASER:      Yes,   sir,   thank you very much.

                                  THE CORONER:        Thank you very much-

                                   DETECTIVE      INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - C a l l e d :

                                                       Bv THE C O R O N E R ;

                        Q. You have got to repeat your name every time so that we have
                           got it in each individual case? - A. Yes, sir.     Michael
                           Layton, Detective Inspector, West Mid la nd s Police-

                    G   Q.   Inspector Layton, if you would be good enough to take me
                             through the visual evid en ce? - A- Yes, sir.  In respect of
                             Simon I have made examin ati on of the video and photog rap hi c
                             evidence which is available and Simon has, in fact, been
                             identified alive in the enclosure which we are referring to
                             as No. 3.  He is shown on a photograph and also on a BBC


                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                     D . I . M- LAYTON

                             video.    In respect of the ph ot og ra ph that is referenced
                             D B 16/29 and the BBC tape is actually referenced Map 1 and
                             timed at 1449:39:18, and so that would be 2-49 p.m.

                                  James Thomas has signed a plan of the terraces which
                    B        indicates the pos it io n that he stood with Simon before the
                             pressure from the crowd separated them.     That plan has been
                             given a reference J T 2 . Simon has been shown again on video,
                             again a BBC tape, and he is shown on that being ca rried from
                             the dire ct io n of Gate 3 with PCs Holt and Sykes.  The
                             reference for that is Wap 7, 1528:51:10.     In this instance
                             Mr. Bell has been able to assist us, the father, in relation
                             to the visual evide nce and he has been able to confirm what
                             we have shown him does relate to Simon.

                                  I have, sir, pr ep ar ed a further plan which has been
                             given the reference number MWJL73.     This indicates locations
                             in Enclosure No. 3 both from the pho tograph and video
                             reference I first gave.

                    D   Q. With regard to that plan I am going to get you to
                           demo ns tr at e in a moment but there are two live positions
                           there, one is somewhat further back and the second one is
                           near the barrier which is broken:' - A. That is correct,     sir-
                           I should, in fact, mention in respect of the photograph
                           which is re fe renced DB16/29 that is, in fact, timed at 1445.

                        Q. I am going to give your plan MWJL73 the Coroner's exhibit
                    E      number C 4 - The other plan I am going to ask you to
                           de mo ns tr at e is yours MWJL74 which is re fe renced C 5 . If you
                           could now come and show us where these position s are please?
                        A. If I can refer you again please to the plan of the
                           terracing, I d o n ’t think we have per ha ps mention ed it before
                           but where the dotted line is shown on this particu la r plan
                           it does indicate the barrier that subsequ en tl y broke.         The
                           two con dit ion s we are referring to, firstly, in relation to
                           the photo gr ap h is in about that location there ( ind icat in.g) -
                           That was the earlier timed photograph.            The second location
                           when Simon was seen alive is roughly this posit io n here
                           (i n d i c a t i n g ? ■ If I can refer you to the larger map,_
                           referred to in Plan MWJL74 - this is a video identification
                           where Simon was app arently deceased at that time on the
                           pitch - and the location we have for that is in the region
                           of Gate 3 in this parti cu la r area here ( indi cat, i n g ) slightly
                    G      to the left of Gate 3 as you look from the pitch.

                        Q. Ue have got a large plan.      It is going to be difficult for
                           people at this en d to see but if you walk down to that
                           larger plan and just show the Jury because it will be easier
                           for them to see it.      Will you e x c u s e ? By tomorrow we will
                           not have to have such sharp eyes. - A. Again we are now
                H          facing the Lep pi ng s Lane terraces here.        You have got Gate 3
                           there and the location is around this area here
                           (i n d i c a t i n g ) -
                                                           6
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                           D.I.   M . LAYTON

If you would just come back, there is just one other matter.
Actually you have already answered it and there is no need
for me to ask it.

     THE CORONER:      Any questions of Inspector Layton?

     MR. FRASER: No questions, sir, but I am specifically
asked by the family on this occasion to thank the Officers
of the West Midlands Police with whom they have had contact
since the loss of their son for the sensi ti ve way they have
dealt with what has been a very difficult problem.

     THE CORONER:   I must say I am exceedingly grateful    to
you for that comment and obvio us ly even more so to you,
Mr- and Mrs. Bell, and other me mbers of your family.    I know
the Officers have done their best and I am pleased to hear
that you have noted i t . Thank you very much indeed on
behalf of all the Officers.

     MR.    FRASER:   Thank you.

     THE CORONER:       Anything that you wanted?        Any questions
from any of you?      (no r e s p o n s e ). Thank you, Inspector
Layton.

     Before I adjourn this Inquest I just want to say two
things.  The first one is that it will already be obvious to
you and also to the families that we are following
inevitably a form.    There is a sequence to it but as far as
I am able to do it I want you to rea lise two things.   First
of all, just because we are following a form doesn't mean to
say that we have got to rush.    Every case I want sufficient
time so that you feel that you have had enough time to deal
with anyth in g that needs to be dealt with.

     The second thing I want to say, which I have already
said in my op ening remarks, is that I try and realise that
although we are deal in g with techn ic al iti es like names,
occupations, dates and places of birth and things like that,
I want to try and be conscious at least at one point in the
Inquest that we have dealt with a person and so, as I said
to Mr. and Mrs. Wafer I want to say to you, I am very sorry
indeed that this tragedy struck you.       Thank you ever so much
for being here.

     That is the evidence I am calling in this case at this
stage.  We are going to adjourn again for a few minutes.

           (The Inquest into the death of SIMON BELL
             was adjourned to a date to be f i x e d )
