    Transcript created by Merrill Legal Solutions




Owning Organisation:        South Yorkshire Coroner

Title Memo:                 Mini Inquest cassette - Conversation in Court with Mr Frazer
                            (Solicitor representing the Hillsborough families) regarding the
                            Hillsborough Disaster

Description:


This transcript was produced in April 2011 by Merrill Legal Solutions from the digitised version
of the audio cassette copy of this recording, after enhancement by BR Consult to reduce noise
and improve audibility of the incoming radio transmissions.




 MERRILL
 LEGAL SOLUTIONS
    Digital transcript of Wordwave International, a Merrill Communications Company
                      101 Finsbury Pavement London EC2A 1ER
                   Tel No: 020 7422 6131 Fax No: 020 7422 6134
        Web: www.merrillcorp.com/mls        Email: ukclient@merrillcorp.com
00:00:14
MR FRAZER:            Shall I perhaps introduce myself?

CORONER:              Yes.

MR FRAZER:            Good morning, Coroner. I am M r Frazer, partner in the practice of Silverman
                      and Livermore in Liverpool and a member o f the Hillsborough Steering
                      Committee. That is a committee that was formed o f a number of solicitors in
                      Liverpool shortly after this tragedy on 15 April at the Hillsborough Stadium and
                      my purpose in asking you to see me this morning was try and, if we can, assist
                      you in the logistical problems that the presentation of this inquest is likely to
                      cause for us both and to deal, if we can, with the question of block
                      representation.

                      I should perhaps open by explaining the constitution o f the steering committee
                      and then perhaps go on to the notes that I have made that we can perhaps
                      discuss this morning.

CORONER:              Yes. Thank you. That’s very, very helpful. Yes.

MR FRAZER:            The tragedy having happened on 15 April, a number o f solicitors were
                      consulted in Liverpool very quickly by families o f the people who had been
                      killed and obviously by people who had been injured. The local Law Society
                      received a large number of enquiries as to a number o f aspects that would arise
                      from the tragedy and under the auspices of Liverpool Law Society there was a
                      meeting held on 25 April at which about 85 firms were represented. Those
                      firms at that stage representing over 200 people, either the deceased families or
                      people who had been injured.

                      The view o f those present that some form of co-ordinated representation for a
                      large number o f matters was wise and it was thought that a committee should be
                      elected. Nominations were received and people volunteered to sit on that
                      committee, there were a total o f 11 people, either nominated or volunteered and
                      after a ballot a total of 6 people were elected to serve on what has become
                      known as the Hillsborough Steering Committee.

                      That committee has, or had as its first priority, representation o f the interests of
                      the bereaved and the injured at the public inquiry before Lord Justice Taylor.
                      The first part of that has now concluded and our next major problem is to deal
                      with the inquests which you will hear, sir, here in Sheffield.

                      It is the view of the group that that committee head, as it were, that block
                      representation would be advisable for a number o f reasons. The committee
                      itself consists o f 6 members, there are in the group who associate themselves
                      with that committee some 140 firms who represent over 500 people who were
                      either injured or who lost family at the disaster.

                      We reckon that approximately 45 firms in Liverpool and beyond represent at
                      least 78 of the deceased. We can identify for you those firms who act for
                      78 people and the remaining 17 either have not consulted solicitors or have
                      consulted solicitors but those solicitors are either not members of our group for
                      one reason or another or simply haven’t told us that they act for somebody who
                      was killed. Again, I can identify those 17 that we don’t have representation for.
00:03:55


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                          2
CORONER:              That would be very useful actually because obviously people don’t have to be
                      legally represented, but it is helpful to know whether they are and whether they
                      aren’t and it would save us a lot o f letter writing if we know who we need to
                      address ourselves to.
00:04:12
MR FRAZER:            I can tell you certainly that at least 5, 6 people —7 people, sorry, on the list of
                      17 are not Liverpool people and the other 10 are. It’s likely that those 10 are
                      represented by Liverpool firms who for one reason or another simply have told
                      our computer the information that we have asked them for. It is our intention
                      either to approach them directly or try and track down solicitors for them so that
                      we can put a solicitor alongside each individual deceased. I am quite happy to
                      supply that information obviously as and when we can.

CORONER:              Yes. Thank you. That would be helpful.

MR FRAZER:            Now, the way that the bereaved and injured were represented before Lord
                      Justice Taylor might be of some assistance in understanding the problems that
                      we face.

                      We, as a committee, elected a lead firm and one of the members of the
                      committee, a Miss Steel, who is a partner in Gough(?) Roberts North Kirk in
                      Liverpool who was elected to, as it were, instruct counsel for the public inquiry.
                      If you like, Coroner, I will go into the mechanics of how we did that although
                      I’m not sure that you will want to know that. That is something that is perhaps
                      for us to deal with but I am quite happy to explain it to you if you want me to.

CORONER:              I don’t think it’s necessary because, as you say, it is a matter for you how you
                      select your representation.

MR FRAZER             Very good, sir. So far as your inquests are concerned, it obviously is a matter
                      for you how you run the logistics of those but it occurred to us, having had
                      some discussion, that what you might consider doing was to have what we
                      might call a generic inquiry first to deal with the events of the afternoon of
                      15 April, to paint the picture as it were, and then to hold 95 individual, separate,
                      short inquiries to see if a particular cause o f death could be ascertained for a
                      particular individual.

                      Again, o f course, it’s a matter for you but we take the view that that might be an
                      easier way to do it and it is our brief as committee to appear before you by
                      counsel en-bloc for at least 78 of the deceased through counsel. The logistics
                      that we will set up behind him, again, is not directly a matter which will concern
                      you but I will explain it if you wish.

                      Perhaps, very briefly, what we would envisage is that counsel would represent
                      at least those 78 in the generic inquiry; he may represent the 95 by the time
                      w e’ve finished our inquiries. He would also represent the same number on an
                      individual basis. We as a committee would receive instructions from the
                      solicitors instructed by the families of those deceased, through the committee,
                      pass those instructions to counsel and he would in turn then effectively appear
                      before you in at least 78 inquests.
00:07:23
                      The alternative option is for you to be faced with 46 firms and if that were the
                      case then it would be right, I think, that they could say they were entitled to
                      46 full, separate inquests. That obviously would be wholly impracticable in our
                      view and it’s certainly the view o f almost everybody in the group that this


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                         3
                      committee represents that block representation before you would be
                      advantageous, both to yourself, sir, and, of course, to the relatives o f the
                      bereaved. Obviously this is a matter that you will have considered and we are
                      happy to abide by your views.
00:08:09
CORONER:              Yes. Would it be helpful if I chip in, so to speak, or do you want to go through
                      the whole of your items.

MR FRAZER:            No. I have a list of items to discuss and how I address you on each one may
                      obviously vary in relation to the preceding one.

CORONER:              My position really is we do occasionally have multiple deaths anyway, not 95
                      usually - fortunately - but we do have multiple deaths. Where the circumstances
                      are the same, for instance in a road traffic incident where two or three people
                      may be killed within the same car, we will do those. Technically there will be
                      two or three inquests because each death is an inquest. The way I do it is to
                      take what I call the evidence which is specific to the individual, for example the
                      post mortem finding because that is specific to him, his age and sex or whatever
                      it might be, and everything else we take as one for the lot. First o f all it saves
                      time; secondly, it is totally impractical to expect witnesses to repeat identical
                      evidence more than once and it’s also cruel and it achieves nothing. So as far as
                      the inquests are concerned in this particular case, I would plan to do exactly the
                      same within the sense of what you have outlined is what I would expect to do.

                      My only reservation at the moment with regard to how you have described it, is
                      that I haven’t yet made up my mind whether it will be better to take the, what
                      you have called, generic part - I’m quite happy with that word - at the beginning
                      or at the end. There are several reasons for that but one of the primary reasons
                      is that one of the things which I think we want to do, we want to try and arrange
                      so that the people who know when their particular specifics, so to speak, will
                      take place.

                      It may in fact be easier to timetable that if we do the specifics first and then deal
                      with the generics at the end because it is difficult to estimate the length of time
                      that the generics will take because I have no —well I have some control over the
                      court but I can’t predict exactly how long any particular representative may
                      wish to take over points. So it may necessary to have a short introductory
                      session in order to set the scene so that the jury will know what we are talking
                      about in the beginning and then take each individual case and deal with that
                      individual case as far as it concerns that person.

                      Now that may, of course, disclose a certain amount of generic information
                      because it depends on how many witnesses are relevant in any particular case.
                      If, for example, somebody was accompanied by a friend and for instance they
                      did the identification and was standing next to him - just for instance - he may
                      well want to speak about the circumstances. That w on’t necessarily do any
                      harm because we would have some first-hand evidence from, I’ll say, lay
                      people, if I can put it like that, as to what they perceived. Then at the end deal
                      with the generics. I may still change my mind about that because it depends
                      really upon when I have looked at what I have got and what we need to do.
00:12:42
                      I’ve got, if you like, several objectives: 1) I want to cause as little additional
                      pain and trauma to the families as I can; 2) we want to do the inquest as
                      adequately as is necessary but not necessarily going over the top particularly as
                      there’s been a public inquiry but, nevertheless, that is in some ways in the
                      relevance and w e’ve still got to do the inquest and w e’ve got to do them


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                           4
                      correctly; and, 3) I don’t want to take longer than is necessary but I’m prepared
                      to use as much time as is needed in order to get the evidence before the court or
                      at least before the inquest. Does that help?
00:13:39
MR FRAZER:            Yes, it does very much. The point that you make about trying to organise a
                      timetable for people is very important, I think, from the point o f view of the
                      committee anyway. It would be our wish to help you in that respect. What we
                      would respectfully suggest is that if we supplied you with a list o f the deceased
                      and their solicitors, perhaps you could timetable the hearing of your inquests to
                      deal with those deceased who are represented by a particular solicitor in one
                      block rather than take them in alphabetical order so that the solicitor who had an
                      involvement with, say, three or four or more could, if he wanted to, come to
                      Sheffield with his clients, have his inquests dealt with in one go and then go
                      rather than do it on a piecemeal basis.

CORONER:              There is a problem with this actually. I don’t intend to do it in alphabetical
                      order and I don’t intend to do it in the numerical order in which the deceased
                      were, if you like, booked in. What I was intending to do was to take it in
                      pathologist order because some o f the pathologists are local but some are not. It
                      would be very inconvenient to bring the pathologists back over again.

                      Now this, o f course, may be inconvenient for the solicitors I accept, because
                      like everybody else, the pathologists did work very hard and they just took the
                      bodies as they were presented to them. That means that people were split and
                      different pathologists did different —it may be that I might have to modify that
                      in certain cases, for example where they sent two related people, it might not be
                      practical to split them for humanitarian purposes. However, that may present a
                      problem for the solicitors.

MR FRAZER:            I accept that. It’s not for certain that all solicitors would want to have either
                      themselves or their representatives present, but obviously the pathologists
                      would have to be present so that logistical problem must obviously take priority.

                      Can I just run down the list o f points that I’ve made? I’ve already discussed
                      very briefly with you the steering committee and, obviously, if at any stage you
                      want more information about the constitution o f that then obviously w e’re quite
                      happy to supply that information.

                      Dealing with the public inquiry; I understand, sir, that you will have seen before
                      you start your inquests the transcript o f all the evidence and I think that will
                      obviously be useful. So, you at least have in your mind that picture that has
                      emerged from the public enquiry. So that really relates to some extent to the
                      generic investigation.

                      You will have an idea obviously in your own mind and if the jury are local they
                      will obviously have the events vividly in their mind as well.

                      The third thing that we thought about was the question o f the numbers o f people
                      who are likely to appear before you and in what form they will appear. You
                      will obviously have us as a committee represented by counsel. It is our
                      intention to discuss with insurers whether they intend to be represented by
                      leading or junior counsel, or both, and obviously depending upon what response
                      we get from them then we will obviously have to consider our position.
00:17:15
                      Certainly the suggestion at the moment is that there would be junior counsel
                      with an instructing solicitor and a, for want o f a better word, runner on a daily


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                           5
                      basis to fetch and carry, so there would be three people on behalf o f the steering
                      committee. Now, I don’t know what approaches you had in terms of the
                      organisations who are likely to be present.
00:17:37
                      Having attended the opening of your inquest, sir, and seeing the size of your
                      court room we were a little concerned that the numbers of people who may
                      attend and the numbers of documents that may be presented might cause you
                      with a logistical problem. Again, I have no wish to tread on your toes in that
                      respect but it’s something that has concerned us. Having seen the extent o f the
                      public inquiry, I don’t think that you will be presented with such an enormous
                      barrage of counsel and paper, but you’re going to have a large number o f people
                      in front o f you, I think.

CORONER:              Well, I was already counting that this court was too small and we haven’t yet
                      fixed on a venue but my intention is to have a venue which will be, if you like,
                      comparable in size - I’m not saying exactly the same size - to the public inquiry.
                      W e’ve got to have enough space for people who want to attend to be able to get
                      in and w e’ve got to have space for the jury, w e’ve got to have space for
                      solicitors and families and so on.

                      So I anticipate that we will be using be using facilities probably in the town hall
                      again and it may well be that w e’ll finish up in exactly the same room as Lord
                      Justice T aylor. I agree with you, this court is too small for this and, in any
                      event, unfortunately other business will continue. I am using this court for - 1
                      don’t like the word routine because no death is routine - and you will excuse the
                      word, other business.

MR FRAZER:            Would it be your intention, sir, to provide transcripts of the oral evidence in the
                      same way that Lord Justice Taylor did? I appreciate that in these courts you
                      have a recording facility but at Sheffield, if you sit in the tow hall, sir, you
                      w on’t have that facility. We as a steering committee found the transcripts most
                      useful but again, obviously, it’s a matter for yourself.

CORONER:              Yes. I think you’ve made a very good question here. It is my intention to have
                      the inquests transcribed either by using the shorthand writers or by some other
                      system; I’m looking into that at the moment and it is also my intention to try
                      and do it on a daily basis just as the public inquiry is concerned. This isn’t for
                      the benefit of the solicitors; it’s for my benefit because I feel that I must be in a
                      position to know what was said yesterday, in the morning of the next day.

                      The question of supplying copies of the transcripts; I think the answer to that
                      will probably be yes, whether and to what extent the usual charges are made,
                      you know, (inaudible) I would probably expect that we would make a charge,
                      though the intention is at the moment that that charge should be paid to the city,
                      Sheffield I mean. O f course they have to fund the cost of the transcriptions and
                      it would make some contribution towards the cost. Yes, I do intend to get it
                      transcribed and I do intend to have it done on a daily basis but I haven’t yet
                      decided —I was very impressed with the shorthand writers, I thought that they
                      did a splendid job, I don’t know what you think, but my impression is that it
                      was very good.

MR FRAZER:            Yes. It was a system which was very, very useful and efficiently operated. We
                      were getting transcripts from the afternoon session the following morning and
                      we were getting the morning session at the end of the working day and it was
                      extremely useful for everybody.
00:21:44

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                          6
CORONER:              Yes. I would like to think that we will have as a good a system at the inquests.
00:21:54
MR FRAZER:            Going back now to the list that we have available at the law library at Liverpool
                      which contains the names of all the deceased; it is my intention at the moment,
                      as the member of the committee nominated to deal with the inquests, to prepare
                      a questionnaire to be sent to all the solicitors who act for deceased to get, as it
                      were, common information for the benefit of counsel before that. So, before the
                      inquests start.

                      We as a committee would obviously be quite happy to supply you with any
                      information that we can about solicitors, I mean obviously we would not supply
                      that questionnaire, but we would be quite happy to supply you with a computer
                      print-out showing the name o f the deceased, the name o f the firm instructed on
                      behalf of the relatives.

                      What concerns us slightly at this stage is that short-list o f 17 or so who are not
                      currently either represented or whose representatives have not contacted us. We
                      are not sure whether it would be right for the steering committee to approach
                      them or whether you have identification for a solicitor for everybody and that
                      might be something that we could perhaps discuss. We would not want to be
                      seen to approach them, to invite them to come underneath our umbrella, as it
                      were o f block, representation. We would like them to know it was available but
                      we would not like to be overt in that approach for obvious reasons.

CORONER:              Yes, I quite understand. It is a difficult situation.

MR FRAZER:            Have you any views on that, sir? Obviously we cannot guarantee to represent
                      all 95 until we have the 95 under our umbrella, but w e’re not sure that we
                      should offer it to those who are ...

CORONER:              Yes. It is a difficulty. I’ve got three points, if you like, on this. I think it was
                      Miss Steel or M r Humphries(?) I’m not quite sure, who sent me a list of
                      solicitors who were within the steering committee group. We compared it with
                      the solicitors who had written to us to indicate that they were representing
                      individuals in connection with the inquest and there were quite a lot who were
                      on your list who haven’t contacted us. That put me in a slight difficulty because
                      a member of the deceased family may well instruct solicitors with regard to
                      administration, civil claims or anything else but not necessarily with regard to
                      the inquest. What I felt I needed was for solicitors who wanted to be, so to
                      speak, on the record as far as the inquest was concerned to say so to me.

                      Now, if the steering committee has authority to be able to say all these solicitors
                      on the list which we submit to you you may take it to be on the record, as far as
                      the inquest is concerned, then I’m quite happy to accept that. I’m not asking for
                      thousands of letters, I’ve got to file them all after all or at least my staff have.
                      Because of this problem that it doesn’t follow as night follows day that
                      representation equals representation in respect of the inquest, I really ought to
                      know. So that’s, if you like, the solicitors.

                      Now I’ve looked through our tabulation and I think at the moment w e’ve got
                      about 42 or 43 people in respect o f whom we know that they are represented by
                      solicitors other than the names which w e’ve gleaned off the global list which
                      was sent to me by Miss Steel. I think it was Miss Steel anyway.
00:26:23
                      Now, with regard to the 17 - of course as you know there is a mail strike which
                      makes it rather difficult to do any kind correspondence at all - it was my


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                         7
                      intention to write to all the people who were not represented as far as we were
                      concerned, in particular where we knew that no solicitors at all were involved,
                      and to say to them that o f course they need not be represented. If they were at
                      any point to decide, a), to tell us if they are; and, b), if they do decide at some
                      point in the future to be represented would they please let us know. I mean, it’s
                      not for me to say whether you should approach them because that’s obviously a
                      matter between you and the Law Society. I can see the dilemma which, if you
                      like, the steering committee is in.
00:27:26
                      It’s easy to approach solicitors and say, “Look, come under our umbrella”, but it
                      is very difficult to approach individuals. It may be that when I’ve written to
                      some of these people that they will respond and say, “Oh yes, our solicitors are
                      X, Y and Z”. I can see no reason why I shouldn’t then either let you have that
                      information so that you can get in touch with the solicitors or ask the solicitors
                      themselves to get in touch with you so that they can be liaising between the
                      groups. Would that be o f some help to you?

MR FRAZER:            Yes, it certainly would. I think if you invited the solicitors to contact the
                      steering committee rather than you supply us with their names and we write to
                      them.

CORONER:              Yes. Well, that’s not problem because we acknowledge when we get a firm
                      writing in to say, “We represent somebody” we acknowledge it with a standard
                      form. There’s no problem in adding a paragraph in these cases to say, “If you
                      would get in touch with the steering committee that would be very helpful”. I
                      do not see any difficulty in that.

                      If you would just let me have the names of the ones that you didn’t get.

MR FRAZER:            There it is. We have 17 as at 20 July. There are 17 names for whom we do not
                      have solicitors.

CORONER:              Perhaps you could make a photocopy of that?

MR FRAZER:            Certainly. I will let you have a copy o f that today, certainly.

                      I think I’ve really touched on all the matters that I noted when we had spoken
                      previously. There were two other matters which we did discuss on the
                      telephone which are, perhaps, o f a more general nature which affect the steering
                      committee which you may or may not wish to discuss. We have raised the issue
                      in correspondence with you both on behalf o f the committee and I understand
                      individual solicitors have written to you concerning the question of an early
                      release o f the post-mortem reports. That’s something that perhaps we should
                      continue to follow in correspondence rather than face to —
00:29:50




www.merrillcorp.com
