                                                                                              M I R . 15




     OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and tim e raised                                    Number



     T itle        ^                    <>~7
f.   (fhclude source and any document number if relevant)
              ,■
               .

 5   Receiver's instructions — urgent action - Yes/N o   ____
                                                                                                                           Receiver




                                                                                                                            Indexer
     D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

     No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                       Statem ent Reader
     Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                            Indexer
     Indexed as indicated                          |^oV~
     No(s) o f actions raised

     Examined - fu rth er action to be taken
                                                                                                  l “* t SSP
                                                                                                  ! f I S
                                                                                                  f * 1 1 W*
                                                                                                  I# li   Ik&iSfe
                                                                                               ___ _____________ —
                                                                                                                            Indexer
     Further action No(s)


     When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master N um ber Form
   HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                       (WEST D I S T R I C T )



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                   STADIUM DISASTER

              ON THE 15TH APRIL,             1989



             INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


                MARTIN KEVIN TRAYNOR




                           Before

DR. S.L.   POPPER,    LL.B,     B.MED.Sci,        B M , B S , MRCGP

               (Her M a j e s t y ’s C o r o n e r )




                              At

              The Medico-Legal Centre,
                   Watery Street,
                     Sheffield.

                              On

              Friday,     27th April,        1990.




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. H a r p h a m , Ltd
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          APPEARANCES:



MR.    D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors'   Group
                              Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH                  Medical and Dental Union of
                              Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                              Forrest)

MR.         CALLAGHAN         Trent Regional Health Authority and
                              South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                              Ambulance Service

MR.         GREGORY           Sheffield City Council

MISS         THORPE           Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN              Police Federation of England and
                              Wales

MR.    P.    ISAACS           Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS.    B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable,   South Yorkshire
MR.    P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                            INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT



OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER


     PROF.    J.C.E.   UNDERWOOD Called

             By The Coroner


     G.J.    McCOMBIE Called

             By The Coroner


     M. LAYTON Called

             By The Coroner


CLOSING REMARKS BY THE CORONER
                        27th April.    1990


                                    INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF MARTIN KEVIN TRAYNOR


                             MR. FRASER:   Sir, can we now move then to Martin Kevin
                        Traynor, "Kevin" being the name by which he was known more
                    B   familiarly by his family, the younger of the two brothers.   The
                        representation is exactly as before, sir.  The family are in
                        Court.

                             THE CORONER:   I am not going to tell you the sequence
                        because you already know it, but the only thing is this is one
                        where there is no visual evidence at all, for all practical
                        purposes?

                             DET.    INSPECTOR LAYTON:     That is so,   sir.

                             THE CORONER:        So be prepared for that.

                              This Inquest I opened on the 18th April, 1989. On that
                        occasion, Neil Anthony Parkin, Acting Coroner's Officer,
                        said:
                    D
                                    "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                                    identified to PC 2857 Turner of the South Yorkshire
                                    Police as that of Martin Kevin Traynor, by John
                                    Traynor, his brother.    He was 16 years of age, having
                                    been born on 20th May, 197 2^ at Birkenhead.   He was a
                                    single m a n and he lived at
                    E                          Birkenhead.  He was an apprentice joiner by
                                    occupation.    He died at Hillsborough football ground
                                    following an incident there on Saturday, 15th April,
                                    1989.   PC 2857 Turner caused the body to be removed to
                                    the Medico-Legal Centre, and there he identified it to
                                    Detective Constable Simon Weigold, who subsequently
                                    identified the same body to Prof. Underwood.    It is the
                                    family wish that the body should be buried".

                        Then I adjourned it, exactly the same as before.

                             This time I think I wrote to dad, to James Traynor, and on
                        1st May you returned my form and you confirmed what I have just
                        read, name, age and so on, was correct.  There is just a small
                        error in that in the statement I have referred to PC Turner.   In
                        fact, he is a Detective Constable, for the record.

                             Blood alcohol was measured in this case as well, and Dr.
                        Forrest found that the level in this case was 60mg/100ml.

                           Prof.    Underwood.



                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                            1
                                                                                PROF.   J .C .E . UNDERWOOD


                                   PROF.   JAMES CRESSEY ELPHINSTONE UNDERWOOD Called

                                                      Bv THE C O R O N E R :

                         . Prof. Underwood, we know who you are.    Can you take me through
                           the post mortem report, similar to the previous case? - A.
                           Yes, sir.   As a result of my examination I concluded that the
                           cause of death was traumatic asphyxia.    The evidence for that
                    B      was very similar to the evidence I have given in the previous
                           case in that the upper part of the body was deeply congested
                           with blood.   In addition to that there' were minor abrasions on
                           the skin of the face and on the left leg.    Internally there
                           were small haemorrhages or bleeding points on the surfaces of
                           internal organs as well as a rather large haemorrhage on the
                           surface of the right lung.   I conclude, therefore, that this
                           traumatic asphyxia has almost certainly arisen as a result of
                           compression of the body, particularly the chest.

                        Q. And I forgot to ask you but in fact we are talking about
                           Martin Kevin Traynor who is recorded as No. 57? - A. That is
                           correct, sir.

                        Q. And similar comments about loss of consciousness will, of
                           course, apply as in the case of his brother?  In other words,
                D          it would be rapid? - A. In my opinion, yes.

                        Q.   In your opinion, yes.  And in a young man, of course, we would
                             not expect natural disease, and I take it you did not find
                             any? - A. He seemed to be perfectly healthy, sir.

                                  MR.   FRASER:    No questions,      sir,      thank you.
                    E
                                  THE CORONER:   Do you think the family would want to
                             speak to Prof. Underwood?

                                  MR. FRASER:   Sir, I took the liberty before we began of
                             asking the family specifically.   I know Mrs. Traynor, senior,
                             would welcome an opportunity to talk to you him, sir.   I am
                             not sure whether Elizabeth would.

                        Q.       THE CORONER:    Yes.  Prof. Underwood, would you mind
                             staying until the end of the Inquest so you can talk to the
                             family for a few moments? - A. I would be pleased to do that,
                             sir.

                        Q. Thank you.      I am most grateful to you.

                                        PET.   SERGEANT GRAHAM JOHN McCOMBIE Called

                                                       Bv THE C O R O N E R :

                                  THE WITNESS:   Graham John McCombie,              sir,   Detective
                             Sergeant.  I have already been sworn.

                                  Sir, the initial evidence in this matter is much the same
                H            as Christopher's, but I will repeat it for your benefit.



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                               2
                                      G.J.   McCOMBIE


    THE CORONER:   Please. - A. Sir, at about 10 a.m. on
Saturday, 15th April, 1989, Martin Kevin Traynor and
Christopher James Traynor, left Birkenhead to meet friends. It
was their intention to travel to Sheffield to watch the FA Cup
Semi Final at Hillsborough Stadium.

     Kevin and Christopher travelled with David Thomas, who
also died, Stephen Edwards, David Ledsom and Albert Ledsom,
in a hired motor vehicle.  They left Liverpool at
approximately 10.30 a.m., stopping en route at a public
house, where they had a couple of pints of beer to drink.
They arrived in Sheffield at about 2.30 p.m.

     After parking the vehicle a short distance away from the
ground, Kevin, Christopher and David Thomas made their way to
Leppings Lane.  They had tickets for the Leppings Lane
terrace, whilst the remainder of the party had stand tickets.

     Shortly after 6 minutes past 3, following the severe
crushing in the West Stand, Detective Constable Malcolm Turner
went onto the pitch and into enclosure 3, where he assisted a
number of people.  At approximately 15 minutes past 3 DC
Turner saw a man who he now knows to be Kevin Traynor, lying
on his back in Pen 3 near to the fencing.  With the assistance
of other officers who as yet have not been identified, the
officer carried Kevin from enclosure 3 and on to the pitch.
He checked the body for signs of life but could not find any.
A doctor, who has not been identified, examined Mr. Traynor
and confirmed that he was dead.

     Detective Constable Turner then returned to the centre
pens and assisted a number of other persons.

     At about 3.30 p.m. DC Turner returned to Kevin Traynor,
and with the assistance of other fans who as yet have not been
identified, placed him on a hoarding and carried him to the
gymnasium, where a temporary mortuary had been set up.

     At 8 minutes past 4 that afternoon Dr. Curpen examined
Kevin in the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

     At 2.45 a.m. on Sunday, 16th April, John Traynor
identified the body of his brother to DC Turner in the
temporary mortuary.

     DC Turner later escorted Kevin's body to the Medico-
Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to DC
Weigold.

     At 8 p.m. on Sunday, 16th April, following identification
by DC Weigold, Prof. Underwood carried out an autopsy and
submitted a report giving the cause of death.

     Sir, evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
blood sample from Kevin, where the presence of ethanol was
detected.  The witnesses proving continuity of the blood
sample are DC Green, DS John Turner, DS James Fletcher, and
                                                                      G.J.   MCCOMBIE


                             the analysis was carried out by Dr. Forrest.
                                  There were no person effects found on Kevin.  However, as
                             you have in the personal effects of Christopher, there was
                             found two full tickets for the match.  Unfortunately, in the
                             circumstances it cannot be established exactly how or when he
                             entered the g r o u n d .

                        Q.   I think the evidence of attendance at the ground is very
                    B        similar to Christopher's because they were together, were       not
                             they? - A. That is correct, sir.

                        Q.   And in one case one of the friends said it was 2.45? - A.
                             Correct, sir.

                        Q. But in the light of the visual evidence in respect of
                           Christopher certainly the 2.45 timing may be wrong.   That is
                           Mr. David Ledsom, is not it? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. He said 2.45.  So we won't make too much about it.  There does
                           not seem to be much doubt they got to Sheffield at about h a l f ­
                           past-2? - A. That is correct.

                        Q. There was another point which I think you drew to my
                           attention.  Can you refresh my memory on that? - A. Yes, DC
                    D      Turner explains how he carried Kevin onto the pitch and
                           examined the body for signs of life.  It is page 11 of DC
                           Turner's statement.  Would you like me to read this paragraph?

                        Q. From:  "With the assistance of other officers'         you mean
                           A. Yes, sir.

                    E   Q. Yes,   go on.   - A.

                                  "With the assistance of other Police Officers, details of
                                  I did not record, I carried the deceased onto the
                                  football pitch, where he was laid down in order to check
                                  him thoroughly.  On doing so I was unable to find any
                                  pulse, and the pupils did not dilate on pulling his
                                  eyelids back. I was approached by a man who stated that
                                  he was a doctor, and he also carried out the same
                                  examination that I had done.  The man stated that life
                                  was extinct and to leave the deceased to assist with
                                  other injured people.  I did not obtain the doctor's
                                  details and continued with the assisting of others".

                             Of course,    there were off duty doctors giving treatment,     sir.

                        Q.   In fact, Mr. Fraser knows, but in very few cases have we
                             actually got the identity of the doctors.   The doctors went
                             around but did not stop to say who they were.   They just said
                             what they thought and went on, and this is one.   There are one
                             or two cases where a doctor can find himself on the video, and
                             occasionally people managed to track them down, and officers,
                             but we have not done so in this case.   In fact, it was at
                             3.30 that he was taken across the football field, was not it?
                H            - A. At about 3.30, sir.



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                M. LAYTON


                                 MR.   FRASER:     The family have no questions,            thank you.

                                         PET.    INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                                                       Bv THE C O R O N E R :

                                  THE WITNESS:   Sir, Michael Layton, Petective Inspector,
                             West Midlands Police.  Sir, an examination has been made of
                    B        visual evidence, but it has not been possible up to the
                             present time to identify Kevin at the stadium.

                                  PC Turner has viewed visual evidence, but was not able to
                             identify himself actually dealing with Kevin.  The officer has
                             signed a plan of the enclosures indicating the approximate
                             location at which he found Kevin, and that was in Pen 3.   The
                             reference number for that plan is NT/1.  He also signed a plan
                             of the pitch area indicating the approximate location at which
                             he placed Kevin on the pitch after removing him from the
                             enclosure, and that plan is referenced NT/2.

                                  Sir, as I have already stated the family assisted in both
                             cases in attempting to obtain visual evidence.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:    Yes.  Well, you know how hard you tried to
                    D        find it, and it was not possible.   Can you show us the plans?
                             - A. Yes, sir.   Can i refer you to the plan MT/1.

                        Q. That is C.146.       - A. And MT/2,      sir.

                        Q. That will be C.147. - A. In respect of the plan MT/1, the
                           point at which Kevin is believed to be is in this position
                    E      here in enclosure No. 3.  Then in respect of the plan MT/2 on
                           the pitch, the position referred to is here, at the Leppings
                           Lane e n d .

                        Q. So on the assumption that the two brothers went in together,
                           which this officer for this lad and others for Christopher,
                           all of them locate them in enclosure 3? - A. That is right,
                           sir.   All the evidence suggests they were both in enclosure
                           No. 3.

                                  THE CORONER:       Mr.   Fraser,    any questions on that?

                                  MR. FRASER:    No, sir, I have no questions on behalf of
                             the family, but again I have specific instructions to rise at
                             this point.   The combined families of Christopher and Kevin
                             are keen to express their thanks through you to everybody who
                             helped the brothers on the day.   There were obviously valiant
                             efforts made.   Tragically they were unsuccessful, but
                             everybody who helped is thanked, and thanks also must go to
                             the Officers of the West Midlands Police for the support they
                             have given to the family in the 12 months during which they
                             have been trying to investigate this disaster.

                                  THE C O R O N E R : I have the greatest of pleasure in
                H            accepting your thanks through Mr. Fraser.       It is very good of
                             you to ask him to say, because you are quite right in what you

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                5
                        have said, and it is nice that you have felt it in your hearts
                        to be able to acknowledge it.

                             Before we finish, have we got anything on the other point
                        about Christopher?   We will go back to Christopher for a
                        moment.


                    B       (The Inquest into the death of MARTIN KEVIN TRAYNOR
                                   was adjourned to a date to be f i x e d )




                    C




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                    6
