                                                                                                 M IR .15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                 Date and time raised    ^ ‘^ v           g~~^ C?        Number



Title                                     d-J-H -             /4— _______            o »"T>>____ ^

mr      4
            ie source and any document number i f relevant)


‘ Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No ____
                                                                                                                         Receiver




                                                                                                                         Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                     Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                         Indexer
Indexed as indicated                                                  cTT
No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken

                                                                                                                     £


                                                                                                                         Indexer
Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
      HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                          (WEST DISTRICT)

\

               INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

         VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                      STADIUM DISASTER

                  ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



                  INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                    DAVID GEORGE RIMMER




                             Before

    DR. S.L.    POPPER,   LL.B,    B.MED.Sci,   B M , B S , MRCGP

                   (Her Majesty's C o r o n e r )




                                  At

                  The Medico-Legal Centre,
                       Watery Street,
                         Sheffield.

                                  On

                          24th April 1990



                  TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




         From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
              Official Shorthand Writers,
          55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          APPEARANCES:



MR.    D. FRASER              Hi lls borough S o l i c i t o r s ' Group
                              Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH                  Medical and Dental Union of
                              Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                              Forrest)

MR.         CALLAGHAN         Trent Regional Health Authority and
                              South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                              Ambulance Service

MR.         GREGORY           Sheffield City Council

MISS         THORPE           Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN              Police Federation of England and
                              Wales

MR.    P.    ISAACS           Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS.    B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable,        South Yorkshire
MR.    P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                                 INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                    B


                        OPENING BY THE CORONER

                        PROFESSOR ALAN USHER Called

                           By THE CORONER

                        POLICE OFFICER GILLIAN PARKS Called

                           By THE CORONER
                           Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE
                    D      Cross-Examined by MRS. NORCLIFFE

                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                           By THE CORONER
                           Cross-Examined by MRS. NORCLIFFE
                           Further by THE CORONER
                    E




                    G




                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        u e s d a y , 24th April,   1990

                                          THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                                                    DAVID GEORGE RIMMER

                    B
                                HR. FRASER:   Sir, I understand that today's
                          timetaible has been slightly revised to accommodate a
                          case which would normally have been dealt with at the
                          end of your list, that of David George Rimmer.
                          Nr. Rimmer's wife nas expressed an intention not to be
                          present during the presentation of the summary, sir.
                          She is represented by solicitors who are a member of my
                          group and I therefore appear as a member of the
                          committee on their behalf as their agent before you.

                                THE CORONER:   This is a resumed inquest which was
                           opened on the 19th April, 1939.   On that occasion Neil
                           Anthony Parkin, the acting Coroner's Officer said:

                    D            "The body which is the subject of this inquest has
                                 been identified to PS 2620 Cropley of the South
                                 Yorkshire Police as that of David George Rimmer by
                                 George Stanley Gaskell, his brother-in-law.   He
                                 was 39 years of age having been born on the 15th
                                 September, 1950, at Onriskirk.

                                  He was a married man and he lived at
                    E             Skelrnersdale.

                                  He was a Sales Manager by occupation.

                                 He died at Hillsborough football ground following
                                 an incident there on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.
                                 PS Cropley caused the body to be moved to the
                                 Medico Legal Centre and there he identified it to
                                 Detective Constable Simon Weigold, who subsequently
                                 identified the same body to Professor Usher.

                                 It is the family wish that the body should be
                                 b u r i ed. "

                                In the usual way we had that checked and the only
                           thing that was added to the information was that
                    G      Skelmersdale was in Lancashire and other than that all
                           the information was correct.

                                We did the blood alcohol level in the usual way.
                           In this particular instance the alcohol was measured at
                           less than 10 mg/100 ml.


                H                                          -   1   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                  Now we turn to Professor Usher, who has already
                             been sworn.

                                              PROFESSOR ALAN USHER Called

                                                    By THE C O R O N E R :

                                    •THE WITNESS:    I am Alan Usher
                    B
                        J.   Professor Usher, this is an inquest, as you have already
                             heard, relating to David Rimmer, who I think was
                             identified to you by that name? - A. Yes.

                        ). In fact it is David George, but you knew him as David.
                           You have not recorded his reference number on my copy.              -
                           A. I have the number 4 for him.

                        }.   Yes, that is correct.  You are satisfied you are             giving
                             me evidence relating to him? - A. Yes.

                        ). Can you tell me what your findings were in relation to
                           him? - A. Yes.   To summarise, I found that David Rimmer
                           was a fair-haired, heavily built middle aged white male,
                           176 cm in height and who weighed 83 kg.   There were
                    D      small fragments, flakes, of light blue paint, the same
                           colour as I had seen on the rails at the ground, present
                           over the lower abdomen and I imagine they had been
                           dislodged there when clothing was removed from him.

                             He had no natural disease which could have caused or
                             contributed to his death.   In my view he had a normal
                    E        expectation of life.

                             The findings were absolutely typical of traumatic
                             asphyxia.   There were two grazes, matching grazes, over
                             the front of the hips on each side suggesting he had
                             been pressed against something at that height at some
                             time.  There were other very small injuries which
                             included a bruise on the back of the head, little more
                             than an inch by about three-quarters of an inch.    I do
                             not think there was anything...    The stomach contents
                             did smell faintly of drink.    I think he had probably
                             had a drink but a very small amount.

                             You also found a little bit of blue pain on his upper
                             chest? - A. Yes.

                    G               MR.   FRASER:   David's family have no questions,
                             sir.

                                  THE CORONER:       Professor Usher,        thank you very much
                             indeed.



                H                                       - 2 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                GILLIAN PARKS Called

                   By THE C O R O N E R :

     THE WITNESS:   Gillian Parks, Officer of the West
Midlands Police Force.

Would you take us through the summary please? - A. On
Saturday, 15th April, 1989, Mrs. Linda Mary Rimmer saw
her husband, David George Rimmer, leave the family home
with the intention of travelling to Sheffield to attend
the Cup semi final football match at the Hillsborough
Stadium that day.

Geoffrey Philip Bridson travelled with Mr. Rimmer by
private car leaving Skelmersdale at about 1015 hours and
arriving at Sheffield at about 1315 hours.

Near to the Hillsborough Stadium they met by arrangement
James Lewis, Peter Hart and two other associates.    A.11
six rnen went to the Leppings Lane entrance at about 1425
hours and passed through the turnstiles.    The two
associates went to other parts of the stadium as they
had seated tickets.    The other four, including Hr.
Rimmer, Went together into enclosure 4.

The four men were separated due to crowd pressure.  As
they had entered the enclosure Mr. James Lewis saw the
time on the stadium clock was 1438 hours.

Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
terracing, Police Constable Andrew West and Police
Constable Andrew Justice saw man being passed over the
heads of spectators in enclosure 4.The spectators
were unable to lift the man over the perimeter  fence and
he was put on the floor of the terracing.    Both
officers entered the enclosure and went to the man.
They attempted to resuscitate him but without success.
They lifted the man, now known to be David George
Rimmer, through the now broken perimeter fencing.
Police Sergeant William McCall also assisted the
officers.

Police Sergeant Paul Cropley carried Mr. Rimrner on to
the pitch where he further attempted resuscitation
without success.   The officer was assisted by
spectators and other police officers to carry Mr. Rimmer
on a hoarding to the gymnasium where a temporary
mortuary had been set up.

At 1605 hours that day, Dr. Allan Paul Redgrave examined
Mr. Rimmer in the temporary mortuary and certified his
life extinct.
      At 2355 hours George Stanley Gaskell identified the body
      of his brother-in-law, David, to Police Sergeant Cropley
      in the temporary mortuary at the gymnasium.

      Police Sergeant Cropley later escorted the body of Mr.
      Rirnraer to the Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the
      identification to Detective Constable Simon Weigold.

      On Sunday, 16th april, 1989, following identification by
      Detective Constable Weigold, Professor Usher carried out
      an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of death.

      Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the blood
      sample taken from Mr. Rimmer where the presence of
      ethanol was detected.  The witnesses proving continuity
      of the blood sample are Dennis Chambers, Detective
      Sergeant John Turner and Detective Sergeant James
      Fletcher.   Dr. Alexander Robert Forrest carried out the
      analysis.

      Mr. Rimmer did have a ticket for the match and entered
      via the turnstiles.

      This concludes my evidence,      sir.

           THE CORONER:      Have you got any questions?

           MR. FRASER:     No thank you, sir.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. C A T C H P O L E :

).    Just a matter of clarification and of the sequence of
      events so forgive me if I repeat some of the summary.
      As I understand it, they entered the turnstiles at 1425?
      - A. that is correct, sir.

<).   As a group they go on to the terraces at          1438 because
      Mr. Lewis sees the clock? - A. Yes.

<). They go into pen 4.     They stand as a group for a period
    of time, but we are  not sure how long, and then
    subsequently the crowd pressure forces them apart? - A.
    That is right.    I think Mr. Bridson actually says
    within ten minutes of taking up their position he lost
    sight of Mr. Rimmer.    That is included in Mr. Bridson's
    s tatement.

Q.        THE CORONER:      James Lewis on page 10 says:

           "We entered the pen which was about 2.38 pm, as I
           remember looking at the clock by the police post.
           There was a lot of crowd crush.   I led the way by
           going left towards the side of the pen at the rear.


                               - 4 -
     Almost immediately my friend David got separated
     along with my nephew and other friend Geoff."

Then he talks about where he was stood and then he says:

     "Dave was standing two steps        forward about five or
     six feet to my right."

Which was the other statement? - A. Geoffrey Bridson,
page 4.   It is five lines up from the bottom, sir.

Yes, that is right.   That is effectively the one you
quoted, he said that within ten minutes he lost sight of
his friend David.

     THE CORONER:     Mr.   Catcnpole,    is that clear to you?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Yes, I think so.   The passage you
read, sir, did suggest they had simply got separated and
it was not due to the crowd pressure at that point.   It
simply says they lost sight.

      THE CORONER:   Yes, I think that that is what I
read.    Perhaps we ought to read a bit out of
fir. Bridson's evidence as well.   This is Geoffrey
Philip Bridson and he says:

     "I7e entered into the terraces.  We went left into
     pen 4, took up position just a few yards down the
     terraces and a few yards into the terraces from the
     central dividing fence between pens 3 and 4.   When
     I initially took up my position the pen I was in
     was full.   As time went on the pen began to fill
     and fill and became uncomfortable by the inability
     to move.    My direction was completely controlled
     by crowd movement and I would say that within ten
     minutes of taking up my position I lost sight of my
     friend David Rimmer."

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I think as I summarised it, it was
subsequently that the pressure built up and forced them
to separate.   That is what I was trying to get out.

     THE CORONER:    That is the evidence.   What
Geoffrey Bridson says is that they arrived at 2.25,
which is what is in the summary.    It took them about,
he estimates, ten minutes to get through.    This is
obviously an estimate and then he says a further ten
minutes by the tirae he lost sight of David Rimmer.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     I am grateful,      sir.
                                       Cross-Examined by MRS.      NORCLIFFE:

                     Ol. I think the last point you made, may just clarify this.
                         With regard to paragraph 2, all six men went to the
                         Leppings Lane entrance at about 1425 hours and passed
                         through the turnstiles.   You advised my friend a short
                    B    while ago that they actually went through the turnstiles
                         at 1425.   Is the evidence that Leppings Lane entrance
                         is actually the turnstiles, or is there a separate time
                         prior to 1425 at actually arriving at the ground? - A.
                         No, arriving at the entrance is 1425 and that is
                         contained in the statement.   He arrived and then all
                         six passed through the turnstile.

                    C).         THE CORONER:     Have a look at Geoffrey Bridson,
                           page 4, line 7.      It says they arrived at the ground at
                           2.25? - A. Yes.

                        Q|. Then another eight or nine lines further down it says:

                                "I would estimate..."

                    D      What does he say? - A. "I would estimate it took rne ten
                           minutes to get through the turnstile."

                           So there is a difference between the arrival time and
                           the turnstile time, isn't there? - A. Sorry, my error.

                                MRS.   NORCLIFFE:     Thank you.

                    E           THE CORONER:        Is that clearer for you?

                                MRS.   NORCLIFFE:     Yes,    it is, sir,    thank you.

                                THE-CORONER:   Anything else arising out of. that?
                           It is quite difficult getting the times right and it is
                           very hard for the officers because they are summarising
                           other people's evidence and it is difficult when you ask
                           questions because they have not memorised it because it
                           is impossible to do so.

                                Thank you.

                                 DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                                                By THE C O R O N E R :

                                THE WITNESS:   Michael Layton,           Detective Inspector,
                           West Midlands Police.

                           Yes, officer? - A. Sir, an examination has been made of
                           visual evidence in respect of Mr. Rirnmer and he has been
                           identified in enclosure number 4, specifically he is
                H          shown on a BBC video tape, which is referenced M A P . 7

                                                      - 6 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                          timed at 1511.43.18.   PC Justice has signed a plan
                          showing the position at which he found Mr. Rimmer on the
                          terracing prior to his being passed through the broken
                          fencing on to the pitch.   That plan, sir, is referenced
                          A J J .1.

                          PC West has identified hirnself again on a BBC video,
                    B     assisting to carry Mr. Rimmer at the front of enclosure
                          number 4.   That is referenced M A P . 7, timed at
                          1518.14.17.

                          Sergeant Cropley has identified himself on video and he
                          is shown" on a BBC video tape, referenced M A P . 9.   The
                          reference number shown, sir, is 0017.02.16.        That is
                          not an actual time reference.   The only thing I can say
                          is that the filming in respect of that part of the tape
                          commenced at approximately 1508, but it would not have
                          been continuous filming, so that particular shot was
                          taken some time after that particular time, after 1508.

                          That shows Mr.   Rimmer being carried across     the pitch on
                          a hoarding.
                    D
                          A large number of photographic prints show officers and
                          fans assisting to carry Mr. Rimmer across the pitch and
                          these include Mr. Ian Eric Boileau, who identified
                          himself on a photograph, in fact two photographs which
                          show a similar view.   One of these photographs is
                          referenced SSSE.1/11.    There is a further photograph,
                          sir, referenced CS.1/24.    That is not timed, sir, but
                    E     there is a stadium clock in the background which shows
                          the time to be 1524.   At this stage the family have not
                          actually viewed visual evidence.

                          That, of course, is perfectly acceptable? - A. Oh, yes,
                          sir.   Sir, can I refer you to a plan referenced MWJL.6,
                          which is a plan of the pitch?

                        5. Refer me to AJJ.l first. - A. Yes, sir, that is a plan
                           of the terraces, the plan submitted by PC Justice.

                        ). That we are going to reference C.69 and then your plan
                           MWJL.6 as C.70. - A. Yes, sir.       Sir, if we deal with
                           the plan submitted by PC Justice first, that is AJJ.l,
                           this is enclosure number 4 and the point at which he
                           believes he dealt with Mr. Rimmer was actually at this
                           point h e r e .   Then in respect of MWJL.6, if we look at
                           the pitch plan, there is a reference to the BBC video
                           tape, M A P . 7, and that is shown at this location h e r e .

                          Sir, there are further references to both photograph and
                          video.  Do you want me to be specific in relation to...

                H
                                                    - 7 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        Q. No, I don't think you need mention them, but we have got
                           four pointers, as it happens.  There are lots of
                           photographs, but just trace them across. - A. They
                           basically show a flow indicating that Mr. Rimmer was
                           carried across the pitch down towards the Spion Kop end,
                           which is in fact where we have got the last photograph.
                    B 0,     There are in fact four positions which we have marked on
                             the plan? - A. There are, sir.

                                    THE CORONER:     Any questions?

                                    MR. FRASER:      No thank you, sir.

                                         Cross-Examined by MRS. N O R C L I F F E :

                        0,   I may have misunderstood something.      The identification
                             at 1511, this video MAP . 7, it is in paragraph 11.     It
                             isan identification in pen    4, I wonder ifyou could
                             possibly elaborate on that? - A. Basically that shows
                             Mr. Rimmer in the process of being carried from
                             enclosure 4 on to the pitch.     He is actually...    I
                    D        think if we refer to...     In fact that is the first
                             position I indicated on MWJL.6, that is actually this
                             position h e r e .

                                  MRS. NORCLIFFE:   Thank you, sir,              I had
                             misunderstood.   Thank you, officer.

                                               Further by THE C O R O N E R :
                    E
                        Q-   It is him being carried out from the terracing, in
                             effect? - A. Yes, sir.    As was referred to in the
                             summaries, some of the fencing was pulled back and Mr,
                             Rirnmer was actually removed through a hole in the
                             fencing on to the pitch.

                                    THE CORONER:      Yes,   thank you,

                                  That is the evidence we are taking at this stage.
                             Hr. Fraser, I know that Mrs. Rimmer is not here but that
                             is not to say that she has not had an effect.   On the
                             contrary, she has suffered a very grievous loss and we
                             would like her to know that (a) we respect her decision
                             and it is a perfectly proper one that she has taken and
                             (b) we would like her to know that we feel for her as we
                             do for the other people whose families appear before me.

                                    MR. FRASER:     I will ensure those sentiments reach
                             her,   sir.




                H
                                                        - 8 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             THE CORONER:   Me will now rise for a moment and
                        then deal with Mr. Tyrrell.

                             (The Inquest on DAVID GEORGE RIMMER was adjourned
                             to a date to be fixed)

                    B




                    C




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H
                                              - 9 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
