 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                                                       ^ lO
                                                Date and tim e raised         \ g      \                           Number

           'TL<25S_ '
 Title    ~V ~g J W         S e g g          C x-          ~ \tt-       U ^ ,T & g _
"(Include source and any document number i f relevant)
                                                                                > ) ID
U^""'11
 Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No   ____
                                                                                                                                Receiver




                                                                                                                                   Indexer
 Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

 No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                            Statement Reader
 Statement reader's instructions




  Indexed as indicated                         <—

 No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                            0 /M         SIO
  Examined - fu rth er action to be taken


                                                                                                  i   Sr.v fe«a-


                                                                                                                                   Indexer
  Further action No(s)


 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

              STADIUM DISASTER

           ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

           KESTER ROGER MARCUS BALL




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                      At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                      On

               30th April 1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
         .Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                        APPEARANCES;



MR. D. FRASER               Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                            Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH                Medical and Dental Union of
                            Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                            Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN            Trent Regional Health Authority and
                            South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                            Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY              Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE              Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN            Police Federation of England and
                            Wales

MR. P. ISAACS               Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and        Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF              Constabulary

MR. S.. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.    JACKSON
                    A
                                              INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




                    B
                        3PENING BY THE CORONER

                        DR. JOHN RICHARD SHORTLAND Called

                            By THE CORONER
                            Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER

                        SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCK Called

                             By THE CORONER

                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                             By THE CORONER
                             Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER
                    D        Further by THE CORONER




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        Monday, 30th April, 1990


                                      THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                                         KESTER ROGER MARCUS BALL
                    B
                                MR. FRASER:    The next evidence relates to Kester
                          Ball.    Kester's mum and dad are present in court, sir,
                          and the practice that represents them is a member of my
                          group and I therefore appear in my usual guise as their
                          representative.

                               THE CORONER:   Good afternoon.   What we are going
                          to do - were you here during the last case?  (Y e s )
                          Then I am not going to tell you what is going to happen
                          because you already know.   We will start straight
                          away.

                               This then is a resumed inquest which was opened on
                          the 18th of April, 1989.   Neil Anthony Parkin, acting
                    D     Coroner's Officer said:

                               "The body which is the subject of this inquest has
                               been identified to PC 2263 Chang of the South
                               Yorkshire Police, as that of Kester Roger Marcus
                               Ball by Roger Charles Ball, his father.

                               He was 16 years of age having been born on the 2nd
                    E          of August, 1972 at Ormskirk, Lancashire.

                               He was a single man and he lived at
                                                  St. Albans, Hertfordshire.    He
                               was a schoolboy by occupation.

                               He died at Hillsborough football ground following
                               an incident there on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.
                               PC 2263 Chang caused the body to be removed to the
                               Medico Legal Centre and there he identified it to
                               Detective Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently
                               identified the same body to Dr. Shortland.

                                It is the family wish that the body should be
                                cremated."

                          There is at least one error in this and that is that
                          the body was not identified by Simon Weigold to Dr.
                          Shortland.   Dr. Shortland will deal with the
                          identification in a moment and Simon Weigold has given
                          us a statement correcting that.   The reason for this
                          error is because we did the openings too fast, in a
                          sense, because we wanted to release the bodies so that
                H
                                                   -   1   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                          people could have their funerals, but of course you pay
                          a price for speed and that is error, but I knew that at
                          the time and decided it was worth it.

                               I did write to you and sent you a form.   You
                          signed it on the 26th of April, 1989 and in fact you
                          confirmed that we had the name right, but we had the
                    B     address slightly wrong.   It should have been
                                                             St. Albans, Herts.,
                          but the rest of the information is correct.   You are
                          Roger Charles and it is Brenda Jean?   (Yes)

                                Blood alcohol was estimated by Dr. Forrest and in
                           the case of Kester the result was negative.

                                    DR. JOHN RICHARD SHORTLAND Called

                                             By THE CORONER:

                        Q. It is John Richard Shortland? - A. That is correct.

                        Q. You are the Senior Registrar here... - A. Senior
                           Lecturer, sir.
                    D
                        Q. Can you tell us about the identification and how you
                           satisfied yourself? - A. Yes, sir.   The body of Kester
                           Ball was identified to me by police officers who were
                           in the mortuary at the time and the mortuary
                           attendants.   I don't know the names of the particular
                           police officers.   In addition to that there were marks
                           on his body to indicate his name and the sequential
                    E      body number, which in his case was 74.

                        Q. So can you then tell me what your findings were? - A.
                           There was considerable congestion of the face and upper
                           part of the body and there were the tiny little
                           hemorrhages that are associated with asphyxia.    These
                           were also present in the internal organs.   The brain
                           was very heavy and showed evidence of herniation of the
                           cerebellum into the foramen magnum, that is the main
                           hole through which the spinal cord goes.   There was
                           evidence of direct injury to the heart as a result of
                           the compression.   There were some marks on the outside
                           of the patient's body in that there was an angular
                           mark, which I did wonder if this could represent
                           pressure from the front mesh.   I should be interested
                           to know if he was at the front near that barrier.

                           In addition to that there were some abrasions on the
                           under-side of the chin.

                           I recorded a cause of death, sir, as traumatic
                           asphyxia.

                H
                                                -   2   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
I think he was fairly near the front. - A. Right, sir.

It sounds, and, indeed, it was horrific, but how long
did this poor lad suffer? - A. It is very difficult to
say, but all the recordings of patients who have
suffered traumatic asphyxia and been observed, loss of
consciousness is a very early feature, clinically, and
that would have obviously limited the degree of
distress and pain he would have suffered.

In fact some of your colleagues have suggested ten,
fifteen seconds, of that order? - A. I think that is
not unreasonable, sir, yes.

All this herniation of the brain, that would all have
happened probably after he lost consciousness? - A.
Yes.

Including a lot of the asphyxial signs? - A. I think
so, yes, sir.

No natural disease? - A. No.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Fraser, any questions?

           Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER:

Dr. Shortland, just one thing.    Like so many football
fans this young man wore a scarf of his team's colours.
His parents were concerned as to whether or not the
wearing of that may have contributed in any way towards
his death.   Are you able to offer them any reassurance
about that? - A. Yes, I think I can offer them
reassurance in that I found evidence which to me
suggested he was pressed up against the wire mesh in
the first place.   I attributed the abrasions
underneath the chin to that same sort of mechanism.
Had there been any contribution from a scarf it would
have acted somewhat like a ligature and I found no
marks to suggest that whatsoever.

     MR. FRASER:    I am grateful, doctor.

     THE CORONER:   You did not find a fractured hyoid
bone? - A. No, sir.    The larynx was normal, apart from
petechial hemorrhages.

      THE CORONER:  Would your clients be helped if Dr.
Shortland spoke to them after the inquest for a moment
or' two?

     MR. FRASER:    I will have a word with them.
     THE CORONER:   Dr. Shortland, before I let you go,
I think this is your last appearance in the hearing of
these cases?

    THE WITNESS:   It is, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I believe you did seven.   Dr.
Shortland, I would like to take the opportunity of
thanking you for coming on the Sunday when you came,
and working like, indeed, a lot of your colleagues,
very, very hard.   I know you had lots of other
responsibilities and matters on your mind, but I do
very much appreciate the fact you made yourself
available and I felt comfortable because I had
confidence in you and that was important to me.    Thank
you very much indeed for the way you have helped with
the evidence and also the way you have been willing to
spend time to talk to relatives.

            SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCK Called

                   By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:   Sergeant John Killock, sir, of the
West Midlands Police.

Yes, if you would be good enough to take me through the
summary. - A. At about 1100 hours on Saturday, 15th
April, 1989, Mr. Roger Charles Ball travelled by
private car from St. Albans with his son, Kester Roger
Marcus Ball, and two other youths with the intention of
attending the semi-final football match at the
Hillsborough Stadium.   Mr. Ball had a West Stand
terrace ticket and his son purchased a ticket for the
same enclosure from other supporters during a break in
their journey.

After parking the car and walking directly to the
stadium, they arrived at the Leppings Lane entrance at
about 1430 hours and joined the huge crowd attempting
to gain entry.

At about 1450 hours they entered the stadium via gate
C.   They entered the tunnel beneath the West Stand and
were carried by the incoming crowd into enclosure 3 to
a final position two to three feet from the perimeter
fence immediately behind the goal.

Mr. Ball saw his son was about three feet to the left
of him at match kick-off time.

In the severe crushing that followed Mr. Ball lost
consciousness and did not see his son alive again.
                        Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
                        terracing, Police Constable Lawrence was in enclosure 3
                        assisting to remove casualties.   At about 1525 hours
                        he removed a youth he now knows to be Kester from
                        enclosure 3, near to the perimeter fence.

                        With the assistance of other officers who have not been
                    B   identified, he carried Kester through the tunnel to the
                        concourse area at the rear of the West Stand.   Police
                        Constable Lawrence attempted to resuscitate Kester,
                        assisted by another police officer who has not been
                        identified.   The attempt was unsuccessful.

                        Mr. Terrance Steven Pitt, a spectator, states that he
                        attempted to resuscitate Kester, again without success.
                        A nurse who has not been identified examined Kester and
                        stated that he was dead.

                        Police Constable Lawrence moved Kester to a position
                        outside gate C adjacent to the river wall and remained
                        with him.

                        At about 1635 hours Dr. David Monaghan attended that
                    D   location, examined Kester and certified life extinct.
                        At about the same time Police Constable Chang took
                        charge of Kester from Police Constable Lawrence and
                        escorted Kester to the temporary mortuary in the
                        gymnasium.

                        At about 2245 hours in the temporary mortuary, Mr.
                        Roger Ball, Kester's father, identified his son to
                    E   Police Constable Chang.   Police Constable Chang later
                        escorted Kester's body to the Medico Legal Centre and
                        confirmed the identification to Detective Constable
                        Weigold.

                        Dr. James Richard Shortland carried out an autopsy and
                        submitted a report giving the cause of death.

                        Found in the personal effects of Kester was a full
                        match ticket which confirms his entry to the stadium
                        via gate C.

                        As you will see, sir, from reading the statements,
                        there is a conflict between two of the witnesses, PC
                        Lawrence and Mr. Pitt.

                        Yes.   If I remember rightly PC Lawrence takes the view
                        that he was with Kester virtually the whole time? - A.
                        Throughout.

                        And does not recollect Mr. Pitt's intervention? - A.
                        No, sir.

                H
                                             - 5 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        Q. I think Mr. Pitt did deal with several people? - A.
                           Yes, sir, four in all.

                        Q. I think he has identified Kester from photographs? - A.
                           From the mortuary photograph, yes.

                        Q. I am right in saying that we have not been able to
                    B      resolve this conflict? - A. No, we cannot take it any
                           further.

                        Q. It is true to say that we have found - not necessarily
                           in this case - but it has happened quite often that
                           people had no recollection of anything but they were
                           found doing things on photographs and so on, which they
                           no longer could remember? - A. That has happened on
                           numerous occasions.

                        Q. So the mere fact that somebody cannot remember
                           something does not necessarily mean... - A. No, not at
                           all.

                        Q. On balance, PC Lawrence says he was with him and handed
                           him over? - A. Yes, that is correct.
                    D
                        Q. So there cannot be any doubt about his association with
                           Kester? - A. No.

                        Q. One very minor point.   Paragraph 9.    I think rather
                           than that the full match ticket confirms the entry, it
                           is consistent with? - A. It is consistent.   We know he
                           entered because he was with his father.
                    E
                        Q. We know from the other evidence because Mr. Ball
                           himself has told us? - A. That is correct.

                                THE CORONER:   Mr. Fraser?

                                MR. FRASER:    No questions for the officer,
                           Thank you, sir.

                                MR. LIMB:   No questions.   If it is relevant to
                           the wording of paragraph 9, might I draw your attention
                           to paragraph 11?

                                THE CORONER:   What does paragraph 11 say?

                                MR. LIMB:   There is specific photographic
                           evidence regarding entry via gate C.

                                THE CORONER:   Yes.   There is no doubt that he
                           entered through gate C.   What we are. saying is that if
                           you think about it, having a ticket does not prove
                           anything, if you see what I mean.    It just means he
                           had a ticket, but of course it is consistent if a
                H
                                                - 6 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
person has a ticket, comes through gate C and it is
intact.

     MR. LIMB:   I understand the distinction and I
have no questions.

     THE CORONER:   It is a matter of just making sure
the wording is right, which I think is desirable
insofar as one can get it.

     DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                  By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:   Sir, I am Michael Layton, Detective
Inspector of the West Midlands Police.

Yes, Inspector? - A. Sir, an examination has been made
of video film and photographic evidence and Kester has
been identified alive both outside the stadium and
subsequently in enclosure number 3.

On a photograph which has been given the reference
number MWL.10/33A, which is timed at 1454, this shows
Kester and his father apparently about to enter gate C.

Sir, on a BBC video tape which has been given the
reference number MAP.l, timed at 1456.33.12, Kester is
shown alive in enclosure 3 and subsequently on a
photograph which has been given the reference number
PO/4, he is shown in enclosure 3 near to the front
perimeter fencing.    I think there are two points in
respect of that particular photograph, sir, PO/4.
First of all, the photograph appeared in The Times on
Monday, 17th April, 1989, and it was in fact from that
newspaper edition that Mr. and Mrs. Ball made that
particular identification.   Secondly, in relation to
the summary, I think the wording used in the summary is
"shows him in distress", whereas my perception of the
photograph is at that stage Kester appears to be
unconscious.   I think there is a difference.

There is, yes. - A. Sir, PC Lawrence has signed a plan
of the terraces indicating where he found Kester and
that plan has been referenced JRL.l.    The officer has
identified himself on video.   Again on a BBC video
tape, MAP.7, timed at 1520.20.09.    That is in
enclosure number 3, although he certainly was unable to
see himself actually dealing with Kester at that stage.

Mr. Pitt, whose evidence you have already heard about,
sir, has identified Kester from photographs as a man he
attempted to resuscitate.   He has signed a plan of the
concourse area indicating the point at which he
believes he treated Kester and that plan has been
referenced TSP.2.

Sir, both Mr. and Mrs. Ball have assisted us in
relation to obtaining the visual evidence and as such
have been able to confirm it.

Can I refer you, sir, to a plan which has been given
the reference number MWJL.157?

That is C.167. - A. That is a plan of the outside of
the stadium, sir.  MWJL.120, which is a plan of the
terraces.

That is C.168. - A. And JRL.l,   sir, which again is a
plan of the terraces.

Yes, that is C.169. - A. Sir, in relation to the plan
MWJL.157, the first point indicated on the plan is in
relation to the identification outside beforehand when
Kester was found alive.   That is in this position
here.   Just very close to the gates.   In fact while
we are on that plan perhaps I can refer to the position
referred to by Mr. Pitt in his plan TSP.2.   He refers
to the concourse area, which is this area here and the
position he indicates is this position here in the
concourse area.

In relation to MWJL.120, the BBC video tape, MAP.l,
that is the identification when Kester is still alive.
The point at which I believe he is shown is in
enclosure number 3 in approximately this position h e r e .
In respect of The Times photograph, that is in this
position h e r e . It certainly is very close to the
fence, but it is a still photograph which has not got a
time on it and so in the sequence of events we have no
further photographs to show whether Kester actually
progressed to the fence.

On that photograph he is a little bit back from the
fence? - A. That is right.   He is close but he is not
actually at the fence.

On the other hand, if there are cross markings on the
body one could possibly deduced that he must have
progressed forward? - A. That is right, sir, but we do
not have evidence.

Sir, in relation to the plan by PC Lawrence, JRL.l, the
position indicated is here which in fact is very close
to the previous plan, the photograph.
           Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER:

Inspector Layton, some of the photographs which have
been used for identification have not all been as clear
as they might have been.   Is the photograph that was
published in The Times on the 17th of April, the first
Monday after the disaster, is that a clear photograph
of Kester so far as it is possible for press
photographs to be clear? - A. I think the answer would
have to be, sir, that it is certainly, as far as Mr.
and Mrs. Ball are concerned, very clear.    It is
certainly a very definite identification.    It would be
difficult for me to go further in the sense that they
obviously know Kester better than anyone else and as
such...   What I am saying is that it probably would
have been difficult for us to make have made the
identification, based on the fact it is a black and
white photograph, with a large number of people on the
photograph.

But they are certain in their conversations with you
that that is their son on the front of the paper? - A.
They are absolutely certain.

              Further by THE CORONER:

In fact, as you very rightly say, on that particular
photograph he is actually back from the fencing, isn't
he? - A. That is right.

There are other people who are much nearer to the
fence? - A. Yes.   There are people who are much nearer
and much clearer.

But, of course, one has to take the photographs as they
come? - A. That's right.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you, Inspector.

     Mr. and Mrs. Ball, thank you for coming.    Apart
from losing your son it must have been very distressing
to have photographs of people in this distressed
position, which of course we all saw from time to time
immediately afterwards.   I quite understand that that
may well have added to your distress, though, of
course, in some respects how can you add to the
distress which you felt when you realised that your boy
had died.   I would like you to know how very, very
sorry we all are that this terrible tragedy has
happened to you.

     The only good thing I can think about is to think
you could have lost your husband as well, bearing in
mind your position and the fact you lost consciousness
                         and I am just thankful that that did not happen and
                         that at least you were spared.   Of course that does
                         not diminish in any way the specialness of Kester to
                         you and the great, great loss which you have suffered.
                         Thank you for being here this afternoon.

                        (The inquest into the death of KESTER ROGER MARCUS BALL
                    B             was adjourned to a date to be fixed)




                    c




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H                             -   10   -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
