HER MAJESTY'S COROWER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

 VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

           STADIUM DISASTER

        ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                Before

S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

         (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                  At

            The Town Hall,
              Shef f ield.

                  On

           8th January, 1991




       TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




 From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
      Official Shorthand Writers,
  55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
s

                              INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                        Page
    STATEMENT BY THE CORONER                             1
         D. BUTLER Recalled

              Further by The Coroner                     2
              Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien             5
         I •D . CRAWFORD Sworn

              By The Coroner                             8
              Cross-Examined     by   Mr.   Hale        20
              Cross-Examined     by   Mr.   Payne       23
              Cross-Examined     by   Mr.   Isaacs      23
              Cross-Examined     by   Mr.   Catchpole   24
              Cross-Examined     by   Mr.   Russell     24
        B .J . ANDERSON Sworn

              By The Coroner                            26
              Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning             34
              Cross-Examined by Mr. King                35
              Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole           36
        K.M. MULLEE Sworn

              By The Coroner                            36
              Cross-Examined by Mr. Isaacs              46
              Cross-Examined by Mr. King                47
              Further by The Coroner                    48
        G.P. BRIDSON Sworn

             By The Coroner                             48
             Cross-Examined      by   Mr. Payne         58
             Cross-Examined      by   Mr. Manning       60
             Cross-Examined      by   Mr. King          62
             Cross-Examined      by   Mrs. McBrien      63
             Cross-Examined      by   Mr. Russell       63
        A.M. DODD Sworn

             By The Coroner                             65
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Hale                 78
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne                79
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Isaacs               80
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning              83
             Cross-Examined by Mr. King                 84
             Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell              87
             Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne        88
             Further by The Coroner                     88
                      INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT (Cont)


                                                   Page

     E. WOOD Sworn

             By The Coroner                         89
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Payne          93
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. King           94
             Cross-Examined   by Mr. Catchpole     100
             Cross-Examined   by M r s . McBrien   102
             Further by The   Coroner              102
STATEMENT BY THE CORONER                           103
DISCUSSION                                         105
               TWENTY FIFTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                    TUESDAY, 8th JANUARY 1991


       (In the absence of the Jury and the Witnesses )


     THE CORONER:     Mr. King, have you any more thoughts on
the matter?

     MR. KING: Sir, I indicated to Detective Sergeant
Griffiths that in fact I do not require the Witness to be
recalled.

     THE CORONER:   I want to say two things. I am in two
minds actually about whether we should not recall him
because I think it might be worth going over two aspects as
it might possibly relieve somebody's mind.  It might just
be worth asking him to indicate where the lady was on the
pitch because if we did that we might be able to exclude a
lot of people without doing anything further.  I am
inclined to just re-examine him on those aspects but, as I
say, I am very anxious we do not cause unnecessary pain to
anybody.

     MR. KING:  I took the view, and on advice from those I
represent who agree, that it would be better in all the
circumstances to leave it. Sir, I agree with what you have
just said but what I propose to do is to leave it to you to
deal with it and I would not ask any questions.

      THE CORONER:   I think that might possibly be a kinder
way of dealing with it and it might settle the matter once
and for all and we will all feel a little bit easier in our
minds.   That is the first thing. The second thing I want
to say arises out of something I had said. We should not
have legal submissions late in the evening.   It is a bad
time but the only convenient time.   I said something - I
cannot remember the exact wording - to the effect post­
rescue or inter-rescue, on the whole I wanted to try and
minimise adverse comments with regard to supporters or
words to that effect. What I want to make quite clear is
this;   I think I have indicated the way I want to deal with
it but where it is necessary or appropriate to deal with
the supporters in order to help us understand how the
deceased came by their deaths we would have to deal with
it, favourable or unfavourable to any particular person,
but I am very, very sensitive to the need to be sensitive
in the matter.   Is that reasonably clear? I just want to
make sure we do not have any misunderstandings on this
score. Was there anything else before we get the Jury in?
No.

                 (The Jury came into Courts
                       DAVID BUTLER RecaTled

                      Further bv THE CORONER:

    Q. Thank you for coining back. You are still under Oath
       and I just wanted very briefly to explore a couple of
       things.  Before 276 is put up I have two relatively
       simple things to ask.   I think you mentioned that you
       went to Pen 4, that is right, is it not? - A. That is
B      right, sir, yes.

    Q. Did you go to the gate? Was it the gate of Pen 4
       that you went to? - A. I did, sir.

    Q. I think you mentioned that there were bodies in the
       gate? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. What I am interested in - if you can put up 276 now -
       is that I want to be sure we have got the right pen.
       This is an exhibit which you have not seen, of
       course, which has been prepared. We will open the
       bundle so that you can look at it in front of it.
       What this is, Officer, is a compilation as far as we
       can make out of where the various deceased people
       were so far as they can be identified. You can see
       that, can you? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. If you look at it you will see that in Gate 4 there
       were no deceased people. We know there were only
       eight people who died altogether in that pen, eight
       or nine, but whereas there are quite a lot of people
       congregated around Gate 3. Can you see that? - A.
       Yes, sir, I can.

    Q. What I am interested in is whether you can tell me
       whether the people whom you saw in the gate appeared
       to you to be alive or dead and how many there were?
       I am not trying to trap you.  I am merely trying to
       find out whether we can reconcile your evidence with
       this, okay? - A. Right, sir.  I removed at least
       three dead persons from what I believed was Gate 4
       and a fourth one who came round after being given
       mouth to mouth.

    Q. Having looked at that, as I say if you feel you were
       in Gate 4 that is it? - A. Well, sir, after looking
       at that I mean I do not know what science you have
       used to get this diagram but I could have been
       mistaken.  I could have been at Gate 3.

    Q. It is visual evidence we have used where people have
       been identified by video or photographic evidence.
       Am I right in saying you actually identified two
       people whom you were able to reconstruct as having
       been associated with you? - A. I think I only
       positively identified one.

    Q. Anthony Peter Kelly I think? - A. That is right, sir,
       yes.




H
                                                       D. BUTLER


    Q. Can you remember whether this chap was one of the
       people you removed from the gate? - A. It was, sir,
       y e s . I thought it was Gate 4 and I removed him from
       t he•• •

    Q. Never mind which gate it was.    Just tell me whether
B      this chap was somebody who you   removed from the pen
       or whether it was somebody you   found on the pitch? -
       A. Somebody I helped to remove   from the pen.  I
       actually carried him.

    Q. You are sure about that? - A. I am, sir, yes.

    Q. Could I have Body File 54? I will just ask you
       another question while I am waiting for that. You
       also mentioned a young lady whom you had something to
       do with, is that right? - A. I didn't have anything
       to do with her, sir, no.

    Q. Pardon? - A. I did mention a young lady,   I didn't
       personally have anything to do with her.

    Q. Can you recollect, if we showed you a plan of the
       pitch, where she was? - A. No, sir, I wouldn't be
       able to tell you.

    Q. You would not be able to say? - A. No.

    Q. The other question I want to ask is, do you recollect
       whether this lady recovered or not? - A. She appeared
       at the time to be unconscious.

    Q. Unconscious? - A. That is as far as I can remember.

    Q. But you do not know what happened to her? - A. I do
       not, n o .




                               /Q. There is no point in.




H
                                                            D. BUTLER


    0. There is no point in showing you a plan of the pitch
       because you just wouldn't remember? - A. I would not
       know, sir.

    0. It is very difficult to reconcile your evidence with what
       we have got, but Mr. Kelly was almost certainly in pen 3,
B      but we will double check that.   Are you reasonably sure
       that you dealt with him in the pen or did you just carry
       him across the field?   All I am trying to do is find out
       what you actually did with him. - A. I did carry him at
       some point.   I did carry him.

    Q. You carried him? - A. I did carry him.

    Q. Do you remember where you actually picked him up? - A. I
       can't be certain, sir, no.

    0. Your recollection is that you helped to get at least four
       people out of a pen, of whom in your view at least three
       were dead and one revived when they were being
       resuscitated? - A. That's right, sir.

                 THE CORONER:   Does anybody want to go over any of
         this?

              MR. KING:   I don't know whether you would like to
         ask the Officer a little more, if he can remember it,
         about the description of the young lady?   For example,
         her hair, her age.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   Can you recollect by any chance what
         she was wearing? - A. No, sir.

    Q.   What we are trying to do is to find out whether this       is
         somebody who died or... - A. I appreciate that, sir,       but
         I cannot be certain what she was wearing.

    Q. Can you remember the colouring of her hair by any chance?
       - A. No, sir.

    Q. You can't really remember anything about her at all, is
       that what you are saying, apart from the fact she was a
       young lady? - A. She was a young lady.

    0. Were you able to estimate her age at all? - A. Perhaps
       early twenties.

    Q.   Early twenties? - A. I would    say so, yes.

              THE CORONER:   Is there anything else?      I can't
         think of anything else to ask him.

G
                                                                 5


                                                             D. BUTLER


                 MRS. McBRIEN:    Sir, relating to something the
            officer said yesterday, I was wondering if I could put
            one question to him?

                THE CORONER:    Yes.

B                      Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

    Q. Officer, you said yesterday that a surge of people came
       in and they headed for the tunnel, that is right, isn't
       it?   That is what I wrote down yesterday. - A. If you
       wrote that down, I may well have said that, yes.

                 THE CORONER:   It is difficult for him to remember.
            Do you remember whether he said it to me or to you or one
            of the others?

                 MRS. McBRIEN:   I believe it was to you, sir, but I
            can't be sure about that.

                 THE CORONER:   Ask him the next question,   Let's
            proceed on that assumption.

    0   .        MRS. McBRIEN: Well, relating to that, when you saw
            the fans flooding into the ground in this way did you
            think they had come in illegally somehow, or did you know
            that the police had given the fans the right to do this?
            - A. If you referring to the fact the gates were opened,
            I didn't know who had opened them or why.

    Q. Didn't you think some action had to be taken when you saw
       fans coming in in this way?   It was something unusual,
       wasn't it? - A. Very unusual, yes, but I was not in a
       position to stop them.

    Q. What did you do, personally, about it? - A. Personally?

                 THE CORONER:   What is it you are trying to ask this
            officer, Mrs. McBrien?

                 MRS. McBRIEN:   I am trying to establish when the
            officer saw something like this happening, he would not
            expect it to happen, what was his reaction to it.

                 THE CORONER:   In what way is that going to help us
            in deciding how anybody died?

                 MRS. McBRIEN:  I thought maybe they could be
            diverted, or something, as they were all coming together.

                 THE CORONER:   Well, maybe so, but he said to you
            that the surge came through.   He had already told us
            what he was doing.   If he says, "I think we should have
            done this or that", in the first instance that is an




H
                                                      D. BUTLER


expression of opinion which I would discount.   I can't
see the point of your question.   I can see what you are
asking but I can't see it advancing the purpose of these
Inquests.   It is not going to make any difference to the
jury.   At least I think it is not going to make any
difference to the jury.

     MR. PAYNE:   Perhaps, if I may be permitted to
suggest, if Mrs. McBrien were to ask the officer whether
he did anything and if so, why, and if not, why not.

       THE CORONER:    That is really what you are trying to
say?

       MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes.   Thank you, Mr. Payne.

     THE CORONER:   Can you answer that? - A. As I said
yesterday, the first time the gates were opened I didn't
know why they had been opened or by whom.    I assumed it
had been when somebody had been ejected and the pressure
of the crowd had forced them open.    I went with other
officers and tried to close the gates.    The second time
they opened because of the pressure of people I could not
even get over towards the gates to try and close them.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   So when you saw them heading towards
the tunnel, do you know what time that was? - A. I would
say that was about ten to three.    I can't say exactly.
I am only guessing, roughly.     They were not just
heading towards the tunnel.   They were heading in all
directions.

But the majority were heading that way, weren't they?

     THE CORONER:   I will read you what the officer
actually said, because I have got the transcript and you
haven't.   I said to him:

       "0. So this was a rather big occasion? - A. I had
       worked the previous year but I had not worked at the
       Leppings Lane turnstiles, I had worked in the North
       Stand.

       0. What happened then?    What further observations
       did you make? - A. Once the gates had been opened a
       second time we had lost control of the situation on
       the concourse really to a degree.    Obviously we
       could not search anybody.    The thing I noticed
       there were Programme Sellers.    There was a large
       group gathering around them and obviously they had
       got large amounts of money, so I thought it best to
       go and stand near them.    The situation was, it was
       like a tinder box, it could explode at anytime.     As
       I say everybody was very mad, aggressive.    There
                                                              7


                                                      D. BUTLER


        was a strong smell of beer.      Men were urinating all
        over."

         Then we went on about where that happened.      That
    is what he said he did.    Now, go ahead.

B




C




D




                  MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes.     I am not really.




G




H
                                                   D. BUTLER


    q   .         MRS. MCBRIEN:  I am not really sure now how to
            proceed with this but I just feel that when they were all
            coming in and most of them were heading that way, could
            something have been done?

                  THE CORONER:    Well I don't think we can take it
B           any further.

                  THE   WITNESS:  In my opinion with the amount of men
            that were   there at the time if you are referring to
            diverting   them, it could not have been done with that
            amount of   men.

    Q.            THE CORONER: At that point in time? - A. At that
            point in time.  It needed several more, at least 100.

                  MRS. McBRIEN:    All right.   Thank you, Officer.

                   THE CORONER: I think you have already explored
            this aspect, Mr. King, either with this Officer or with
            another so I don't suppose you want to go over this point
            again?
                  MR. KING: Sir, I am grateful for the invitation
            but I decline it.

                  THE CORONER:    Thank you very much.

                  Perhaps I ought to say that when I read what the
            Officer said I merely picked the one bit when I questioned
            him.  I have not had time to study the transcript and pick
            out every single reference so there may be other references
            in here but I just picked the one where he did give some
            sort of reply.


                              IAN DAVID CRAWFORD    Sworn

                                   Bv THE CORONER:

    Q. You are Ian David Crawford, I believe? - A. That is right.

    Q. Is it s           t    i    l  l   T   i    s        it
                         in Cheshire? - A. It is now
                        Northwich.

    Q.       Are you still with the Royal   London? - A. Yes sir.

    Q.       And    at that    time I think youwere an Assistant District
            Manager? - A. I still am sir.

    Q.      in addition to that you have been a Liverpool supporter
            for most of your life? - A. That is right sir.




H
                                                                  9


                                             I,D. CRAWFORD



    Q. And you attend as many matches as you can I believe? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. And you are quite experienced as a result, experienced
       in attending football matches? - A. Yes sir.
B   Q. Did you, just as a matter of interest, go to the 1988
       semi-final, not 1989, the 1988 one? - A. The previous
       year no sir, I did not go.

    Q.   But you did go in 1989.   Right? - A. I did.

    Q.   I think you travelled in what you described    as a   "mini
         coach"? - A. Yes, a 12 seater mini-bus.

    Q.    Was this a privately organised    thing or was it an official
         party? - A. It was a privately organised party.

    Q. You left, is itMaghullat about half-past-9.        Would that
       be right? - A. That is right.

    Q.   What time did you arrive in Sheffield.   Can youremember?
         - A. At the ground?

    Q. No, in Sheffield itself first of all? - A. It would be
       about lunchtime.

    Q. In fact I think you stopped at a pub somewhere didn't you
       for a bite to eat at about lunchtime? - A. That is right,
       yes.

    Q.   Somewhere you said near to the Snake Pass.  How near to
         Sheffield was that would you say? - A. It was near I think
         it is a village called Oughtibridge.

    Q. I see, in the environments of Sheffield? - A. That is right.

    Q. That is where you arrived at about noon? - A. Correct.

    Q. I believe that you stayed there until about 2 o'clock.
       Would that be right? - A. That is right sir.

    Q.    And I expect you had something to eat and to drink as one
         would expect if one was staying there.   It was not very
         crowded was it this particular pub? - A. There were a few
         locals in there and apart from our party about half-a-dozen
         other Liverpool supporters.

    Q.   Then you set off towards the ground? - A. Yes.

    Q.    In the mini-coach, right.  I forgot to ask you, thejourney
         across from Sheffield to this pub in Oughtibridge was that
         reasonably satisfactory? - A. Yes, we went across through
         Manchester and on to I think it is the Woodhead Pass on that
         way.




H
                                          I.D. CRAWFORD



    Q. And no particular difficulties? - A. No difficulties.

    Q. You then set off again towards Sheffield I believe.     Is
       that right? - A. Yes.

H   Q. Were you checked at some point by the Police before you
D      made it to the ground? - A. Yes, we were checked by the
       Police for alcohol of which they found none.

    Q. Do you know approximately how far this was from the ground?
       - A. Possibly a mile or so.

    Q. Were you the only vehicle which was being checked at that
       point? - A. No there were quite a few along the way that
       were being checked.

    Q. Just as a matter of interest, apart from checking you for
       alcohol did they check you for tickets as well? - A. They
       asked us to empty the contents of our pockets and I think
       at that point also the tickets were shown.

    Q. So it was a fairly thorough check in your particular
       instance? - A. Yes, and all the party did have tickets.

    Q. And you in fact were with three others who had standing
       tickets I believe? - A. That is right for the Leppings Lane
       end.

    Q. Then you proceeded and eventually you parked somewhere.
       Do you know where you parked or not? - A. No, the mini-bus
       driver dropped us off near to the ground, about half-a-mile
       from the ground and turned back to park further up.  I don't
       know where because I was picked up later on from the
       hospital.

    Q. You then made your way towards the ground as you say about
       a half-mile, so tenmLnutes' walk or so would it be? - A.
       Yes, a short walk.

    Q. Can you remember what time you got to the Leppings Lane
       end of the ground.  I don't mean into the ground but to
       the ground? - A. It would be approximately 2.25/2.30.

    Q. Was there already a substantial number of people at the
       turnstiles at that time? - A. I would not describe it as
       being very crowded at that time but people were beginning
       to arrive in scores.

    Q. So does that mean that you were able to make your entrance
       without any particular difficulty? - A. At that time, as I
       say the crowd was not too bad but for some reason we
       weren't being allowed into the, there is like an area just
       before the terraces. For some reason we were being withheld
       outside.




H
                                                                11


                                            I-.D. CRAWFORD



    Q. When you say the "terraces" do you mean the terraces or
       the   turnstiles? - A. It seemed to beyou have to go through
       the   turnstile to get into like a pen area behind the
       terracing and for some reason people weren't being allowed
       into there.
B
    Q. I see, so you were being held up at the turnstiles you say?
       - A. Yes, and the crowd was by then building up.

    Q. So your perception was that the entry through the turnstiles
       was slow.  Is that what you are saying? - A. Yes.

    Q. Either stationary or    slow? - A. Yes, that is right.

    Q. But   you did not know the reason for that? - A. No.




D




E




F




G                             Q. Eventually you did get through
                                                                  12


     A                                                  I. D. CRAWFORD




         Q. Eventually you did get through the turnstiles? - A. I
            actually went through the turnstile without my ticket
            being checked, quite quickly actually, into the pen
            area behind the terracing.
     B
         Q. Do you know about what time you would have got through
            the turnstile? How long did it take to traverse - you
            said you arrived at 2.25, 2.30 or thereabouts, what
            time did you actually manage to get into, we call it
            the concourse area? - A. It was no more than ten
            minutes.

         Q. In your particular case your ticket was not ripped? -
     C      A. No, there was only one steward at the turnstile area
            and people just seemed to be walking through without
            tickets being checked.

         Q. Do you remember which turnstile that was, as a matter
            of interest? It is not very important. - A. I could
            show it to you on a map but I don't know what it was
            called.

         Q. You mean you would be able to recognise which one it
     D      was if we showed you a picture? - A. I think so, from a
            map.

         Q. If you turn in the black folder to Exhibit 257, were
            those the turnstiles you went through? - A. From that
            picture I could not tell you.  If I had a diagram of
            the ground I would perhaps be able to see easier.

         Q.   Turn to 274.   It is not a terribly important point, but
«*
     E        that is the best we can do with a diagram of the
              ground. - A. Where I actually went through without
              having my ticket checked, where I meant was the
              perimeter gates.  It was not actually a turnstile, but
              there were stewards on them gates, supposedly checking
              for tickets.

         Q. So what you are saying is that you went through what
            were like big park railing gates? - A. That is right,
     F      which were closed.  That is what caused the delay
            outside the ground. When I said earlier ....

         Q. Yes, perhaps I misunderstood you. - A. I am getting
            confused as to the actual terminology.

         Q. Let's start this again so we get it right.  You got to
            Leppings Lane end of the ground at about 2.25, 2.30? -
            A. Yes.

         Q. There weren't that many people there but it was
            beginning to build up? - A. The perimeter gates were
            closed.




     H
                                         I. D. CRAWF.ORD




They were closed - you are sure about that? - A. Well
there was definitely a delay anyway.

Yes, and you say that there were stewards.  How do you
know they were stewards at those gates? - A. There was
one steward. He was wearing a yellow jacket, a typical
steward's jacket.

You can't remember whether it had any writing on it can
you? - A. No, because I was facing him. People seemed
to be just filtering through the gate and because he
was on his own he did not seem to care whether he was
taking tickets or not.

So he filtered, as far as you were concerned, but did
not take the ticket from you? - A. I don't know whether
he was meant to check tickets or whatever.

But he didn't? - A. He didn't seem to do anything.

Then you got into this area between the perimeter gates
and the turnstile area, is that right? - A. That is
right, yes.

Did you then go through a turnstile in due course? - A.
No, there was then a build up of the crowd in that
turnstile area, and I moved out to the perimeter fence,
alongside the River Don.

You did that because you were uncomfortable? - A. The
crowd was building up quite alarmingly and there did
seem to be some sort of barrier in the turnstile area
that people were by then getting rather pressed
against, and I decided consciously to move across to
the perimeter fence, alongside the River Don.

You were able to do that, you had freedom of movement?
- A. I was able to do that, not freely but I managed to
make my way across there, and there was a lot more
space at that area.

Did you see any mounted Officers? - A. Yes, at that
point I spent a minute or two at that fence area.
There were mostly other, it seemed to be women and
children at that point, because there was a bit more
space, and the mounted Police were behind a wooden
barrier between the stand and the perimeter fence, on
the River Don, the embankment, so they were behind that
barrier at that point.

Just as a matter of interest, did you see any Officers
in the crowd who were actually trying to get in through
the turnstiles, the crowd that you had left? - A. No,
the wooden barrier was opened on the command of one of
                                                         14


                                               I. D. CRAWFORD




     the mounted Policemen, and two or three mounted
     Policemen came from behind there, despite the plea of a
     Policewoman who was on foot, and they then proceeded
     to, the only way to describe it is to charge the horses
     into the crowd.

Q. You are saying that these Officers came out, and what
   did you envisage they were trying to do, or what did
   you see? You said that they charged the horses into
   the crowd, is that right? Don't tell me what you
   thought they were trying to do because you don't know,
   I suppose. - A. Well, all I can say is what I saw, and
   they were behind the wooden fence.  One of the Officers
   who appeared to be in command said to a Policewoman on
   foot,  Open the barrier, we are going through", and the
   Policewoman said, "No, you'll only make it worse", and
   the mounted Policemen, as I say, the only way I can
   describe it is charged because they did move the horses
   in what I would call a provocative manner towards the
   crowd, so provocative that there were women and
   children having to jump over the fence onto the steep
   embankment, and I had to myself rush out of the way to
   avoid being trampled on by a horse.

Q. So you did not find the activity of the mounted
   Officers at that point helpful? - A. Certainly not.

Q. Did you look behind to see what was happening a bit
   further up the road, so to speak? - A. I was more
   concerned with avoiding being trampled on by the rather
   large horses.

Q. Did you notice what was happening to the people outside
   the turnstile area at that time? - A. No, it was not
   long after that point actually that the blue concertina
   gate was opened.

Q.    Do you recollect whether it was opened widely or just a
     little bit? - A. I don't think it could have been
     widely because there were only a few people that
     actually went through.    I have since later found out
     that these gates were opened twice.    I must have gone
     through in the first opening.

Q.    So you think it wasn't opened widely.  You are quite
     right, they were opened several times, but that is what
     I am trying to find out, what you remember about the
     opening? - A. Well, when I went through the gates I was
     not involved in a surge of the crowd at that point.
     That came later on when I was already in the pen.

Q. So in fact you entered through the blue concertina
   gate? - A. That is right.
                                           I. D. CRAWFORD




Did you notice whether it was closed behind you? - A.
No.

Having got through, what did you do then? - A. I had
time to be able to go to the lavatories behind the
Leppings Lane area, and after visiting there walked
down into the pens.

Before you did that I think that you overheard a
conversation, didn't you? - A. This was as I was
walking along the top of where the pens are, into
Leppings Lane area, into the terracing area at the top
of the terraces, I overheard somebody say, "Don't go
down there, it's too crowded".
          9                            f
                                      o
"Don't go down there", meaning don't go down the
tunnel, or don't go down where? - A. Well, looking down
the tunnel all you could see was the pitch.  It was
quite sunny, you could see the sunlight through the
tunnel, and you could see what did not look to be too
crowded an area, and I think the players were out on
the pitch at that point, so although I overheard
somebody say, "Don t go down there, it's too crowded",
from my own observations I thought it looked okay.

What I am trying to establish is where you heard it,
and I think it was near the toilet end? - A. It was
just outside the tunnel, just before I actually entered
the tunnel.

Were you at   that point able to see the players on the
pitch? - A.   I think so. I am a bit confused about that,
but I think   the players may have been out on the pitch.
I could not   tell you of which team.

So you made your way down the tunnel, right? - A. Yes,
I walked slowly into the tunnel to the back of the
crowd in the pen. At that point I did not realise that
the pen was enclosed at both sides.  I just thought it
was an open terrace area as I had been used to in
places such as Anfield and other grounds.

In fact, you had reasonably free passage down the
tunnel? - A. Yes.

We are talking about the tunnel at this stage, okay? -
A. Yes.

Having got to the other end of the tunnel, did you go
left or right? Can you remember? - A. I can't really
remember because I then became part of the crowd, but I
was, looking at this diagram, it was the pen where Gate
3 was.
                                            I. D. CRAWFORD




You would have gone right then? - A. Yes.     I went the
only way that I thought I could go.

Describe to me in your words what happened - first of
all, what was happening on the field as you got to the
exit of the tunnel, as you first approached it? - A.
What was happening on the field?

Yes, can you remember? - A. Not particularly, no.

What happened to you? - A. I became part of the crowd
then which seemed to be getting more packed.   I was
gradually pushed further forward and there did seem to
be a surge of people behind me at one point.
Eventually my left leg was trapped against a barrier.
My left leg was behind the barrier and the rest of my
body was being propelled the other side of the barrier,
and at that point I thought that my leg was going to be
torn off.

At that point do you know what was happening on the
pitch? - A. No.   I was only concerned with trying to
avoid serious injury. My arms were packed tightly
against my chest.   I had spectacles in my breast pocket
and my concern at that point was hoping that the
spectacles did not break in my pocket, because I was
being so crushed, to avoid them breaking and possibly
injuring me seriously.

How long would you say it had taken from the time you
entered the terrace to the point when you got trapped
against this barrier which you have described? - A. It
would be very difficult for me to put a time on that.
Time did not seem to really make much difference at
that point.

What was happening around you, firstly when you were
traversing the terrace, and I am taking the point of
stopping where you got wrapped round or trapped on the
barrier, what if anything was happening around you? -
A. The crowd was getting obviously more and more
packed, to an unbearable point. People were screaming
out. One chap next to me mentioned something about
thinking there was somebody underneath his feet but he
was unable to help him, or her.  I half remember
joining in the cries to the Police to try and open the
gates to relieve the situation.  There certainly were
plenty of shouts to the Police to help out, and I do
remember one youth climbing the fence to try and get
out himself and being pushed back in by the Police, who
perhaps thought he was just trying to run onto the
pitch.
                                          I. D. CRAWFORD


Can you relate that incident to anything which was
happening on the pitch? I am sorry to keep on asking
you about that but it is a very convenient way of
timing things because people do not walk around
looking at their watches.  Can you recollect what, if
anything, was happening on the pitch? - A. Not at
all. What was happening on the pitch was of no
interest to me whatsoever.

This lad - I think it was a lad you said - was trying
to climb over? - A. Yes.

He was climbing over the rails, is that right? - A.
He jumped on to the front fence railings to try and
climb out  and had got his torso above the fence but
was forcibly put back into the crowd by the Police
that were in front of the fence.

Apart from that incident, and you have already
described  that there were cries to the Police, did
you hear any response from the Police? Did they use
their voice in reply to what was being said? - A. I
can't remember anything clearly about that.

Did you hear any cries about pushing back at all? -
A. Yes, from that side of things the Police were
asking the crowd to push back which was joined in by
the crowd themselves joining in talking to people or
shouting to people behind them to push back.

You heard that and it is very interesting what you
said about people joining. Were there signs made or
was it just word of mouth so far as you remember? -
A. I couldn't see too much myself because of the
sheer crush.

You were in pain, were you not? - A. I was in pain
and I was also extremely frightened and unable to
turn round.

In relation to these cries of "push back" which you
have described to me, can you relate those to the
incident which you have mentioned about somebody
being pushed back into the pen? - A. I am sorry,
could you just repeat that?

Can you relate the cries of "push back" to the
incident which you have described with somebody sort
of half climbing up and was pushed back into the pen?
- A. Not particularly because at that point, as I
have said, things were really unimportant, what was
going on, other than sheer self-preservation.

Did you see the gate at all? If you did not see then
say "I didn't see it"? - A. Eventually I was
                                         I. D. CRAWFORD


propelled towards that gate and that is how I exited
from the area.

At this point in time you did not see it? - A. Again
there was no reality about time but at some point I
could see the gate which was closed and then later on
it was opened and I somehow was propelled towards
that gate.

Do you know when it opened? Have you any yardstick
as to when you saw it opened? - A. No, I couldn't say
for certain.

Do you have any yardstick? The gate obviously was
closed, or at least initially they always were in
those days. The question is, when did it open? Can
you relate the opening to any of the events which you
have mentioned such as the lad being pushed back or
the cries of "push back" or anything else? - A. In
time?

In time? - A. Possibly a few minutes after that but,
as I say, things are very hazy about that same
period.

You eventually were propelled towards this gate as
you have already indicated. Was this a voluntary
movement by you or an involuntary one? - A. When I
saw the gate opened I hoped that I could get through
it but I think it was the sheer movement of the
crowd.  It was like squeezing toothpaste out of a
tube.  Eventually I ended up on my side halfway
through the gate and although people were standing on
me and jumping over me to get out of the gate
eventually three Policemen managed to drag me through
the gate on to the pitch.

At the time it seemed an awful long time to you when
you were lying there? - A. At that time, yes.

Can you say how long it might have been? - A. It
seemed like an eternity but it was possibly only
about a minute or so.

Then I think they put you down and I think you lost
consciousness for a time and somebody tried to revive
you, another Officer? - A. Yes, I was put on to the
pitch face down and then a Policeman turned me on to
my side.  I remember everything going very blank and
I think a Policeman slapped me to revive me and then
a stretcher was brought and I was taken off the field
on a stretcher.

In fact, one of your party lost their lives, did they
not? - A. That is right.
                                          I. D. CRAWFORD


That is Alan Johnston, is it? - A. Yes.

You were not with him when all this happened or were
you? - A. I last saw Alan Johnston in what you
describe as the concourse area between the perimeter
gates and the turnstiles.

Actually we do not call that the concourse area.  I
made a mistake. We just call it the turnstile
area? - A. We went through the perimeter fence
together and it was when I moved out to the perimeter
fence at the side of the River Don by the side of the
embankment is the last time I saw Alan Johnston.

He stayed in the bit that was there? - A. We were
separated involuntarily by the crowd.

You do not actually know where he went or what he did
so far as you personally know? - A. No.

Apart from the fact that you lost him? - A. Yes, he
was on the Leppings Lane terracing.

Can you just help me on this? When you were being
propelled forward from the tunnel exit on to the
terrace to the barrier, and we will deal with the
barrier in a moment, I think you have described it as
an involuntary movement, that is right, is it not? -
A. Yes.

I think you have also described it that you felt a
surge, is that right? - A. This is before my leg
trapped behind me.

That is the period I am trying to cover.  Just
describe that to me again? What I want to find out
is the intensity, if you like, of the surge that you
felt? - A. When I describe it as a surge what I
actually mean is that it just felt as though the
crowd got more packed in a short time. When I first
went down the tunnel and on to the terraces the crowd
did not seem to be at all packed but within a matter
of a short time the crowd was very dense indeed.

What you are saying is that when you first exited
from the tunnel, the terrace itself was crowded but
not so crowded.  Tell me in your own words what it
was like? - A. It certainly wasn't frightening at
that point.

How long did it take - and I am sorry to keep on
about the time - to change from that situation of not
frightening to being propelled down and becoming what
sounds like pretty awful, which we know of course it
was? - A. I would say it would be about five to ten
minutes.
                                                         20


                                                 I. D. CRAWFORD



Q. As long as that do you think? - A. I think you said
   the players were on the pitch when you came through
   the tunnel? - A. I thought I had seen the players on
   the pitch when I was at the top of the tunnel but at
   what time that was exactly I couldn't say.

Q.    We know what time the gate opened, you see, but you
     went to the loo, did you not? You came through the
     gates? - A. Yes.

Q. Then you went to the loo, then you heard the
   conversation, and then you walked down the tunnel? -
   A. Yes, that is right.

Q.    I think you said slowly?   - A. Yes, there was
     certainly not a surge of    people at that point.

Q. The surge came afterwards? - A. Yes, that is right.
   That is when I felt the crowd getting a lot more
   solid, which was later on.

Q. Could you mark a little plan for us as to where you
   were on the terrace? If you walk round to the
   overhead projector, if you do not mind. My Officer
   will show you which is Pen 3. 337 it will be. Could
   you mark it with a cross? Mark it with a cross and
   put the 1 against it where you first came in and then
   the barrier around which you got wrapped, if I can
   use that awful word? - A. That is the area I first
   came in and I believe it was this barrier here
   ( indicating\.

Q. Did you notice any barrier breaking? - A. No.

Q. Thank you very much indeed.  If you would just wait
   there as these ladies and gentlemen will want to ask
   you questions. - A. Yes.

                  Cross-Examined bv MR. HALE:

Q. Mr. Crawford, when you approached what we now
   understand is the perimeter gates you said that you
   were going through for some reason very slowly, is
   that right? - A. Initially it was very slow but then
   people seemed to filter through the perimeter gate.

Q. Do I understand from that that you would have wished
   to go through more quickly? - A. It was my first
   visit to Hillsborough and with experience of visiting
   different stadia across the country it didn't seem to
   be normal.

Q. I accept that you had not been there before and,
   therefore, you did not know anything about the actual
   turnstiles themselves and what rate at which they
                                                          21


                                                I. D. CRAWFORD


       could allow people in and so on but nevertheless I
       understand from the way you gave your evidence you
       were just a little bit aggrieved, would that be
       right, at being held up? - A. Not particularly, it
       just seemed unusual.

B   Q. You saw those gates as you now appreciate, they were
       not turnstiles, and did you see their function as
       being to hold you up or what did you see their
       function as? - A. Nobody has at that point or since
       ever explained what their function was and so I did
       not know.

    Q. The fact is that they were holding up the crowd
       outside the turnstile area? - A. Yes, they were.

    Q. To some extent? - A. There just seemed to be one gate
       with one steward on.

    Q. Could you see beyond there into the turnstile area or
       would you have recognised it if you had seen it? - A.
       You could see through it because the fence was just
       of the metal variety and you could actually see
       through it. There did not seem to be very many
       people in the area behind the fence.

    Q. So you thought that the turnstile area had plenty of
       room to take more people? - A. I would have thought
       so.  It just seemed to be with the filter system it
       was a very slow way of allowing people through.

    Q. Nevertheless, at the time when you were going there
       for whatever reason the fact that that perimeter gate
       was partly closed did in fact allow plenty of room in
       the turnstile area? - A. I am sorry, could you just
       repeat that because I didn't understand.

    Q. When you were outside the perimeter gates and you
       were looking into the turnstile area your perception
       was then that there was plenty of room in the
       turnstile area? - A. Yes.

    Q. So if the gate was in any way intended to make things
       easier in the turnstile area, it was being effective
       at that time? - A. I would say it was effective in
       keeping people out of the turnstile area but
       ineffective in crowd control in the sense that it was
       causing a crowd to...

    Q. I was coming to that.  In effect although the
       turnstile area was being relieved of pressure there
       was pressure being created outside the perimeter
       gates? - A. Yes, which I think was on the Leppings
       Lane area.




H
                                         I. D. CRAWFORD


Your perception was that before long that pressure
became unbearable? - A. Not outside the perimeter
fence, no.

But you got inside and you found it unbearable inside
the perimeter fence? - A. After a short while, yes.

Was that because more people had suddenly come
through the perimeter fence behind you? - A. My own
opinion of it was that the steward on the perimeter
fence gave up and just decided to let the people come
through and that is why the crowd in the turnstile
area built up and I then moved out, as I have already
said, to the embankment area to the embankment area
to the fence alongside the embankment on the River
Don.




                         /Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE
                                                               23


                                                    I. D. CRAWFORD


                    Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

       I am just going to have a go at trying to clarify the
       sequence of events.   I know you have been asked quite a
       number of questions by the learned Coroner about this.
       Can we take it that you are sure that at the time you
B      went down the tunnel the teams were on the pitch? -A.
       After all this time of reflection I am not entirely sure,
       no.   I do think that when I gave the statement in May
       1989 I was more positive then that I had seen activity on
       the pitch, but whether it was one of the teams, or
       something else going on on the pitch, I am not entirely
       sure.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

       Mr. Crawford, can I just take you up on that point?
       Obviously a long time has passed since these events, but
       you did make a statement about this matter, you say? - A.
       In May, 1989, when thoughts were obviously a lot fresher.

       You would agree with me that when you made that statement
       you were more likely to remember accurately what you had
       seen than now, many months afterwards? - A. Yes.

       In that statement you were saying when you went into the
       tunnel you believed there were players on the pitch? - A.
       That didn't concern me thinking I was late for the match.
       It is quite normal for players to warm up on the pitch.

       Of course.   However, the position,   as I understand it,
       is that you go in through Gate C on   the first occasion of
       its opening?   That is something we   seem to have
       established? - A. All I remember it   as was a blue
       concertina gate.   I don't know the   name of it.

    Q« He know it as Gate C.   You go to the lavatory? - A. Yes.

    Q. Help us at all with the length of time you would have
       been there, or thereabouts? - A. The lavatory wasn't
       particularly crowded so I would not have spent a long
       time there.

    o. Two minutes, three minutes?   A. Possibly less.

    Q. You got then towards the tunnel? - A. Yes.

    Q. You say you hear the remark you have mentioned to us? -
       A. Yes.

       You look down the tunnel and in your statement originally
       made a matter of weeks after these events you believe you
       see the players on the pitch? - A. Yes.




H
                                                              24


                                                     I. D. CRAWFORD


    Q. You accept you are more likely to have been accurate then
       than now with the passing of time and the blurring of
       recollections? - A. Naturally.

    0. It is then, as I understand your evidence, that you walk
       down the tunnel, you get to the end of the tunnel and you
B      don't feel that in going into the crowd that you are
       going into a frightening situation? - A. No.

    0. Your estimate, doing the best you can, is that it is
       another five to ten minutes before the build-up of the
       crowd becomes frightening? - A. Yes, as I say it was an
       estimate.

    0. Of course, but you were there and that is your estimate?
       - A. Yes, but as I have already said, time didn't really
       mean anything for most of that period.

    0. Why did you tell us five to ten minutes?   You were doing
       the best you could? - A. Well, things were rather hazy
       once I was on the terrace.

    Q. Were you doing the best you could? - A. To try and pin me
       down to a time, I would have said something in the region
       of five to ten minutes.

    Q. I haven't tried to pin you down to anything.   I think
       that was a time you volunteered to the Coroner. - A.
       Correct.

    Q. Were you doing the best you could when you gave that
       time? - A. I was.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

    Q. Just one matter.   You were in the crowd and you heard
       shouts of "Push back."   You yourself were powerless to
       push back, weren't you? - A. Yes.

    Q. The people around you were powerless? - A. Yes.

    0. You don't know the position of the people behind the
       people who were behind you?    You just don't know that
       position? - A. I was not in a position to be even able to
       look behind me.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

    Q. Mr. Crawford, could I go back outside the turnstiles
       again?   When you had filtered through in the perimeter
       gate, you presumably went into the area that led up to
       the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

    Q. At that point you were facing the turnstiles? - A. Yes.




H
                                                              25


                                                    I. D. CRAWFORD


    Q. I think you described in your evidence in answer to
       questions from the Coroner that there was a build-up of
       the crowd which then led you to decide it was time you
       ought to move out into the sterile area? - A. Yes.

    Q. For all that time until you made that decision, you were
B      looking forward because the way you were going was
       towards the turnstiles?   Is that fair? - A. Yes.

    Q. You didn't see any of the events that may or may not have
       occurred behind you to cause that build-up to occur? - A.
       No.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

    Q. You say that you called at a pub for refreshments in
       Oughtibridge? - A. I think it was in that area.

    0. Can you remember the name of the pub? - A. No, but it is
       a pub on the left hand side of the road just after a pub
       called the Blue Ball, if that is of any help.

    0. Was it the Cock Inn? - A. I have no idea the name of the
       pub.

           THE CORONER:   Anything else by anybody?
      Mr. Crawford, I am very sorry you have got a sore throat
      today because obviously it has been a bit difficult for
      you.   I am even more sorry that you were hurt at the
      Hillsborough disaster, but I am very thankful that that
      was all.   That you survived.   Thank you very much
      indeed for coming this morning.

                        (Short adjournment)




F




G




H
                                                                   26


                                              B.J. ANDERSON



               THE CORONER: We are now going to hear from
         Brian John Anderson.


                        BRIAN JOHN ANDERSON Sworn
B
                                Bv THE CORONER:
                                                           in
    Q. It is Brian John Anderson, _
       Liverpool.  Is that right? - A. That is right, yes.

    Q. Mr. Anderson, just so that we know, so that you know,
       you of course are the son of John Anderson who lost his
       life, aren't you? - A. Yes.

    Q. And I am very very sorry about   that. I want to take you
       through the evidence in the same way as I do with other
       witnesses because I think that will be easier for me
       and also for you. - A. Okay.

    Q. First of all are you a regularfootball supporter? - A.
       Yes, I have been going all my lifa, yes.

    Q. A Liverpool fan? - A. Liverpool

    Q. Had you been to the 1988 semi-final? - A. I went to that,
       yes.
    Q. Did you go to the same part of the terracing or stadium
       or were you somewhere else? - A. We were in the Leppings
       Lane but we were over to the left of the goal so we must
       have gone round the outside to get to there.

    Q. I see, so you were in one of the outer ....        A. The outer
       pens.

    Q. One final question on that aspect, do you remember by
       chance what time you arrived in 1988? - A. To the ground
       you mean?

    Q. Yes? - A. Approximately 2.15/2.20.

    Q.    Did you come by car or coach in 1988? - A.     By car.

    Q.    In fact in 1989 you   also came by car? - A.   Yes.

    Q.    You left Iassume from home with your dad at about what
         time would you say, can you remember? - A. I think it
         would probably be around 9 o'clock, that sort of time.

    Q. Can you recollect approximately what time you got to
       Sheffield, not what time you got to the ground, what time
       you got to Sheffield? - A. Well we got into Sheffield
       approximately 1 o'clock but we got misdirected all round
       the Nottingham Forest end so it was 1.30 by the time we
       got the car parked.




H
                                                           27

                                          B.J. ANDERSON
A

    Q. So you were actually in Sheffield at 1 but it took you another
       half-an-hour to get parked? - A. Yes.

    Q. Do you know where you parked by chance? - A. I think it was
       a little side road off the A61 it was by a little bridge.
B      That is all I know.

    Q. Did you walk from there straight to the ground or did you
       go somewhere else? - A. We went for a pint in the Travellers
       Arms.

    Q. How long did you stay there would you say? - A. We stayed
       there probably from 1.30 to 2.15 then we walked to the ground
       then.

    Q. Were there other fans there? - A. Yes, there was a lot of
       fans there, yes.

    Q. Mainly Liverpool or mixed as far as you could tell? - A. Well
       certainly in the bar we were in it was Liverpool.

    Q. Just about how many would you say were there? - A. May be
       100 .
D   Q. Did you see anything either there or when you left at what
       2.15 on your way to the ground with regard to the behaviour
       of the fans which concerned you? - A. No, everybody was just
       in a very good mood. We were going to win the Cup you see
       so it was all very good.

    Q. You then, I think you said you left about 2.15? - A. Yes.

    Q. And you got to the ground at about what time? - A. I would
       imagine about 25-past-2, something like that.

    Q. When you got to the ground you have got to traverse some
       perimeter gates first of all. Do you know what I am talking
       about the perimeter gates? - A. Yes sir.

    Q. Did you have any difficulty getting through those? - A.
       When we got there there was a fair number of people inside
       the perimeter gates but there was nobody to stop us from
       going in. The only way to get into the ground was obviously
       to go in through those perimeter gates.

    Q. Do you recollect whether they were open or shut? - A. They
       were open when we went in.

    Q. You did not see any Steward or anything like that at the
       perimeter gate? - A. Not particularly, I did not notice.
       We just walked in.

    Q. You presumably aimed for the turnstile area? - A. To try
       and get to the turnstiles, yes.




H
y;                                                                   28

                                                  B.J. ANDERSON



         Q.    When you first got through the perimeter gates, before
              you got through the turnstile, what was it like in that
              turnstile area at this time? - A. It was reasonably full.
              The Police weren't ordering any queues or anything, it
              was just a lot of people in there but we had to go in
     B         that way.

         Q.    Were you crushed at that point in any way?   - A. Not when
              we first went in weweren't, no.

         Q. You had been there before of course so you knew more or
            less where you wanted to go, didn't you? - A. I had a good
            idea, yes.

         Q. What happened then? I am still outside, we have not got
            through the turnstiles yet? - A. In that, what do you call
            that area there?

         Q. Outside the turnstiles, between the perimeter gates and
            the turnstiles? - A. We were in that area and then crowds
            started coming in behind us.  It started filling up
            reasonably quickly. Mind you I say that, we could have
            been there for ten minutes or so, I don't really know, but
            it filled up reasonably quickly after us so after a while
            we did get a bit crushed.

         Q.    Did you feel any pressure from any pushing from behind? -
              A. Not pushing, just pressure, just a lot of people in
              there.

         Q. Did you see any Police horse going up and down in the area
            where you were? - A. It is hard to say really. I have seen
            some films and things and some of it gets a bit cloudy.

         Q.   Try and tell me what you remember from the  time because
              it is difficult, it is 18 months on, you had a terrible
              experience. - A. There was certainly Police, I would not
              say there was Police where we were standing but there
              was Police on the outside where there was like a barrier
              to your right and there was lots of Police there.

         Q. In fact I think it is right    to say you were sufficiently
            uncomfortable in this crowd    that you eventually finished
            up in that you and your dad    had difficulty in breathing?
            - A. We were getting a bit     crushed there then yes.

         Q. Did you contemplate stepping aside and going on to the
            river ... A. Well that is what we did. We were getting
            a bit crushed and I could see my dad particularly was
            not very comfortable so we both sort of said, right, let's
            make our way through this barrier because it is easier
            over there, so we made our way through the barrier.




     H
                                                              29

                                          B.J. ANDERSON



    Q. You ducked underneath? - A. Ducked under it or climbed
       over. We got over it anyway and we waited then by the
       what I now know to be Gate C. We stood by there.

    Q. That area was much quieter? - A. It was very relaxed
       there, yes.

    Q. What happened then as far as you were concerned? - A. Well
       we stood there for a while and we were saying, we were a
       bit disappointed because we weren't going to get into the
       match but we were looking at all the crowds and nobody
       seemed to be moving really. There didn't seem to be any­
       body going in the turnstiles. We thought they had even
       closed the turnstiles.  They probably hadn't obviously
       but it seemed to look like that. It seemed to look like
       that because nobody seemed to be going anywhere. After
       a while we stood there for a bit and the next thing the
       gates just opened in front of us and we just went in.

    Q. We know the gates opened several times, I can tell you that
       it is no secret. What I am trying to find out is which
       opening you went through. Can you describe the opening?
       - A. Yes, well it was fully opened.  I am pretty certain
       actually that we were, we were definitely not the first
       opening because a friend that we were with I now know he
       had gone in before us anyway. He must have gone in the
       first opening and we must have been after him.

    Q. And you remember that it was fully open? - A. It was fully
       open, yes.

    Q. So you went in? - A. We must have been one of the first to
       go in really because we were right by the gate.

    Q. I see. At that point just before the gate opened were you
       crushed against the gate, can you remember? - A. Not at
       all, no.

    Q. What happened after that? Last year you had gone round
       the side, you say, you don't quite know how? - A. That is
       it I don't really know.  I can't remember how we got there
       last year to be honest but this year the gates opened and
       the tunnel was just in front of you and we just went in
       down the tunnel. Our idea was to head back, to head over
       to the left where we were the previous year but I did not
       realise the set up that it was all a penned in area.
       We intended to go in and just make our way to the left to
       get where we were because it was a good spot we had the
       year before.

    Q. I see, so you would be quite happy to be round the side?
       - A. Oh yes, that was our intention to try and get to
       there.




H
                                                       30

                                      B.J. ANDERSON



Q. So you together with the crowd went towards the tunnel
   in other words because that seemed to be the most inviting
   bits at that time? - A. Yes.

Q. Could you see the pitch as you entered the tunnel? - A. As
   we got to the tunnel we could see the pitch and we were
   laughing together me and my dad saying:  "It is great this,
   we have actually got in" because we had given up getting
   in and we were actually getting in before, it looked to me
   like they weren't on the pitch.  I am pretty sure I said to
   my dad:  "Look at this, they are not even on the pitch,
   we are going to get a good view here".

Q. Can you remember whether the players were on the pitch at
   that point? - A. Well as I say I would definitely say they
   weren't on the pitch.

Q. They were not? - A. No, because that was something we
   actually commented on.

Q. So you went down the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you have free passage? - A. Down the tunnel, yes,
   nobody there inside the tunnel.

Q. When you got to the other end of the tunnel where it exited
   on to the terraces you went in there? - A. To the left.

Q. When you first came out on to the enclosure what was it
   like? - A. Well there was a lot of people in there, it was
   full but at that stage it was no fuller than I have learnt
   to expect over the years. You just get yourself comfortable
   into a position and that was our intention.

Q. Were you able to make your own way in the initial stages,
   so we are talking about you just having got in, I am trying
   to take you through slowly if I can put it like that. Were
   you able to make your own way at that point? You were
   trying to get over to the left I think you said? - A. That
   is right, yes.

Q. Did you manage that? - A. There was people in front of us.
   It was up to the end of the tunnel sort of thing the back
   wall. We just made our way into that past the back people
   and then as we got through there I said to my dad:  "Let's
   go for the left" so my dad sort of went to the left and as
   that happened sort of a little bit of a push up which is a
   natural thing because people want to get off the barrier
   and if it is not too full people will push off the barrier
   and you get that all the time pushing backwards and forwards
   but just a normal thing because people want to get off the
   barrier. As that happened I went forward and I went sort of
   straight down on to a barrier. As far as I knew my dad had
   been left up to the left behind another barrier, but I just
   found myself straight down on to a barrier.
                                                              31


                                          B.J. ANDERSON



    Q. So you found yourself squeezed up against the barrier you
       say? - A. Yes.

    Q. Dad was a little bit further to the left? - A.     Would have
       been, yes.
B   Q. Did you lose sight of dad at that point? - A. I didn't
       see him again.

    Q. You never saw him again until afterwards of course? - A. Yes,

    Q. Let's think about you for a moment then, all right.  Having
       got squeezed against the barrier at that point just tell
       me what happened? You at that point weren't too concerned
       because you just thought this was a normal? - A. That is
       correct.  I was on the barrier, not very comfortable but
       not concerned because I thought I would be able to get back
       off this now.

    Q. Tell me what happened? - A. There was just never a point
       that I could get off the barrier.  The pressure then just
       became so intense. Obviously when they opened them gates
       everybody then had come up the tunnel and that time when
       I had been getting pushed on to the barrier everybody had
       filled up behind me.




E




                              Q. Can you remember




H
                                         B. J. ANDERSON




Can you remember when you first got onto the barrier,
when you first got onto the barrier, what if anything
was happening on the pitch? - A. I could not see the
pitch at all.

You could not see it so you do not actually know? - A.
No idea what was going on.

Did you see the pitch at any time? - A. Not while it
was in that position no, not at all.  I could just see
a goalpost, I think, but that was all I could see.

What I am interested in is whether you could see the
players? - A. No, not at all.

Did you see the players at any time? - A. No, at that
point then - I was there for a while, quite a while,
and to be honest I was more concerned with my life than
anything else.

I quite understand that and the only reason why I ask
about the players is because it helps us to get the
timings. - A. I would say that they must have been
ready to come out onto the pitch when we got to the
tunnel, because we really expected them to be there.

So you were on the barrier, you were squeezed against
the barrier.  Did you get taken off the barrier
eventually?  I don't mean right at the end, but .... -
A. No, I was just on the barrier.

So that was where you stayed? - A. I stayed there, yes.

Until you managed to get right out. Can you mark on a
plan for us where it was that you got stuck?  (The
Witness marked Exhibit 338) - A. It is difficult
really. It could have been this barrier, but I have
got a feeling it was probably somewhere here.

Okay, can you sign that? (The Witness signed the
Exhibit) You were on this barrier. Were people around
you saying anything? - A. For the first minute or so it
probably wasn't really a concern to anybody, but as
time went on, I just really don't know the length of
time but as time went on there was people, the angle I
was at I had my arm against the barrier and there was
another chap was holding my chest off the barrier,
because he was in a bad way. The only people I could
see was this chap here that was over the barrier, and
two lads in front of me.  I couldn't turn round
anywhere, but there was people that seemed to be behind
me, but probably alongside me on the-barrier, who were
actually dying, crying that they were dying.
                                         B. J. ANDERSON




There was shouting, "I am dying"? - A. That is right,
yes.

You shouted as well? - A. There was two lads in front
of the barrier and I thought I was dying and I said to
them, "Help me", like, and they said they couldn't do
anything for me, it was just the way it was.

Did you hear anybody shout or express any opinions
about pushing back? - A. No, I was starting to fade
away, I think.

It is obviously very difficult for you to say how long
but the pressure eased, didn't it, in due course?
Where did it ease from in the first instance? - A, All
I can say is one minute, well for quite a long time I
should say, not one minute, I was under a lot of
pressure.  I thought I was going and then things went
blank for quite a while, because there was this lad
that was on the barrier, as I say, with me, and the
next thing I know the pressure had eased and he was
nowhere to be seen, so I can only imagine that I must
have gone unconscious and I don't really know what
happened to me there at that point. Time is impossible
to say.

Impossible to say - in your statement you said ten
minutes, but are you saying that that was a guess? - A.
Yes, that is pure guesswork, just imagining ten
minutes.  I really don't know.

Over a period of time and you don't know how long? - A.
That is right.

Did it ease from the front or from the back, can you
remember? - A. It was just much easier around me. As I
say I think I must have gone out and I just came back,
came to as it eased.

How did you manage to get out of the terrace yourself?
- A. Well, when I was on the barrier all I wanted to do
was get under the barrier where I thought it was going
to be better, so as soon as it eased I just ducked
straight under the barrier, and then a few lads were
saying to me, "Don't go that way mate, don't go that
way.  It's terrible that way".  They said to go to the
back so I ducked back under the barrier and I could see
people getting hoisted up into the stands, so I just
made my way there and I was lifted out.

I don't for a minute suppose you know what time that
was? - A. As I say, I could guess but it would purely
be guessing.
                                            B. J. ANDERSON




Not, it is not worth guessing. - A. It would not be
constructive.

The only thing is did you look on the pitch? - A. I got
up into the stands and I was really very dizzy. There
was a lot going on, on the pitch, and I could see
Police trying to pull down a fence, and lots of other
people as well.  I particularly remember a Policeman
but there was a lot of other people doing it as well.

Pulling at the fence? - A. Trying to get the fence
down, one of the mesh fences, which was probably just
in front of me where I was sitting.

That is when you were in the stand? - A. I was in the
stands then, yes. There was just a lot of people and
people just standing in the stands, just dazed.

You went out of the back and in fact you found your dad
quite soon, didn't you? - A. I just made my way out.   I
just said I had got to find my dad and I went down the
steps and found my dad by the river section, in the
concourse at the back.

Yes, it must have been a very sad experience for you.
Did you feel, when you were crushed against the
barrier, you have already described it but did you feel
any surges? - A. No, just to me I was expecting to come
back off the barrier and I just couldn't.  It just got
steadier and steadier, there was no sudden push against
me.

           Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING

Mr. Anderson, you have described yourself as being a
supporter all of your life? - A. Yes.

Is it your position normally somewhere behind the goal?
Is that where you normally like to be? - A. No.   I have
given up going in the Kop now I go in the stands, but I
have always gone on the Kop, always stood up, but I
never go right behind the goal.   I might have done a
long time ago but I have given that up a long time ago.
I stand well to one side.

I suppose that age brings a little more reflection? -
A. Well, I am not very tall and it is more important to
see the match now than just enjoy the spirit of it all.
It is fun to be behind the goal but I would much rather
stand and watch the match properly.

You would rather see the match? - A. Yes.
                                          B. J. ANDERSON




A        pf°ple by their natural inclination take up a
position directly or as directly behind the goal as
they can? - A. It is the first place to stand really,
because to me it is probably the best viewing spot but
it just gets so full that it is very difficult to see.
That is why it fills up first.

Of course, not being so tall, and I share that, a bit
more room gives you a better view of the pitch? - A.
That is correct, yes.

Absolutely jam-packed behind the goal, a bit more room
to the sides? - A. Certainly full behind the goal, yes,
and if you get somebody tall you can't really get round
them.

What you are saying is that when you got out of the
tunnel you were at that time directly, just about
directly behind the goal? - A. Yes.

You and your father were intending to make for the
left-hand side? - A. That is correct.

When you got out onto the terrace at thattime,
although there were a lot of people there and it was
full, it was no fuller than you have come to expect? -
A. For them few seconds, yes. We just went for it,
like. We just went in and our idea was just to move to
the left.  It seemed okay at that time.

And had you not been able to do, you would as you
described have got yourself comfortable and got on with
watching the match? - A. Correct, yes.

             Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Mr. Anderson, just one point on that. You expected to
be able to move to your left, do I understand it? - A.
Yes.

Across the full width of the terrace? - A. Yes, I would
have thought as like at Anfield where you could do
that.  I didn't realise I was penned in.

Could we just have a quick look at C274, please? Is it
possible for you to look at that plan and show us
roughly where you had been in 1988, which had been on
one of the side pens? - A. To be honest, I probably can
but^the pictures don't mean anything to me really.  I
don t know whether they are poor pictures or something,
but I will have a look. Yes, I think I can.   (The
Witness indicated his position in 1988 on ExhibIt~C274)
- A. We were actually standing here in 19&ff. We were
                                                            36


                                               B. J. ANDERSON




     talking with people in the stands.   There is like a
     sloped area.

Q. You are indicating in the corner of the terrace? - A.
   That is right.

Q. If one was looking out onto the pitch, onto the far
   left side? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. Had you expected that when you came down the tunnel in
   the middle that you would be able to make your way
   right across the terrace to that position?  Is that
   what you had hoped to do? - A. Well, yes, really it was
   naive but that is what we thought we could do.

Q. Yes, and what you did not realise is that there were
   fences, or radial fences, down the middle of the
   terrace blocking your way? - A. That is right, I had no
   idea.

         THE CORONER:    He was indicating Pen 7.

               Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE

Q. Mr. Anderson, just following up that point, I am not
   asking you to remember how you got to what we call Pen
   7 in 1988, but by whatever route you did manage to get
   to it in 1988? - A. Yes.

Q. And is it fair to say that for whatever reason when you
   came in in 1989 nothing sprang to your mind as to which
   way you ought to go, the tunnel was the obvious way? -
   A. Yes, the thing is I can't remember, even now I have
   tried to think how we got to Pen 7, but given the time
   it was and the match was just about to start, it was a
   cup semi-final, we seen the pitch, we just wanted to go
   and watch the match so we went straight down the
   tunnel.

Q. The shortest route at that time? - A. At that point,
   yes, just to go and watch the match.

Q*        THE CORONER:   Mr. Anderson, thank you very much
     indeed.  I am most grateful to you.

             KARL MATTHEW MULLEE Called (Sworn)

                        By THE CORONER

Q. It is Karl Matthew Mullee, isn't it? - A. Yes, that is
   correct.

Q* Could you give me your address, Mr. Mullee? - A.
                                    1 Derby.
                                                                37


                                                     K. M. MULLEE




    Q. You are about 19 now, is that right? - A. Yes, that is
       correct.

    Q. You are a Liverpool supporter? - A. Yes, that is right.
B
    Q. And have been for some years, is that right? - A. Yes.

    Q. You managed to get a ticket for the semi-final in 1989,
       is that right? -  A. Yes.

    Q.   Just as a matter  of interest,did you actually go to
         the '88 one as well? - A. Yes.

    0.   Perhaps I will deal with the '88 one first of all, just
         to dispose of it so to speak.   First of all, how did
         you travel in '88? - A. I went with my dad.

    Q. In a car? - A. Yes, in the car.

    Q. Do you know what time you arrived in Sheffield in '88?
       - A. It was roughly in Sheffield itself about half­
       past-11.
D   Q. Did you go to the same part? - A. We went to Leppings
       Lane end, yes, but it was actually on the side, not in
       the centre.

    Q. On the terracing though? - A. Yes.

    Q. Do you remember how you got there, to the side, in '88?
       - A. We went round to that side and entered via, I
       think it was a tunnel.  I am not quite sure.

    Q. You got onto it from the back, so to speak.     You didn't
       go along the terracing? - A. No.

    Q. We will get you to show us in a minute on the plan.
       Just one final question: do you recollect what time
       you entered the terracing in 1988? If you don't it
       does not matter. - A. I think it was around about 2 on
       that occasion.

    0. Now we are talking to 1989 now, okay? - A. Yes.

    Q. Again I think you went with your dad? - A. Yes, that is
       right.

    0. Again by car? - A. Yes.

    Q. What time did you arrive in Sheffield on this occasion?
       - A. It was around about quarter-to-1.

    Q. A little bit later, but not that much? - A. Yes.




H
                                                              38


                                                    K. M. MLfLLEE




    Q. I think dad parked the car about three-quarters of a
       mile away? - A. Yes, we parked some distance, but it
       was relatively near   to the stadium.

B   Q. Did you go straight   to the stadium or did you stopen
       route? - A. We went straight to the stadium.

    0. On your journeyings   to the stadium did you see     anything
       of other supporters? - A. Yes, we saw      a nutnbei:   of
       supporters.

    Q. Tell me what you saw? - A. Just going towards the
       stadium. There wasn't that many because we was quite
       early, but we did see a number of supporters, yes.

    0. Nothing that worried you or concerned you orupset you
       or frightened you or anything else? -A. No.

    0. You got to the stadium.  What time did you get to the
       turnstiles? - A. It was about half-past-1.

    Q. Half-pst-1? - A. Around about, yes.
D   Q. What time did you get to Sheffield again? - A. It was
       around about quarter-to.

    Q. Quarter-to-1?. - A. Yes.

    Q. I take it you had no problems at all in getting in? -
       A. No, it was totally free. There was nobody around.

    Q. You went through the turnstile? - A. Yes.

    Q. Both of you, you and dad? - A. No, my dad went in
       another part of the stadium.  He was sat down.

    0. So you were on your own after that? - A. Yes.

    Q. Having got through, where did you go? - A. I would like
       to make the point that I was searched and my ticket was
       checked, but that was probably because I was early.

    Q. Where were you searched? - A. My jacket was searched.

    Q. Where was it? - A. At the turnstile, and I went
       straight to where I was supposed to go but there was no
       Policing to tell me where to go.  I had to find my own
       way and there was only a couple of stewards and they
       didn't give me any help, so I found my own way and went
       to the centre of the ground where I was allocated.

    Q. Would you normally at that time, once you had got
       through the turnstiles, have expected the Police to
       direct you at that point, or would you have expected




H
                                           K. M. MULLEE




the stewards to do it? - A. I would have expected at
least a steward to direct me.

Did you attempt to ask a steward? - A. There was only a
couple of stewards, but no.




            /Q. It was not that they refused
-M
                                                                   40


                                                         K. M. MULLEE

         Q. It was not that they refused to direct you? - A. No,
            no, it wasn't.

         Q. It was just thatthey did not say, "This way" or
            "That wa y " . You could see the tunnel Itake it? - A.
            Yes.
     B
         Q. What was it that made you decide to go down the
            tunnel? - A. Basically the impulse to actually get on
            to the ground as early as possible to get a good
            view.

         Q. What I am trying   to find out is, was itthe factthat
            the tunnel was in front of you? Was it that you
            could see the pitch when you looked through the
            tunnel or was it that you could see any directions on
            the tunnel? - A.  Yes, there was a direction.

         Q.   Was it that that   made you go that way? - A. Yes.

         Q.   Did you see any other directions on signs anywhere
              else? - A. Not to my knowledge, no.

         Q. The tunnel was empty I presume when you went through?
            -  A. Yes.
     D
         Q. Which pen or terrace did you enter? - A. I think it
            was 4.

         Q. To the left? - A. Yes.

         Q. Was it full, empty or what at that time?     - A. It was
            quite empty.

         Q. Could you see the railings which were dividing the
            terracing off? - A. Yes.

         Q. Did you notice any gates at the back of the railings?
            -  A. No.

         Q. You   did not notice them? - A. No.

         Q. Did you notice they were there either from thatyear
            or the previous year? - A. No, I didn't really notice
            that.

         Q.   You did not pay much attention? - A. No.

         Q.    Were you content with where you were at that   time? -
              A. Yes, I was.

         Q. It was not totally empty, was it? - A. No, no, there
            were a number of people in there but it was perfectly
            fine. There was plenty of space.




     H
                                         K. M. MULLEE


You took up a viewing position where? - A. It wasn't
far down from the tunnel.  It was just to the left
and just across from the tunnel virtually at the
back.

Just describe to me what happened after that? - A.
Round about quarter of an hour before kick-off I felt
very uncomfortable.  It suddenly got densely
populated and very compact and I found myself being
pushed - not pushed - just forced with the weight of
people forward, just slightly forward, and I got
trapped against a barrier.  I got stuck on a barrier.

Is that where you stopped, so to speak? - A. Yes, a
crush barrier.

Until a quarter to, what was the terrace like? You
got there you said at 1.30 and so you were there for
an hour and a bit? - A. Yes.  It was relatively full
but not uncomfortable.

Did it fill up over that hour and a bit what I would
call smoothly or was there a perceptible change so
far as you can remember? - A. Yes.

I am not talking about quarter to because you have
given me that but I am talking about the time before
that for the moment? - A. It filled up smoothly.

I think you have told me that you are a regular
supporter.  Have you been behind the goal in big
matches before? - A. No.

This was the first experience? - A. Yes. You see, I
was allocated a ticket for that section of the
ground, the terrace.

I am not talking about at Hillsborough but about any
big game? - A. No.

So this was new for you? - A. Yes.

I think you said that you got squashed up against the
barrier? - A. Yes.

Can you tell me what was happening on the pitch when
you landed, so to speak, on the barrier? - A. When I
actually landed on the barrier there was nobody on
the pitch that I could, you know, actually see but
just after I gathered that players did enter on to
the pitch but it was some while.  I couldn't see
because I was doubled over the barrier. All I could
see were the people in front of me.

You never saw the players yourself though? - A. I
never saw the players.
                                         K. M. MULLEE



You did not see anything of the match in the end? -
A. No.

How soon after you got on to the barrier, because you
have just mentioned you were doubled up over it, did
that happen? - A. Did players?

The doubling up? - A. The doubling up, as soon as I
hit the barrier because the weight of bodies behind
me forced me over the barrier.

I want to try and pin this down a little bit harder
because in your statement you did try and give a time
as to when you were bent over which is not quite the
same as what you have told me. Just think again and
just take me through it slowly. You got on to the
terrace.  Everything was fine until a quarter to
three and then there was a build up of people? - A.
Yes.

How long did it take for this build up of people to
move you on to the barrier would you say? - A. It
wasn't very long. Only a matter of minutes.   I
couldn't be sure.

You cannot be sure? - A. No, not now.

When you first got on to the barrier were you
uncomfortable when you first got on to the barrier? -
A. Yes.

Straight away? - A. Yes.

Could you breathe at that point? - A. Yes.

You could because you are alive now but did you feel
that you could breathe at that point? - A. Yes, it
was only a while after being on the barrier that I
actually found it hard to breathe.

Can you give an estimate of how long that might have
been? - A. A matter of about five minutes.

Although you did not see anybody on the pitch
something gave you an indication that the players
might have been on it? - A. Yes.

What gave you that indicator? - A. Supporters
cheering.

So you could hear cheering going on around you, at
the back of you, in front of you, where was the
cheering coming from? - A. All parts of the ground.
                                         K. M. MULLEE


Was it coining from within your own terrace as well? -

A. No, because people were pretty distressed in my
part of the terrace.

Those are the people immediately around you? - A.
Yes.

What I am interested in is not the people immediately
around you but people a little bit distant from
you? - A. Yes, yes. They were cheering.

But the people immediately around you on this barrier
were just as uncomfortable as you were? - A. Yes.

Did you notice any other changes in the crowd
behaviour which might have given you a clue with
regard to when kick-off took place? - A. Yes,
immediately around me people were shouting up to
people at the back in the seats to help people
because they were distressed.  The man next to me,
Mr. Anderson, who is the man who died, when he was in
quite a bit of distress everybody around was shouting
and calling to help him out.  I was doubled on the
barrier and I was right next to him and I tried to
help but just like everybody else around they
couldn't help because they were jammed and they
couldn't really do anything about it.

You are not able to relate that to anything that was
happening on the field or anywhere else? You do not
know what time that was? - A. It was I would say just
after the players came out on to the pitch.  I would
say round about ten to three maybe.

The players came on to the pitch at six minutes to
three, I can tell you that? - A. Right, it was round
about there, y e s .

In your statement you said, "At about three I had
become bent over the barrier and I could feel the
pressure from behind and I became very distressed and
began to shout for help". Now it does not make
tuppence difference to me which is right but you have
told me that this happened a little bit earlier five
or six minutes earlier? - A. Yes.

I have just read you this.  Does that ring any bells
as to why you might have said that when you gave your
statement? - A. No, this time difference, perhaps my
times probably differ because of the distance in time
from then and now.

As I say, it does not matter to me what it is. All I
am trying to do is establish as near as I can? - A.
As of now I am uncertain.
                                         K. M. MULLEE



I suppose what you would like to say is that at some
time between the players coming out and kick-off this
happened? - A. Yes.

Was it during this period that you saw Mr.
Anderson? - A. Yes.

You did not know him at the time but you recognised
him subsequently, did you not? - A. Yes.

I think you then lost sight of him a little bit
later, is that right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Do you know when that was? - A. No.

Do you know whether the match had stopped, started,
finished? - A. The match had started.

The match had? - A. Started.

But you have no idea whether the players were
there? - A. I have no idea.

How long was it before you felt a little bit of
relief yourself personally? - A. About ten past
three.

Did you then see whether the players were off the
pitch, when you were able to look around? - A. What
happened was, I was unsure because while I was on the
barrier I almost blacked out and a man actually
shouted to me, "Come around" and when I came off the
barrier all I did was just stagger back and a man
propped me up because I would have fell to the
ground.  He told me to lean on his shoulder and so I
leant on him for about five minutes and got my breath
back and became a little more conscious.

Can I just try and summarise the timing now because
if I have got it wrong you must correct me? As I
understand what you are saying is that as at quarter
to three things were fine, 2.45. Then from 2.45
onwards there was an increase in pressure which did
not take very long to push you against the barrier? -
A. That is correct.

That is where you remained but you did not really
become breathless for about another five minutes or
so? - A. Yes, that is the impression.

You doubled over the barrier at some point between
the players coming on to the pitch and the match
starting and it was in that period that you were
observing Mr. Anderson. Have I got that right? - A.
Yes.
                                         K. M. MULLEE



Are you sure? - A. I am positive, yes.

Can you show us on the plan which barrier you were
at? - A. Yes.    It was this barrier I think
( indicating ) .

   MR. BEECHEY:   339.




                                     /Q. THE CORONER..
                                                              46



                                                    C. M. MULLEE


0.        THE CORONER:   That is 339.   You are confident it
     was that one, are you?   I an not trying to make you
     change your mind.   I want you to be absolutely sure that
     you are confident about it? - A. Yes.

          THE CORONER:   It is very difficult, of course, to
     remember at this time.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

0. Just a little bit more detail, if you could help me,
   Mr. Mullee.   In 1988 which way had you gone?   Could you
   help us with that?   I think the Coroner had said
   originally we would find out about this later on, but we
   never actually found out.   Could you help us?    Perhaps
   if you could be shown a plan, C.274. - A. Could I
   actually show you on the map?

0. Yes, show us on the model. - A. I was just here.

            SERGEANT GRIFFITHS:   He is pointing towards pen 1,
     sir.

Q.        MR. ISAACS:   How did you get in? - A. I don't
     actually remember.   I think we entered by here.

0. So you think you went down the right hand side of the
   Uest Stand? - A. Yes.

Q. And into pen 1 in the way you have indicated? - A. Yes.

Q. You didn't then go by the centre tunnel, the way in which
   you went in 1989? - A. No.

0. In the 1988 game, you had gone with your father and he
   stood with you? - A. No, I was with my sister too and she
   stood with me.

0. And your father on that occasion? - A. Yes, he was
   sitting down.

0. Just so we know what the position is, in 1988, just as in
   1989, your father wasn't with you? - A. No.

0. The difference between 1988 and 1989 is that you were
   with your sister? - A. Yes, that is correct.

0. Did the fact you were with your sister, was     that    perhaps
   a reason as to why you didn't go behind the     goal    in 1988?
   - A. It was partly the reason why we stayed     far    over to
   that side because there was less congestion     over    there.
   There weren't so many people.
                                                          47



                                                   C. M. MULLEE


0. You were aware that going behind the goal you would be
   more likely to be in a crush than staying at the side as
   you had been in 1988? - A. I would say that’s fair.

Q. Can you just help me with this then, if you would:  in
   1989 when you went through the tunnel there was plenty of
   room?   I would have thought you were one of the first
   people actually on the terracing.   Could you help us as
   to where you were standing originally before the push
   came, this gradual push that took you to a barrier? - A.
   Yes.

0. Perhaps Sergeant Griffiths could put the original plan up
   that is signed.    You told us, I think, that you were
   just to the left, at the back, from the tunnel? - A. I
   was just about here.

           THE CORONER:   Mark it with a circle.   Put a "1" in
     it.

0.        MR. ISAACS:   Now the pressure when it came, did it
     come from behind you or were you pushed first of all to
     the side and then forward?   Can you help us with that at
     all? - A. Yes, it came from behind and I was pushed
     straight forward.

Q. Just avoiding the barrier that we can see between you at
   point 1 and the place where you ended up? - A. Yes.

0. Does that mean that whilst you were standing there people
   had moved into a position behind you and kept on moving
   into a position behind you?   Or are you not able to
   help? - A. I am not certain.

0. You just felt the movement forward? - A. Yes, I just went
   forward.

0. As you said to the Coroner, to be in a situation where
   there was such tight packing of the crowd was entirely
   new to you because you had not stood behind the goal
   before? - A. That’s correct.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q. Mr. Mullee, can I just check timings with you to make
   sure I have it correct?   There was a time when you
   gained the impression that players had come out on to the
   pitch because of cheering from other parts of the ground
   apart from where you were? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. At that time, the time when you understood players were
   coming on to the pitch, you were already trapped on the
   barrier, is that right? - A. Yes.
                                                              48


                                                      C. M. MULLEE


    Q. You were already in distress and discomfort? - A. Yes.

    Q. And people immediately around you were already in
       distress and discomfort? - A. Yes.

    Q. This had built up from a period beginning about a quarter
B      of an hour before the kick-off? - A. That is correct.

                         Further by THE CORONER:

    0 . I think I ought to ask you one other question, because
       the only time we have not tried to verify is the quarter
       to three one.   What makes you confident that this
       happened at quarter to?   Was there anything that sticks
       in your mind that makes you feel that that is the correct
       time? - A. No, I am not absolutely certain.   It is just
       a reasonable estimate, to say about quarter to.

    0 . But you don't actually know precisely? - A. Not
        precisely, no.

    0. It wasn't that you had looked at a clock or your watch or
       anything like that? - A. I cannot remember.

            THE CORONER:     Does anybody want to ask any more
       questions?   No?

            Mr. Mullee, thank you very much indeed,

                    GEOFFREY PHILIP BRIDSON Sworn

                            By THE CORONER:

    Q- You are Geoffrey Philip Bridson? - A. Yes.

    Q. Can vou give me your address? - A.
                   , Lancashire.

       You too are a Liverpool supporter, is that right? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. I think you too   attended the 1988 match? - A. Yes.

    Q. Were in the same terracing or were you somewhere else?      -
       A. No, the same terracing.

    Q. Behind the goal   in 1988? - A. Yes.

    0- Taking 1988 for a moment, what mode of transport did you
       use? - A. By car.

    0 . Do you know what time you arrived in Sheffield in 1988? -
        A. No, I don't remember.




H
                                               G. P. BRIDSON


Do you know what time you got through the turnstiles? -
A. It would be about quarter past two - about.

Did you go straight on to the terracing in 1988? - A.
Yes.

Do you recollect which one you went into?      Did you go
down the tunnel? - A. Yes, we did.

Do you remember which one you went down? - A. Yes, we
went into, I think, pen 3, the one on the right hand
side.

Were you reasonably comfortable in 1988 in that pen? - A.
No, it was very, very crowded - very crowded.

At quarter past or later on? - A. Later on.

What was it like at quarter past when you got in? - A. It
was comfortable.

We are talking about 1988? - A. Yes.      It was full but
comfortable.

When did it begin to become uncomfortable as far as you
are concerned? - A. Well, I think it just went
progressively worse leading up to kick-off time.

How tight were you in 1988 in that pen, at the tightest,
if I can put it like that? - A. Very tight to be very,
very uncomfortable.   So much so that there were people
being pulled up from the terracing up to the stands
behind because it was so uncomfortable.

Fortunately, of course, we know you survived and as far
as I know everybody else did? - A. Yes.

We can leave 1988 now and turn to 1989.     Did you travel
by car again? - A. Yes.

This time I think you went with your friend,
David Rimmer? - A. That's right.

I think you left Skelmersdale at about 10.15? - A. Yes.

You arrived in Sheffield at? - A. Quarter past one.

Quarter past one? - A. Yes.

I think you met somebody at noon initially? - A. We were
supposed to meet another party in another car at Birch
Services at about half past eleven.   They never showed
up.
                                                                    50



                                                        G. P. BRIDSON


    0. So you waited for a little while? - A. We waited and we
       left Birch Services...

    Q. How long did you wait? - A. We waited about three-
       quarters of an hour and we left Birch Services at about
B      midday.

    Q. So in Sheffield, parked at about quarter past one? - A.
       Yes.

    0. How far was that from the ground, about? - A. About half
       a mile or possibly a little bit more.

    Q. Did you go straight to the ground? - A. No, we waited for
       the other car to arrive.

    Q.   What time did they turn up?   - A. About quarter to two.

    0.   So you all set off at quarter to two? - A. No, we had
         some lunch and then we set off for the ground at about
         quarter past two, maybe ten past/quarter past two,
         something like that.

    Q.    What time did you arrive? - A. It would be just before
         half past two.    It is only ten minutes/quarter of an
         hour away.

    Q. So about 2.30? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Just before 2.30? - A. Yes.

    0.   When you got there, just a thumbnail    sketch, what was it
         like? - A. Chaos.

    Q.   Lots of people? - A. Yes.     Once   you actually walked
         through the outer gates...

    Q. The perimeter gates?   The railing gates? - A. Yes, the
       railing gates, those type of gates, it was just a
       seething mass of people.

    Q. What time did you say this was? - A. This was just before
       half past or around half past.

    0. Did you see any stewards on these outer perimeter gates?
       - A. No.

    0. Did you see anybody else patrolling at the outer
       perimeter gates? - A. There were policemen outside the
       gates, if you like on the public highway side, and there
       was a police officer on a horse, which, when we arrived,
       was on the right hand side of where the mass of people
       were.   Having gone through the turnstiles there were




H
                                                         51



                                                 G. P. BRIDSON


     policemen actually stood at the turnstiles facing the
     crowd.

0. Having got through the perimeter gates,do you mean? - A.
   Yes, having gone through, yes.   There were a number of
   people, a number of policemen, but there was nobody
   guiding or manoeuvring people into lines or anything like
   that.   There was no stewarding going on.

Q. The mounted officer, what was he attempting to do, as far
   as you could tell? - A. He was attempting to get the mass
   of people into queues.   He is actually an officer we
   have seen at the matches at Anfield on a number of
   occasions.

Q. He was one of the Merseyside men? - A. Yes.

Q. Was he outside the perimeter gates or inside? - A. He was
   inside.

Q. Was he having any success? - A. Initially no, but what he
   actually did, after we had been there a few minutes he
   used the horse to sort of drive a wedge and to separate a
   number of people who were near the turnstiles from those
   away and there was a clear gangway of about two or three
   feet.   He was attempting to organise the people who were
   nearer to the turnstiles into queues.   A second police
   horse then came and moved this first police horse into
   the crowd and it ended up there was nobody patrolling
   this gap and so the crowd just came together again.

0. So the gap held for a while? - A. Yes.   Once there was
   nobody in it everyone thought, "Well, what are we doing
   stood here?   We'll go forward."   Just literally walked
   and bridged the gap, that is all.

Q. Did you notice whether people were pushing forward at
   that point? - A. Yes, they were.

0.    When I say "pushing forward" I don't mean...    You tell
     me what you mean by "pushing forward"? - A. Well, in
     general terms, when you have got a number of people into
     no queues, it could be maybe twenty people wide and you
     have only seven turnstiles so obviously those people have
     to get together into a queue to get into the turnstiles.
     That element was the pushing.     There were obviously
     people at the back who were gently moving forward.
     There was no weight of people behind you trying to push
     you forward.    It was just a general movement forward.

Q.   You were in this crowd? - A. Yes.
                                                              52



                                                   G. P. BRIDSON


       Were you discomforted in any way at that point? - A. Only
       when we got up close to the turnstiles.   Up until that
       point not really.

    o. What time did you get through the turnstiles? - A. About
B      twenty-five to, twenty to. We were about ten
       minutes/quarter of an hour getting through.

    0. Having got through, where did you go? - A. Because we
       were a member of a party I waited for my friends to come
       through. We then went straight from the gates, the
       turnstiles, through the tunnel and on to the terracing.

    Q. Was that the route you had used the last year? - A. Yes.
    0. As you had been there the previous year, did you know the
       terracing was divided up by radial fences? - A. I don't
       remember.   I don't think I was aware it was segmented
       into such tight compartments.   We knew there was a
       divider down the middle, but I think that was about all.

    Q. This time I think you went to the left? - A. Yes.

    Q- Was that a fluke or a deliberate choice? - A. Just a
       fluke.

    Q. Going down the tunnel you had no problems, I assume? - A.
       No, it was clear.

    Q. When you got on to the terrace this would be what, about
       twenty to? - A. It would be about that.

    Q. Describe to me what it was like then? - A. It was very
       busy then.   We felt we could not go any further forward
       on to the terracing because it was quite full in front of
       us and that we should go to the left where there seemed
       to be a little more space. We moved two or three yards
       to the left, sideways on to the terracing, and maybe just
       a couple of steps down and basically it was full in front
       of us.   There were people behind us. We obviously had
       to push our way and weave our way through people.   It
       wasn't as if it was empty, even then.

    0. I realise that.   What I am trying to find out was were
       you at that point apprehensive? - A. No.

    Q. So it was full but you weren't apprehensive? - A. Oh, no,
       there was no problem.



G




H
                                   G-.P. BRIDSON



Were you still with David Rimmer at that time? - A. Yes.

There may have been other friends as well? - A. That is
right, yes.

How long were you in that position before anything changed?
- A. A few minutes.  I don't recall how long but a few
minutes.

You don't remember whether any events or which one could
link it to? - A. No, there was just a steady influx of
people.

So after a few minutes what happened, what changed.  Tell
me? - A. There was a sort of a movement forward and I was
moved to the left and Dave and other members of the party
went in different directions.  I think Dave went forward
slightly. One or two of the others I think even were
pushed backwards.  It was just as if where we were if you
like was a sort of a fork and some went forward, some were
pushed back.  I just happened to go to the side and we lost
contact with each other then.

Was that in fact when you lost touch with David? - A. Yes,
I did not see him again.

So we will leave David now, we have not actually talked
much about him anyway but up to this point what you have
told me is basically what he would have experienced if he
was near you? - A. Right.

You were actually able to set your stop watch at some point
weren't you? - A. That is correct.

Tell me a little bit about that? - A. It is just habit, I
am afraid.  I have a digital watch and I always set the
stop watch element for kick-off so I can time how long we
have gone etc. and normally wherever we have been in years
gone by I have had no problem in getting my arm up and
setting the watch.   I normally do that as the teams come
out which is five minutes roughly before kick-off. Now
I physically could not get my arms out. They were sort
of jammed by my side it was that tight and I could not get
my arm out to do it at the time I would normally have done
it, so we struggled for a couple of minutes and eventually
I did manage to get my arm out and set the thing.

So this was after the teams were out? - A. Yes.

We have got two times now. We have got the time when the
teams came out. What was it like as far as your personal
perception was? I realise it was crowded? - A. Yes.
                                      G«P. BRIDSON



But what I want to find out is how crowded is crowded now,
try to pin that down? - A. It was getting very uncomfortable
at that point, very uncomfortable.

So when the team comes out it was already very uncomfortable?
- A. Yes, yes.
Had it been very uncomfortable for any period of time prior
to that or was that when the .... A. Yes, it had but I
think it came more to my notice the fact I then could not
get my arms out.

I see, so up to that point although you weren't exactly
happy you weren't ....   A. I was not frightened.

You were very uncomfortable but you weren't particularly
worried? - A. That is reasonable, yes.

Then you managed to set your watch after a moment or two.
- A. Yes.
Did things then change.     Did your perception change? - A.
It just got worse.

It got worse after that? - A. Yes.

Did you see the match     kick off? - A. I did.

Did it get worse then or after that? - A. I think    it was
just a build-up.  I could not say exactly when.

It is difficult. - A. After I had sort of started to set
my watch ready for the kick-off there was a movement to the
left again and so you were sort of in transit and you were
being pushed sideways and sort of forward and it was just
a general, I think, build-up over the next few minutes.

At what point would you say that you became I use the word
apprehensive but you may use any word you wish? - A. I will
use frightened.

Okay frightened? - A. Just after kick-off time, thereabouts
yes.

Did you feel any surges? - A. Not ....

You know what I mean, a sudden pulse? - A. Yes, we are
used to them. No, it was a general sort of movement.

I think you heard people calling for help? - A. Yes.

Can you say firstly in relation to all these various times
that you have been talking about, these calls first became
perceptible to you? - A. Round about the time when they
stopped the match which was 6-minutes-past-3, about that time.
                                                             55


                                            G..P. BRIDSON



    Q. Were these cries or .      A. Yes, and shouts.

    Q. Coming from your immediate vicinity or in front of you?
       - A. In front of me, nearer to the fence than I was, yes.

B   Q. Did you hear   anybody suggest pushing back or anything like
       that? - A. Yes, I certainly tried and others did. There
       was somebody under my feet which we spoke to two or three
       people around me and said:   "Let's try and get back" but
       we couldn't.

    Q. But you couldn't? - A. No.

    Q. What I am trying to find out is whether the message was
       being passed   back? - A. A small way back, yes, but of course
       it then gets   lost in the general noise.

    Q. I see, so in the position you were you weren't able to push
       back? - A. No, no.

    Q. Were you moved from your position that you have been
       describing when you set your watch? - A. Yes, moved sideways
       and forward.

    Q. And further towards the front? - A. Yes.

    Q. And it was really that period that covered the time when
       you became frightened? - A. Yes.

    Q. I think you will have to put two marks on our little plan.
       We have got a plan, you will see it in a moment. Can you
       walk around to the overhead for a moment? Could you put
       a circle and a '1* for your position where you were trying
       to set the stop watch? - A. About there.

    Q. As near as you can.  It is very difficult? - A. It would
       probably be around there somewhere.

    Q. Do it with a circle if you would? - A. No, about there.

    Q. And can you put a cross where you finished up? - A. There.

    Q. Because I think you escaped into the little enclosure at
       the side, didn't you? - A. Yes.

    Q. You did not get right to the front fence then? - A. No.

              MR. BEECHEY:   340 sir.

    Q.         THE CORONER:  In your statement you said you thought
         you got out at about 3.15.  Is that a wild guess or is that
         - A. No, because of the clock.
G




H
                                   GL.P. BRIDSON



You saw that? - A. Yes, not as I literally stepped out
on to the pitch but within a few seconds.

I see, so it is a pretty accurate time? - A. Well reasonably
accurate, yes.

If I can just take 1988 there, I just want you to do a
comparison for me. - A. Right.

If you take the 1988 condition you were in and you were
trying to pick and mark it against the gradient of the 1989
conditions.  Do you understand what I am saying? - A. Right,
I see what you are trying to do, yes.

Where would you say the 1988 and 1989 conditions began to
diverge in the sense of getting worse? - A. In terms of
time do you mean?

Yes, I want you to pick me a time. Was it when the players
came out; was it when you set your stop watch? was it when
the kick-off took place? - A. It was about when we set the
stop watch because we actually said, for the few minutes
we were in contact with each other, that it was just the
same at that point which would be what, quarter-to, 20-to-3.
It was exactly the same as it was the year before.

Hang on. You said you set the stop watch? - A. We set it
at just after 5-to-3, just before 3 o'clock but before we
lost contact with the other people we commented to each
other that the conditions in the ground at that time were
the same as they had been the previous year, so they went
steadily worse from that point and they really got very
much worse as I say after we set the stop watch.

Perhaps I have not quite followed. Give it to me again
just so that I have got this right. You attempted to set
the stop watch when the players came out and you couldn't?
- A. About 5-to, yes.

Then a few moments later you did manage it with a struggle?
- A. Yes.

Then kick-off took place and that is when you became
frightened? - A. Yes.

Up to that point you were very uncomfortable but not
frightened? - A. Not frightened.

Now was it up to that point that it was more or less the
same or had it already got worse? - A. No, it had got worse
than the previous year by that point.

I think you have misunderstood what I am trying to ask
you. What I am trying to find out is whether the severity
                                   G-.P. BRIDSON



of the crush which you felt in 1988 at its height was of
the same intensity as the crush which you felt in 1989 at
the time when you set your stop watch? - A. No it wasn't,
I am sorry, I see what you mean.

It was not as strong? - A. It was not as strong, no.

At what point was the crush equal? - A. I see, I am with
you, between 1988 and 1989.  It would be at may be
quarter-to-3 when we were in contact with each other.

I see, after you lost contact with David Rimmer, when you
said the fork came, so to speak? - A. Yes.

And you would put that at about quarter-to-3? - A. At
about that time, yes.

Obviously it is only approximate that but as it happens
because you had a stop watch you are one of the few people
who .... A. It is just a habit.

Now I don't think - all these ladies and gentlemen may
want to ask questions or they may not, I don't know - I
think rather than rush them and you and everybody else
we will pause for lunch. Could you be back at 2? - A. Yes.

You are on oath. You must not discuss the evidence or
what you are going to say in this hour. Okay? - A. Right.

Because you are still so to speak in the witness box but
we are not locking you up or anything like, just go and
have lunch or whatever you wish to do and if you would be
good enough to be back but please don't talk to anybody
about the evidence.  Okay? - A. Right.

                 (Luncheon adjournment)
                                             J.   P.   BRI'DSON




            Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

You have described your experience in 1988? - A. Yes.

As very tight and very, very uncomfortable? - A. Yes.

You have also told the Jury about your practice of
setting your stop-watch at the beginning of matches? -
A. Yes.

I would like to just put this in context. You are a
regular football supporter, are you? - A. Yes.

Particularly of Liverpool football team? - A. Yes.

At different venues?   - A. Not over the last few years,
but previously yes.

What different venues round the country? - A. Yes,
different grounds.

But recently just at   Anfield?   - A. At Anfield, yes.

So in 1988 you found it very, very uncomfortable, in a
similar sort of position to the one you were in in
1989, similar sort of place on the terrace? - A. On the
other side of the central gate.  I was in Pen 3, is it,
on the right hand side of the goal, in '88.

But in 1989 you were in 4? - A. I was in 4.

Similar in relation to the position behind the goal? -
A. Yes.

In these other matches that you have been to in
different venues round the country, and at Anfield, is
your usual position to stand behind the goal? - A. Yes.

Does it get crowded at other matches as well? - A. Yes,
but not as crowded.

Not as crowded as 1988, you mean? - A. Yes, or '89
obviously.

Quite.  I am mainly interested in 1988, so that was a
bad experience for you, was it? - A. Yes, it was.

Is there an organisation called a Supporters Club?
Liverpool Supporters? - A. Yes, there is.

Are you a member? - A. No.

But it is there to represent the interests of
supporters, is it? - A. I don't know to be honest.          I
                                          J. P. BRIDSOW




know it forms a social function partly. What else it
does I don't know. Maybe it is to inf&rm the fans of
forthcoming games and away travel arrangements, but
other than that I don't know.

But obviously you know that Liverpool has got a
structure of directors and management and so on? - A.
Yes.

Did you mention this 1988 experience to anybody after
the match? - A. No, because nobody listens.

Because nobody listens? - A. No.

You had actually had the experience of being in the pen
when it became very tight so as to become very, very
uncomfortable? - A. Mmm.

So you were in a very good position to report what had
happened? - A. Yes.

Wftat the Jury have been told by other witnesses, and I
have just been looking through their evidence, it is
about six or seven so far, is that in the position
behind the goal quite often it becomes very crowded. -
A. Yes.

And people are shoulder to shoulder and chest to back?
- A. Yes.

You agree with that, do you? - A. Yes.

It is a fair way of describing it? - A. It is the
relative density that is the problem at Hillsborough.

Particularly in 1988 and also then in 1989? - A. Yes.

From the point of view of somebody looking at the
terrace from the outside, that is the terrace behind
the goal, when it is crowded with people shoulder to
shoulder and chest to back, that is what they would
see, people densely packed like that? - A. I would
think so, yes.

You travelled to both these matches, 1988 and 1989, in
company with others, did you? - A. Yes.

Did they have a similar experience to you in 1988? - A.
Yes. There is a group of three, possibly four of us,
and we only now because of family commitments normally
travel to either FA Cup Semi-Finals, Cup Finals, this
type of match. We don t normally now go away to
ordinary league away games.
                                           J. P. BRIDSON




No, big events? - A. The big events, yes, and we have
done that over many years together, so two or three of
us normally have travelled together, Dave Rimmer being
one of them, and we have been to virtually all the big
finals, semi-finals over the last few years, always
together, so we have all experienced the same thing.

Experienced what? - A. The crushing - we were all
together in the '88 semi-final.

How many of you was that? - A. There would be four of
us all together, including Dave Rimmer.

You travelled in the car together in '88 did you? - A.
Yes.

And back together? - A. Yes.

So was this the subject of discussion, that you had all
been very, very uncomfortable? - A. It was more
discussed during the match, or leading up to the match.

Do you know if any of these others made any report to
the Supporters Association? - A. No, I don't think so.

Or the directors of the club or the management? - A.
No, I don't think so.

Or did anything to .... - A. No.

           Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING

In 1988 when the four of you had been together had you
all been at the one same spot? - A. Actually in 1988?

Yes, or had you become separated like occurred to you
in 1989? - A. I don't remember whether all four of us
were all together, but there were maybe two or possibly
three of us together, yes.  I don't know whether we all
stayed together.

Had you all experienced the crushing in 1988? - A. Yes.

Of course, there are spots on the terraces that are
fuller than other spots on terraces? - A. Yes.

As you described on this occasion, you thought you
spotted a position where you could get through and
where there looked to be some space? - A. Yes.

And in the same way as there are positions and
positions, so it is not possible always to tell what is
going on from one place to another.  You did not know
from where you were standing what was going on at the
u                                                                 61


                                                         J. P. BRIDSON




             front of the terrace? - A. No, but normally there is no
             need for people to feel so unsure of where they are
             that they wish to be taken out, which is what happened
             in '88.
    B
        Q. Of course, that was after the quarter-to-3 situation
           when you became frightened about the matter? - A. In
           '88 as well there were people taken out.

        Q. But you had no idea what was going on down at the
           fence? - A. No.

        0. You had no idea what was going on so far as any calling
           was concerned, because you have said that other than
           perhaps two or three people around you, you weren't
           able to get a message in any way? - A. That is correct.

        0. If people had not heard you in the immediate vicinity
           and you had been calling for help, they might not have
           known that you were in difficulty? - A. Yes, that's
           true.

        Q.    So what we have got is a crowd which all the way
             through up to quarter-to-3 or thereabouts is much of a
             muchness from the crowd that you had experienced the
             year before? - A. Mmm.

        Q. A crowd which, although you had been uncomfortable, you
           had gone back into the other  side? - A. Yes.

        Q.   The same position behind the   goal? - A. Yes.

        Q.   Then it got a little worse? - A. A lot worse, yes.

        Q.   But in answer to my learned friend Mr. Payne, from the
             outside perception there was a crowd shoulder to
             shoulder and back to back? - A. Quite possibly, yes.

        Q.   Although you were tight, you did manage at onestage I
             think to get your arm free and actually to then set
             your watch, presumably in that sort of motion with your
             arm in front of you? - A. Yes, actually up in the air.

        Q. Up in the air? - A. Yes.

        Q.    And I hope you did not have to leave it there and you
             managed to get enough space to get it back down again?
             - A. No, it stayed there.




                          /Q. You stayed with




    H
                                                           62


                                                   J. P. BRIDSON


    Q. You stayed with your hand in front of you then? - A.
       Ye s, I couldn't get it back down again.

    Q. Resting   on the person in front of you? -A. Yes,
       resting   on the person in front of me.
B   Q. Which is the sort of position one takes up in a crowd
       of that kind? - A. Not normally, no.  It would be
       normally either arms folded o r ...

    Q. Arms folded? - A. Yes, but through choice rather than
       through not being able to put them down.

    Q. Had you been in that arms folded position before? -
       A. I don't remember.

                     Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

    Q. I do not know whether some of the questions you
       received this afternoon were designed to be a
       criticism that you yourself did not do something
       about uncomfortable overcrowded conditions in 1988
       but tell me this, as a football supporter, would you
       expect those responsible themselves for the policing
       of grounds, for the control of grounds, without
       regard to the views of the spectators, to have regard
       for the safe capacity of the pen? - A. They should
       do.  I would have thought so.

    Q. Do you, as a supporter, rely upon the fact that the
       authorities do have a safe capacity for a pen and
       think about it in advance? - A. Yes.

    Q. Do you yourself, as an ordinary supporter, have any
       control about the numbers being allowed into a pen? -
       A. No.

    Q. Your experience is that of a normal football
       supporter? - A. Yes.

    Q. I want you to tell us again in your own words what it
       was like at twenty to three in 1989 or thereabouts
       when I think you said that you and your colleagues
       mentioned to each other that the conditions were the
       same as 1988? - A. That is correct.

    Q. What was it like at twenty to three in 1989 on those
       terraces? - A. Very, very uncomfortable.  Unless you
       have actually experienced that level of crushing it
       is difficult to explain but it is very, very
       uncomfortable.  You are never still. You are being
       rocked around backwards and forwards. You are trying
       to find your feet on the floor and you are standing
       on other people's feet. Whilst it isn't frightening,
       because I have been watching Liverpool for 25 years,
       it is not very comfortable.




H
                                                       63



                                            J. P. BRIDSON



Q. By the time the teams came out and you wanted to set
   your stop watch, did that pen have room for more
   people to come into it from where you were? - A. I
   wouldn't have thought so, no.

Q. When the teams come out you often get cheering at
   grounds? - A. Yes.

Q. It would be natural for you, as you say, to try and
   move your arm? - A. Yes.

Q. How unusual was it for you not to be able to move
   your arms in the way you have described in 1989? - A.
   That has never happened before.  It is never normally
   a problem.

Q. We know that was somewhere six minutes to three, five
   minutes to three, something like? - A. About five to
   three or thereafter.

              Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Mr. Bridson, do you know if the Police Officers were
   aware of the crushing in 1988? - A. I don't know, I
   am sorry.

Q. I mean by that, would Officers on the pitch in 1988
   be able to observe conditions in the central pens do
   you think? - A. I would have thought so.

              Cross-Examined bv MR. RUSSELL:

Q. As an experienced attender at football matches, can
   you help me with this; before the match kicks off and
   indeed before the players come on to the field, are
   the teams announced? - A. Yes.

Q. When the team is announced, do the supporters of that
   particular team give a cheer for each name as it is
   read out over the tannoy? - A. Normally, yes.

Q. Have you ever known when giving a cheer in saluting
   each name in the team read out over the tannoy that
   supporters punch the air saluting that name and that
   member of the team? - A. Yes.

Q. That is a perfectly normal sight to be seen at
   football grounds up and down the country on the
   terraces? - A. Yes, I would agree.

Q. Do you remember in 1989 the team, the Liverpool team,
   being read out? - A. No.
                                            J. P. BRIDSON


Q. The particular feature of it, you may recall, was
   that it was the first time that Alan Hanson had
   returned to the side, do you remember that? - A. No.

Q. Do you remember any of the people around you punching
   the air at about the time that the teams ran out? -
   A. I don't remember that.

Q. If that did happen that would be a normal sight upon
   a terrace at a big match? - A. Yes.

      MR. PAYNE:   Sir, Mr. King prefaced his questions by
wondering whether the questions which I directed to this
Witness had been intended as a criticism of him and I would
like to make it clear that they were not intended at all to
be a criticism of him but to direct attention to the
conditions which have come to be accepted by all, including
spectators.

     THE CORONER:  Mr. Bridson, I am very grateful to you
for coming. Thank you very much indeed for being here.




                               /ANDREW MICHAEL DODD Sworn
V"
                                                                         65



                                                               A.   M.   DODD



                            ANDREW MICHAEL DODD Sworn

                                 By THE CORONER:

         0. Andrew Michael Dodd? - A. Yes.
     B
         0. What is your address? - A.
            Liverpool 21.

         0.   You are a bank clerk?     - A. Yes.

         Q.    You to the 1989 match in Hillsborough, the semi-final? -
              A. Yes.

         Q. You went with various people, including Gordon Horn, is
            that right? - A. Yes.

         Q. Gordon was a friend of yours and he lost his life
            unfortunately? - A. Yes.

         0. Was that the first semi-final you had been to at
            Hillsborough? - A. Yes, I didn't go in 1988.

         0.   I think you travelled in a mini-bus? - A. Yes.

         Q.   It was a privately organised one, I assume? - A.Yes, it
              was.

         Q. You left at about eleven o'clock in the morning, would
            that be about right? - A. Roundabout that time, yes.

         0. It would be fair to say that on your particular mini-bus
            people did have cans of alcohol with them which they were
            intending to drink? - A. Yes.

         Q. Approximately how many a head, in just round terms? - A.
            Well, me and Gordon we had about half a dozen cans each.

         0. This was for the journey, really? - A. Yes.

         0. I hope the driver didn't have any! - A. Oh, no, he didn't
            have any at all.

         0. You then came to Sheffield? - A. Yes.

         Q. Did you have a reasonable journey? - A. No, it was fairly
            congested on the motorway.   Sometimes it was at a
            standstill.

         0. I think your first stop was at a place called the Silver
            Fox public house? - A. I think it was that name.




     H
                                                                       66




                                                            A.    M.   DODD



    O. Do you know where that was?         Have you any idea? - A.
       It's not far from Sheffield.         I have no idea, really,
       where it is.

    Q.    You were in what I would call the Sheffield conurbation?
B        You had finished the journeyapart from    the last little
         bit? - A. Yes.

    Q. As far as you were concerned.   Do you know approximately
       what time you arrived there? - A. At the Silver Fox?

    0. Yes. - A. I am not sure.         It was after lunchtime.

    0,. Uhat is lunchtime?   Twelve?   One? - A. It was after
        twelve.   I am not sure exactly what time.

    0. It must have been a bit later than that. - A. Yes, it was
       later than that.

    Q.   You went in there? - A. Yes.

    0.   You had a bit more to drink?    - A. Yes.

D   Q. A couple of pints? - A. Two.

    Q.   Then you carried on towards Hillsborough?      - A. Yes.

    0.   Do you know what time you left the Silver Fox? - A. I
         don't know exactly but we were on the road it must have
         been less than half an hour - half an hour, something
         like that.

    0. So the journey time took about half an hour from the
       Silver Fox? - A. Yes.

    0.   Were you stopped by police? - A. Yes, we were.       We were
         pulled over to one side.  The van was checked       for any
         alcohol and they found four cans of lager.

    Q.   They made you fling those away? - A. Yes,      they took them.

    Q.   Then they let you carry on? - A. Yes, they put     a sticker
         on our mini-bus.

    Q. You had a ticket? - A. Yes.

    Q. Do you recollect whether the police asked whether you had
       tickets, just out of interest? - A. I cannot really
       remember.   I'm sorry, I honestly cannot remember.

    Q.   That's all right. What time did you then arrive at the
         ground? - A. Well, we parked the mini-bus up.   It was
         about between quarter past and twenty past two.
                                                                   67




                                                         A.   M.   DODD



    Q. That is when you parked? - A. Yes.

    Q. It was very close, wasn't it? - A. It was a couple of
       hundred yards away from the ground.
B   Q.   So you were lucky really? - A. Yes.

    0.   Do you know the road you were in? - A. No, not really.

    0. Did you then make your way to the ground? - A. Yes.

    Q. You and Gordon stayed together? - A. Yes.

    Q. The rest of them went off somewhere else? - A. Well, some
       had stand tickets.

    Q. You then walked towards the ground.   You weren't
       carrying any cans at that time? - A. No.

    Q. Because they had all been taken off you, or finished? -
       A. No, not all.   There were four cans taken off us.

    0. So all the rest had been drunk and disposed of somewhere
       else? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you see anybody when you were walking to the ground
       carrying cans? - A. I can't remember that.

    0.   Did you see anybody who was acting in a boisterous or
         unruly manner? - A. Not unruly.   There was singing.           As
         we were getting near to the ground you could hear
         chanting, singing.

    Q. So it was more exuberance you would say? - A. Yes, you
       know, a party mood.

    0. That's a good expression.   You got to the ground at
       about what time? - A. We were only a couple of hundred
       yards away from the ground so we were at the ground at
       twenty-five past two.

    0. Perhaps I ought to ask you this because if I don|t it
       leaves a big question mark.    You had two pints in the
       Silver Fox yourself? - A. Yes.

    Q. How many cans did you have on the journey, you yourself?
       - A. I must have drunk my six.

    Q. These were pint cans or halves? - A. Normal sized cans.

    Q. Normal sized cans, whatever that might be.     You got then
       to Leppings Lane at 14.25? - A. Yes.




H
                                                                 68




                                                      A.    M.   DODD



Q. What was it like? - A. When we got there it was pretty
   crowded.   Quite a lot of people there.

0.   Were these people in the roadway and in the area?   Have
     you ever been to the ground before? - A. I have never
     been to the ground before, no.

0. Can you remember some perimeter gates with railings on
   them?   They looked like park gates. - A. I think they
   were to the right hand side.    I am not sure.

0.   Can you remember them? - A. Not really.

0.   Turn round and look at the model.    Can you remember
     those?   Do you want to go and look at them so you can
     see them a bit better? - A. Yes.

0. I am just trying to locate you. - A. Not really, it was
   quite crowded.   It was quite crowded there, I can't
   really picture what gates were where.

Q. I am not asking what gates you entered... - A. I'm sorry,
   what fences, where I actually was?   I haven't actually
   been there before.

Q. What I am trying to find out is this: were you held up
   in your attempt to get into the ground? - A. Oh, yes.

Q. Where were you held up?   That is what I am trying to
   find out. - A. Well, put it this way, I didn't make it to
   the gates, where you put your ticket in the turnstiles.
   I never made it to there.   There were too many people
   there.

0.   Does that ring a bell? - A. Yes.

Q.   Were those the gates where you were held   up?    Or
     beyond? - A. Round that area, yes.

0. The reason why I ask you is - can you see? - A. Yes, I
   can see clearly now.

0. The reason why I am asking you is because in your
   statement you refer to these gates and you...   I will
   read you the sentence:

          "Myself and Colin joined the mass on the pavement
          outside the first blue rail gates..."

     A. I'm sorry, who is Colin?    "Myself and Colin..."         I
     think that is a mistake.   It should beGordon.

Q.   It is Andrew Michael Dodd? - A. Yes.
                                                  A.   M.   DODD



We have got "Colin" in the transcript.    Have we got the
original?   It might be a typing error.    It should be
Gordon? - A. It should be Gordon, yes.




          HR. ISAACS:   Is this Gordon Robinson
                                                            70

                                          A.M. DODD



         MR. ISAACS:     Is this Gordon Roberts sir?

         THE CORONER:     Gordon Horne.

Q. Yes, what it says is:

         "Myself and Gordon joined the mass on the
         pavement outside the first blue rail gates
         which were shut."

   A. Yes.
Q. I am not trying to catch you out or anything, we are just
   to find out what happened that is all. Do you understand
   me? - A. Yes.
Q. Can you think back now, can you recollect whether the
   gates were shut in the first place or not? - A. Honestly
   no I can't remember because as I say it is a while back
   now.
Q. But would you feel if you said that in your statement when
   you gave this statement, whatever date it   was, 31st May 1989,
   was your recollection clear then about that? - A. I must
   admit after Hillsborough I did feel a bit, for a while I
   was upset like and I don't know.  I can't actually remember
   whether the gates were open or closed you know.

Q. Fair enough, but you do remember that you      were held up,
   that there was a crush? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you remember a Police horse anywhere near you? - A. Yes.

Q. Tell me about the Police horse, at least the Policeman on
   the horse? - A. There was more pressure from behind as
   more people started joining on the crowd from behind.
   Things were getting a bit, you know, pushing and shoving
   and I ended up, well me and Gordon ended up by a Police
   horse and I was pushed against it and I got a bit frightened
   you know, I thought it was going to kick. Then we made our
   way away from there from the Police horse.

Q. Did you form any     impression what the horse was doing there.
   Can you remember     whether it was facing you or broadways on
   or which way was     it to you? - A. Well I was pushed up
   against the back     of the horse.

Q. How severe was the pressure on you when that was happening?
   - A. Well I was kind of, it was mentioned before there was
   a gap with the horse, the horse made a gap and everyone
   stopped, but everyone was keeping on pushing from behind
   so that gap was soon filled in and I was one of the people
   at the front of the gap so there was nothing I could do.
                                                              71

                                         A.M. DODD



Q. So you were being pushed forward you say? - A. Well you
   say "pushed", there was a constant you know.

Q. Did you attempt to shout to supporters to ask them to stop
   pushing? - A. Yes, that is a common thing:  "Stop pushing"
   and all that. Everyone says that, yes.

Q.   That occurred? - A. Yes.

Q.   But that did not have any effect   either? - A. Oh no,   not
     at all.

Q. Had you been in that sort of situation before where you
   were being pushed and pummelled outside the ground? - A.
   You always get pushed and shoved at a football match, it
   is part of going.  You know, walking out of the ground,
   walking into the ground.

Q. I see, are you saying that is part of the fun of it? - A.
   No, it is not fun, it is not fun at all.

Q. It is just part of the experience? - A. Yes.

Q. Having been held up for a while what happened then? - A.
   Well we were just like in the crowd milling about still
   rather being pushed from here and there but me and Gordon
   kept hold of each other's jumpers and then there was a gate
   which was opened I do recall.

Q.   A big gate? - A. Yes, a big blue one and we all like
     streamed in there, you know just like with the constant
     pressure hands on the person's shoulders in front so you
     did not fall over.

Q. Was that a big blue gate which is behind where that white
   van is. Just have a look? Is that the one you are talking
   about? - A. That one.

Q. Or can't you remember? - A. All I remember was a gate
   open and I went through, that is all.

Q. When you got through the gate what was the first     thing
   you saw, what was the most noticeable thing that     you
   noticed inside? - A. The people in front of me.      You are
   just concentrating on not falling over, you know     what I
   mean?

Q. You saw the people in front of you and where did you go?
   - A. Well wherever they went I went, you could not get
   out of the throng.

Q. Did you go into a tunnel at all? - A. Yes, went through
   the tunnel.
                                                            72

                                         A,.M. DODD



Q. Did you see the tunnel when you went through the gate or
   not? - A. Not really no.

Q. So you are saying you were in such a crowd and the crowd
   was streaming so fast that you really had to go with them?
   - A. Oh no we going at pretty like not fast but not slow
   either you know.

Q.   So you weren't running or anythinglike that,     youwere
     just moving? - A. Yes, moving.

Q.    But there were so many people about thatyou could    not see
     where you were going? - A. Yes.

Q. And you just followed wherever they went? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you look at your watch at that time? - A. Well when
   I was outside, before we went in at that blue gate I had
   a look at my watch and that was about just before 5-to,
   5-to-3.

Q. Did you see the gate open or did you see it when it was
   open? - A. I saw it when it was open.

Q. So you never saw it open itself? - A. No.

Q. When you looked at your watch was it 5-to or was it
   10-to-3? - A. I must admit it was just before 5-to I remember
   looking at my watch.

Q. Are you sure? - A. Yes.

Q. The statement says   10-to-3. That is the reason why I am
   asking you.  It is   an important point actually. Tell me
   what you now think   the correct time is, was rather? - A.
   Which, when we did   go through the gate?

Q. When you looked at your watch? - A. Oh, when I looked at
   my watch.  I looked at my watch several times before we
   went in.

Q. What I am interested in is just before you went through
   this big gate what   time was it when you looked?- A. Well
   I didn't look at my watch as I went through thegate, you
   know.

Q. Well when did you look before you went through the gate?
   - A. Just before 5-to-3.

Q. Okay, that is good     enough, and you and Gordon were still
   holding on to each     other? - A. Yes, yes.

Q. So you realised that kick-off was getting closer of course.
   You knew what time kick-off was? - A. 3 o'clock.
                                                           73


                                         A-M. DODD



q . Did it make any difference to the way you and the other
     spectators were reacting to the situation? - A. Well me
     and Gordon we said:  "It is going to be kick-off time soon,
     so I hope we get in like".

Q. Did you hear anybody else say anything like that? - A.
   I didn't really listen to anyone else in the crowd.

Q. Once you had got through the big blue gate, right, got it,
   you told me that you were in a stream of people which were
   walking fast but not running but there was sufficient people
   about that you could not see where you were going and that
   you really had to follow the crowd.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Could you have turned round and left that stream at that
   point? - A. No.

Q. Could you have stepped to one side and taken a breathei; to
   go to the toilet, to do anything like that? - A. Not really
   because me and Gordon were in the middle of it.

Q. I see, we now want to get to the tunnel, okay. You got to
   the tunnel, what was the tunnel like? - A. Very dark and it
   sloped down towards the end.

Q. And how many supporters were in it, how full was it? - A. It
   was full.

Q. When we say "full" do you mean it was jam packed so that
   you could not move or that there were just a lot of people
   all of whom were walking like you have described? - A. Well
   it was full and people were moving forward, yes.

Q. They were moving? - A. Yes.

Q.    Were theymoving touching    each other or were they moving
     with steps in between them? - A. You know as I said before
     I had my hands on this bloke in front of me so I didn't
     fall over.    I had hold of Gordon as well, Gordon had hold
     of me, you know.

Q. I see, so that is the way you were advancing anyway through
   the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. Did the speed of the crowd pick up? - A. It remained
   constant.

Q.   The slope didn't make any   difference then? - A. It was not
     that much of a slope, you   could feel yourself walking down.

Q. You are sure that the speed, pace didn't accelerate? - A.
   Well where I was it didn't.
                                                       74

                                      A.M. DODD



Q. It did or it didn't? - A. It didn't, it remained the same.

Q. Again I am pressing you on it because you said the speed,
   "as we entered the terrace had gone to a faster pace" you
   say, now you don't remember that? - A. I can't really
   remember no. All I can remember is going through the tunnel
   and getting to the terrace.

Q. Okay, you have got out of the tunnel and you have got the
   terrace. Can you remember whether you went left or right?
   - A. I went left, well we went left.

Q. Both of you, Gordon and you? - A. Yes.

Q. What was happening on the pitch when you got out of the
   tunnel? - A. I could not really see the pitch, I will be
   honest with you.

Q. So you don't know whether the players were on it, whether
   the game had started? - A. Well when I eventually ended
   up on the terrace, when me and Gordon ended up on the
   terrace, you could see if you looked round the players
   were on the pitch.

Q. Were the players on the pitch as soon as you got on to the
   terrace or later on? - A. Well it was not till I assumed
   my place on the terrace that I noticed the players.

Q. So tell me then in your words what happened. You came out
   of the tunnel and what happened? - A. Came out of the tunnel,
   took a left, ended up on the terrace which was really, you
   know compact, and swaying to and fro.  I thought:   "Aye, aye,
   here we go again" the usual big match crowd but things
   seemed to get worse.  It was more and more tighter.

Q. How long did it take you to take up your match viewing
   position? - A. Well you could not really because you were
   getting swaying from one side to the other.

Q. But at some point you said you did notice the players.
   I am trying to find out at what point you noticed the
   players? - A. As soon as I took up my place on the
   terrace, you know your head up you look on the pitch.

Q. In other words as soon as you entered the terrace you
   could see the players? - A. Yes.

Q. They were on the pitch. They must have been otherwise
   you could not have seen them. Were they playing? - A. I
   could not really tell because you know I was getting
   jostled about but I don't think they were to be honest.

Q. Do you go to big matches regularly? - A. I used to, I
   don't now.
                                                       75


                                      A.M. DODD



Q. Prior to this event did you go? - A. Not regular, I used
   to go when I could.  I used to work Saturdays.

Q. You refer to the fact that "Here we go again" big match
   atmosphere.  Had you been in this sort of experience before
   then? - A. Yes, I have been to football matches before.
   I have been in big crowds which were really tight, you know.
   On one occasion I lost my shoe, found it in the front of
   the terrace.  I have had that happened a few times.




                            Q. Not on this occasion
                                             A.   M.   DODD




Not on this occasion, these are other occasions which
you are talking about? - A. Yes.

So when you got onto the terrace, are you saying that
the position, you had been in this experience before? -
A. As I say, I have been to matches before and I have
been in a tight crowd, yes.

The difference here was that it then started getting
worse? - A. Yes, that's the difference.

What I am trying to find out is when did it begin to
get worse as compared to experiences which you had had
before? Can you tell me, how long had you been on the
terrace? - A. It was a matter of minutes.

Moments, you say? - A. Yes, moments.

When you say moments, do you mean minutes or seconds? -
A. In a minute or two it started getting really bad.

When it was getting worse, was it a constant pressure?
Was it just gently pressing on and on and on, or was it
a pulsed pressure - in other words was it surges? - A.
There was a lot of swaying in the crowd and as you were
swaying more and more it seemed to get more tighter.

Is it common on a terrace to sway.  I don't know if I
have ever been on a terrace so I can't say, but is it a
normal thing to sway on a terrace? - A. Yes and no. If
you are singing or cheering on your team, yes, but if
you are just standing there, no.

Can you remember whether that was happening, whether
there was singing and cheering? - A. All I could hear
was the crowd.  I was concentrating on getting my
footing.

At what point did you lose sight of Gordon? - A. We
were together, we were holding on to each other's
jumper sleeve, and I saw a gap, it just appeared and I
decided to go under a barrier, you know, to get nearer
to the front, to see if I could get out of the crush
any more, so I turned round, as I got under the barrier
I turned round and Gordon just went to the left.  I
always remember he was shouting my name as he went.   I
didn't see him go down, he just went and I lost sight
of him. That was it, that was the last time I seen
him.

Did you see the match kick off at all? - A. I did not
see the match kick off, no.
                                                               76B



                                                    A.    M.   DODD




    Q. Did you know whether it had kicked off at all? - A. I
       honestly don't know that.

    Q. So you can't say precisely when this was, just sometime
B      after .... - A. It was several minutes after we entered
       the ground.

    Q. By this time you had found this little gap and that is,
       in fact, what caused the separation.  Did you get up
       onto a barrier or did you miss it? - A. What do you
       mean by getting on?

    Q. Did you hit the barrier?  I think you said that you saw
       a barrier and you saw a gap - perhaps I misunderstood
       you. - A. No, we were standing by a barrier at first,
       and when you see a barrier, like underneath this table,
       I went underneath the barrier and went in front of the
       barrier, and I thought Gordon would have followed me
       but he didn't.

    Q. That is when you lost Gordon, in fact? - A. Yes.

    Q. Was it any better on the other side of the barrier,
       having got underneath and up again? - A. For a few
       seconds and then it just reverted back to normal again.

    Q. Then I think you saw several people around you who
       obviously looked very distressed, that's right, isn't
       it? - A. Yes, I made my way down to the front.

    Q. How did you do that? - A. I don't know, honestly.

    Q. Do you recollect whether you made your way or whether
       you were pushed? I don't mean pushed in the sense that
       somebody was deliberately pushing you, I just mean
       whether in fact you went voluntarily or involuntarily?
       - A. I ended up at the front due to the swaying of the
       crowd, plus myself pushing my way to the front. When I
       say pushing, I don't mean pushing people, just going
       through the crowd.  I was looking for Gordon as well
       and couldn't find him.  I ended up right near the front
       fence.

    Q. What was happening on the pitch at that point, do you
       know? - A. I don't really know.

    Q. What was happening at the front fence, if anything? -
       A. By the time I got to the front fence a few people
       were shouting, "Move back, move back".  I started
       shouting as well because by this time I was pretty
       crushed.  I had one hand up on the fence like that and
       one hand by my side.




H
                                                          77


                                                   A. M. DODD




Q. So you were right on the fence? - A. Well, I had one
   hand on the fence. There was about two people in front
   of me.

0. You and others were shouting, "Move back"? - A. Yes.

Q. Of course, it was impossible for you to move back,
   wasn't it? - A. Totally, yes.

Q. How did you get out? - A. People started shouting.
   There was a Police Officer, sorry a Police Constable
   and a lady Policewoman by the front behind the goal,
   and people were shouting to them, "Open the gate",
   because there was a little gate just to the right of
   me. "Open the gate", and I seen them open the gate and
   people, they were actually pulling people out because
   it was that compact, people could not just walk out
   they had to be pulled out, so I ended up making my way
   to the gate and I got pulled out by the Police lady.

0.   The gate was on your right? - A.   Yes.

Q.   And the Police Officers who were being called, you say
     they were near the goal, is that right? - A. Yes.

0.   But you don't know, you could see them, but you have
     told me already you don't know what was happening
     behind that goal, whether there was play or no play -
     you can't remember? - A. To be honest with you I was
     not interested in what was happening on the pitch.

Q. I realise that, it is just that it is ever so useful to
   know, but if you don't know you don't. - A. I think the
   game was going on. The game was going on.

Q. But you aren't sure? - A. Well, I would say the game
   was going on, yes.

Q.   Had you seen the gate open before or was this the only
     time you saw the gate open? - A. Which, the one behind
     the goal?

Q.    Yes, the one that you escaped out of in the end? - A.
     Yes, it was opened, I did see it open.

Q. Sorry? - A. I did see the gate open.

Q. But did you see it open and shut or did you see it open
   and then people were being pulled out? - A. Open and
   people being pulled out.

Q. And that was that, it stayed open after that?     Once you
   saw it, it stayed open? - A. I think so, yes.
                                              A.   M.   DODD




Were there people on the perimeter track already by
this point? - A. I don't really know.

You can't remember? - A. I remember seeing the odd one
or two people trying to stand, and the fence at the
front, the main fence, some people were standing on
that, probably to get out of the crush.  I don't know
if there was any people.  I must have been one of the
first people out, first in the first couple of hundred
people out anyway.

So you weren't in the ground very long, were you? - A.
No, I wasn't.

Did you see anybody climb over the fences? - A. I seen
people standing on the fences, yes.

What happened to them? - A. I don't really know.

You don't know whether they had been pulled over or
pushed back or anything like that? - A. I can't
remember to be honest with you.

It is difficult for you to remember, isn't it? - A.
Yes.

Could you help us? I would like you to put a circle in
the position where you lost Gordon, where you ducked
underneath, and put a cross in the position on the
perimeter fence where you finished up, where you had
your arm on the fence, do you remember? - A. Yes.
(The witness marked and signed Exhibit 341)

             Cross-Examined by MR. HALE

I want to ask you a couple of questions, and the
Coroner has probably assured you already that no one is
trying to trap you or anything of that nature here, we
are just trying to establish certain facts. The
questions I want to ask you now do not imply any
criticism either of your or of anyone else. We have
certain figures and I want to try to relate those
figures to the actual situation. You have told us what
you had to drink. You had two pints, I think, at the
Silver Fox, and probably half a dozen cans on the
coach. Now Gordon was with you, did he drink in any
way similarly to you, or did he have   more or   less? -A.
When we were on the minibus I was sitting next to
Gordon and he did have some cans.

Do you think he had more or less the   same as  you? -A.
I don't really know.  I mean he bought the same amount
as me - I don't know whether he drank them all or not.
                                               A. M. DODD




Did he have anything to drink in the Silver Fox when
you did? - A. Yes, I bought him two pints.

He had two pints as well? - A. Yes.

What sort of a man was Gordon, was he of your size or
was he bigger or smaller? - A. He was the same build as
me, maybe a little bit stockier.

            Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

At just before 5-to-3 you went through the gate with
your hands on the shoulders of the person in front,
right? - A. Well, one hand on the shoulder. Me and
Gordon were holding on to each other.

Were other people round about you also holding onto
others in the crowd? - A. Yes, I had hands on my back
from the person behind me.  It was really tight walking
in.

Sorry? - A. When we were walking into the ground it
wasn't crushed but people were together walking.

You could see the person ahead of you.    What could you
see ahead of that? - A. Not a lot.

Other people? - A. Yes, more people.

Were you worried about falling over? - A. Yes, of
course I was*

Sorry, we weren't there so we have to rely on what you
say. Can you explain that? - A. Yes, I was really
worried.

Explain that to the Jury, explain why. - A. In case I
fell over.

Yes, but why? - A. Because you have got a job getting
back up, that's why, in a situation like that.

I don't want to suggest things to you, I want you to
give the evidence, do you understand? - A. Yes.

If you had fallen over what did you think was going to
happen to you? - A. I could say that I could have got
trampled all over.  I could say that but I don't really
know what would have happened, you know.

You, went straight across the space and into the
tunnel? - A. Yes.
                                                            80


                                                     A. MI DODD


    Q. Because you could not go anywhere else? - A. Yes, I
       was with the crowd. I was going where they were
       going.  I couldn't get out of that crowd.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:
B   Q. Mr. Dodd, can I just take you back to when you set
       off? About what time would it have been that
       morning? - A. The time we set off was around eleven
       or just before eleven, something like that.

    Q. There were ten of you? - A. Round about that number.
       I didn't know everyone on the minibus.

    Q. Did you all have something to drink? - A. The
       majority of us. The person who was driving didn't.

    Q. But you certainly had half a dozen cans yourself? -
       A. Round about that figure, yes.

    Q. Was that lager, beer? - A. It was lager.

    Q. You had drunk that by the time you had got to the
       Silver Fox? - A. Yes.
D   Q. Which was just after twelve o'clock? - A. I would say
       just after.  It must have been after that, yes.  It
       was after twelve.

    Q. I think you told the Coroner that it was about
       lunchtime that you had got to the Silver Fox? - A.
       Yes, about lunchtime.

    Q. I think we established that as being about twelve
       o'clock? - A. It must have been after twelve.  It was
       after twelve.  It wasn't around twelve.

    Q. How long after, can you help us? - A. I don't really
       know.  I wouldn't like to say.

    Q. You were there and we were not and we need to rely on
       you to help us with this evidence? - A. Yes.   I will
       be honest with you.  I don't really know what time we
       got there.

    Q. In any event, you had drunk your six cans from eleven
       o'clock to the time you had got there? - A. Yes.

    Q. You had another couple of pints whilst you were
       there? - A. Yes.

    Q. Being as fair as you can - and I do not want to
       criticise you at all - how do you think the amount of
       alcohol you had consumed had affected your judgement
       from time onwards? - A. Do you mean was I drunk?




H
                                                            81


                                                        A . MI DODD


    Q. No, I am asking you, having had that amount to drink,
       how far you think it affected your judgement, your
       ability as to make decisions as to whether to go this
       way, whether to go that way, whether to take notice
       perhaps of what people were saying? - A. I don't
       know.
B
    Q. You had had quite a bit to drink in a pretty short
       space of time.   Do you think it did affect your
       judgement? - A. I was feeling happy and feeling
       merry.  I don't know about my judgement.   I don't
       know.  I felt all right.

    Q.   It seems from what you are telling us that you were
         one of the last people into the ground before the
         kick-off and perhaps one of the first people out of
         this pen? - A. Yes.

    Q. So you came in at the back and ended up going out the
       front? - A. Yes, I did.

    Q.    From what you are telling us, and correct me if I am
         wrong, in the evidence you are giving is that it was
         not only because you were being pushed that way by
D        the crowd behind you but you actually made moves
         towards the front, do you follow me? - A. Yes.

    Q. Had you had much to eat that day? - A. I had had a
       big breakfast before I went out.

    Q. But at lunchtime at the Silver Fox, not much to
       eat? - A. A few bags of crisps.

    Q. That is all? - a . Yes.

    Q. You see, you had had six cans? - A. Oh,   we had loads
       of sandwiches on the minibus as well.

    Q. You had had six cans, a couple of pints, and you had
       had a couple of bags of crisps at lunchtime and the
       sandwiches on the bus? - A. Yes.

    Q. You come out of the tunnel and you tell us you were
       looking to take up a position to watch the game from.
       Before you got out of the tunnel where were you
       hoping to stand? - A. I don't really know.  I hadn't
       been to the ground before and so I didn't really know
       the ground off by heart or anything but I like to
       stand just to either side of the      goal.

    Q. Not right behind the goal    because you would get the
       net in the way but just to the side? - A. Yes, just
       to the side so that you can see.

    Q. What about halfway from the back to the front? - A.
       Yes, somewhere in the middle, yes.




H
                                                           82



                                                        A. Ml DODD



    Q . Because you see you said to the Coroner thatwhen   you
        came out of the tunnel you took a left and you could
        not really take up your match viewing position and I
        got the impression from that that you had an idea in
        your mind where you wanted to get to? - A. Not
B       really, no.

    Q. What you have just told us is that that sort of
       position, just to one side of the goal, was the sort
       of place you would have liked to have been able to
       stand? - A. That is where I would have liked to have
       stood, y e s .

    Q. Did you make your way towards there despite the
       number of people who were in the pen? - A. No, I was
       too busy stopping myself, as you say, falling over
       but after I lost      Gordon, looking for Gordon.

    Q. That came a   bit later, did it not? - A. Yes.

    Q. That did not happen when you came from the tunnel? -
       A. No, I was too busy, as you say, watching my
       footing and not wanting to fall over.
D   Q. Were there not people either side of you who would
       have stopped you falling over? - A. At that time you
       do not think about that. You just worry, you know
       what I mean? It is hard to explain.

    Q. Am I right in getting the impression that when you
       came through the tunnel you actually moved towards
       the place where you wanted to be? - A. I had no
       choice.  I had to go to the left. There was no way I
       could have gone to the right.  I had to stream where
       the crowd was going.

    Q. Then you saw a gap in front of the barrier that you
       were close to and you got under the barrier? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. From there you actually made your way down to the
       front? - A. I would not say "made my w a y " . How can I
       describe it? With all the swaying, pushing, shoving
       and constant pressure I ended up at the front and I
       half moved, well, I attempted to get to the front as
       well.

    Q. Before you said that you were pushing your way
       through and then you said that by that you meant
       going through the crowd.  Is that what you tried to
       do? - A. Slipping in between people like that.

    Q. So you were moving between people? - A. Yes, but not
       very well.




H
                                                             83


                                                         A. M: DODD


    Q. You were successful because you got to where you
       wanted to go. Did you not hear people saying, "Don't
       push forwards. Go back"? Did you hear anyone saying
       anything like that? - A. Everyone was doing the same
       thing as me.
B   Q. Trying to push forward? - A. Trying to find a bit of
       space for themselves.

    Q. When you are behind the goal you expect to be pretty
       crushed, do you not? - A. As I say, I have been to
       matches before and you expect that kind of thing but
       not that bad.

                     Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING;

    Q. The impression generally that you had about this
       match up to that very last time was that this was an
       experience which was not very different from the sort
       of experience that you had had in the past at big
       matches? - A. As I say     I have been in situations
       before at other big matches where I have been tightly
       compact but this one was much worse.   My breathing
       became more difficult as well.
D   Q.   That was eventually? - A. Yes.

    Q.    But when you got out on to the terrace from the
         tunnel and you had gone through this difficult
         experience of making sure you did not fall and
         whether it was because you feared you might get
         trampled on, or whatever conclusion the Jury draws
         from that, the fact of the matter is that you were
         being careful to tag on to your friend and hold on to
         the chap in front of you. You got into the tunnel,
         you saw the crowd on the terrace and your immediate
         impression was, "Here we go again.    It is another one
         of those big type crowds"? - A.    Yes, but not happily.
         It was a bit worrying actually.

    Q. You do not like being crushed? - A. Who does?      No one
       does.

    Q. Exactly. You are used to being tightly compacted
       standing in a big crowd at a big match somewhere just
       behind the goal.

    Q. I would not say "used to". You expect that at all
       big games, if you know what I mean.

    Q. You expect it at big games. The swaying of the crowd
       you expect at all big games. You probably expect it
       at some smaller games but at all big games? - A. Yes,
       going back everyone sways especially when they score.

    Q. Particularly when they score? - A. Yes.




H
Q. It is part as well of the pre-match before the actual
   kick-off when the teams are called out. People
   happily hear the names of their teams, people sing
   songs and the crowd sways? - A. Yes.

Q . Y e s . I do not think I am asking you questions that
    probably everybody does not know about or at least
    have seen about, is that fair? You said yourself if
    there weren't singing or chanting then they are
    swaying? - A. The swaying was mostly to find footing
    and with people pushing from behind as well but to
    put it bluntly it was pretty scary.    It was not the
    usual stuff, if I can put it that way.

Q. You decided then that you would look for another
   spot? - A. Yes, to try and get out of feeling like
   that.  I felt a bit uneasy.

Q. You could hear some people saying not to push? - A.
   That was later on when I was nearer to the front.

Q. You had not been able to hear anybody saying that
   from where you were originally? From the circled
   position where you were to start with before you went
   under the barrier, you had not heard anybody saying
   then not to push? - A. Well, yes, I must have because
   everybody was saying, "Get off.  Stop pushing", like,
   that is part and parcel of it.

                   Cross-Examined bv MR. KING

Q. Mr. Dodd, can you help us? You were aware of the big
   blue concertina gate being opened or simply seeing it
   opened. Did you actually see it opening or just
   merely opened, the one you went through into the
   ground? - A. Put it this way, one minute I was
   standing there and the next minute everyone was going
   through the gap which wasn't there before.

Q. Were you in the middle of the crowd going through or
   would you say you were relatively near the front of
   it? - A. I would say I was in the middle.

Q.    There were people then coming up behind you following
     you through the big concertina gate? - A. Yes.

Q.    We know - and I will tell you this, Mr. Dodd - that
     it was open for some five minutes this gate and so I
     am trying to find out from your evidence at what
     stage you probably went through. . Go back to before
     you were conscious of the gate being opened or just
     before then. Where were you positioned? Where were
     you? Were you waiting at the turnstiles? - A. No, I
     wasn't near the turnstiles.
                                                          85


                                                     A. M. DODD


    Q. Where were you? - A. There were too many people.  I
       must have been round about forty yards or more from
       the turnstiles.

    Q. Let me see if I can help you. Have a look at C.258
       if you will. You see that that shows the turnstiles.
B      There should be a photograph in front of you, Mr.
       Dodd? - A. Yes, I have it.

    Q. You see it shows the turnstiles with big letters over
       it on the front, do you see that on the photograph? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. Do you see there is a barrier which is running down
       the middle of the barrier between the big perimeter
       gates and the turnstiles and there is a van on the
       photograph? Before you noticed the gate being
       opened, can you help us from that photograph where
       roughly you might be on the photograph? - A. I was in
       between the white van and I must have been in between
       that white van and the main gate running across the
       front.  I must have been in that vicinity.

    Q. In that vicinity? - A. Yes.
D




                                     /Q.   So you were.




H
X                                                                       86



                                                              A.   M.   DODD



        0.   So you weren't actually in the area waiting    for the
             turnstiles? - A. I think everyone was making   their way
             towards the turnstiles.

        Q. It's all right, I have got the picture where you were.
    B      You had to move the distance you have described to the
           big concertina gate to get through it, obviously? -A.
           Yes, I must have done.

        0. About forty yards you thought.     One moment it was not
           open, the next mo me nt it was, that is the picture you
           paint? - A. Yes.
        Q. It may be - it is pure speculation - that you were going
           through not long after it had first been opened.   That
           is what I am trying to discover.   Let me go on.   You go
           through that big concertina gate, all right?   You are
           with the crowd.   You are following the crowd.   As you
           get through that big concertina gate were you conscious
           of any stewards around? - A. No, I didn't see any.

        Q. Were you conscious of any police officers around? - A.
           Only the one on the horse.
    D   Q.    Only the one on the horse? - A. Yes.      When I was in the
             crowd earlier on, I remember seeing myself on the
             television later on on the news that night.      There was
             myself and Gordon next to me.     Behind me was a policeman
             - I don't know whether he was an Inspector or something,
             he had a peaked cap.     He was right next to the in the
             crowd outside.

        0. This is outside? - A. Outside, yes.

        0. I am talking now about your going through the concertina
           gate and you have to cross the big concourse to where the
           tunnel is and you have described how you were in the
           crowd.   Did you notice any police officers as you were
           crossing the big area before you reached the tunnel? - A.
           I didn't notice.

        Q. You found yourself going through the tunnel? - A. Yes, I
           ran through the tunnel.

        0. It follows from that you didn't notice anybody trying to
           stop anybody else from going down the tunnel? - A. I
           didn't notice anyone.

        Q. You, in this crowd, going down the tunnel, there are
           plenty of people behind you, following you, aren't there?
           - A. Yes.




    H
V                                                                          87




                                                                 A.   M.   DODD



        0. When you enter that terrace it was already, as I
           understand your evidence, very compact? - A. Yes, it was
           full.   Well, when I say full, it was pretty full.

        Q. I want you to describe what you mean,      because I want to
    B      get the picture.  In this crowd going      through the tunnel
           on to the terrace, with people coming      from behind you,
           what you mean by very compact"? - A.       I am sorry, could
           you repeat that?

        Q. Yes.   My note was that you came out of the tunnel. You
           took a left on to the terrace.It was    very compact.    I
           want you to tell us what you mean by "compact". - A. You
           couldn't move your arms.   You had to keep your arms
           there or on someone in front.

        0. This was a terrace which you were entering in the middle
           of a crowd?    You weren't at the back of it as you
           entered?    You weren't the last person on the terrace? -
           A. I was the last person on the terrace?

        0. There were people coming       behind you? - A. Oh,        yes, sir.

        0. They were adding themselves on to this terrace which you
           have already described to us? - A. Yes.

        Q. You said to one of my colleagues that you expect things
           to be like this in a big    match but not as bad  asthey
           were.   What did you mean by "as bad as they were"?
           What is the condition you are trying to describe which
           you weren't expecting? - A. How tight people were
           standing.    How close people were to each other.
                         Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

        0.   You told us you looked at your watch several timesbefore
             going through the blue gate.   The last such occasion on
             which you looked at your watch it was just before five to
             three? - A. Yes.

        Q. At that stage you were still outside the blue gate? - A.
           Yes.

        Q. You can't remember, or wouldn't be expected to remember,
           how long it was after that that you actually went through
           the blue gate? - A. I can't really say how long it was.
           It wasn't all that long.

        0.   A few minutes? - A. Yes, a moment or two.

        Q.   A minute or two? - A. Yes.

        Q. You were asked by my learned friend Mir. King a moment or
           two ago as to whether you saw when you went from the




    H
                                                             88



                                                   A.   M.   DODD



  gate, the blue gate, to the tunnel, whether you saw any
  stewards or any police officers.   Did you look for any
  stewards when you went from the gate to the tunnel? - A.
  No.

0. Here you looking out for any police officers when you
   went from the gate to the tunnel? - A. No.

Q. Once you were on the terrace - I would like just to
   briefly explore your ability to move on the terrace.
   You were asked by the Coroner as to whether or not you
   remembered seeing anything on the pitch.    The note I
   took of your answer was, "I could not really see the
   pitch.   It was not until   I assumed my place on the
   terrace that I could see the pitch."    First of all, is
   that roughly what you said, or what you meant? - A.- It is
   what I said, but when I said assuming my place, I didn't
   mean, "I'll go and stand over here on the left hand side
   where I usually stand."   It was until things quietened
   down a bit, until I started looking up.

0. What did you mean then by assuming your place? - A. Until
   I got into a situation where I was able to look up at the
   match.

Q. That time came, from what you have told us, because at
   that stage you were able to see the pitch? - A. Yes.

0. Later on you were able to  make your way forward in
   relation to other people?  - A. Well, when I got under the
   barrier I started to make my way forward, yes.

        MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I wonder if I might be permitted
   to ask a further question arising from what Mr. King
   asked?

        THE CORONER:   Yes.

            Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q. If, when you went in the back of this terrace it was so
   close and tight as you have said, how did you manage to
   be one of the first out of the gate at the front? - A. I
   honestly don't know.   I mean, I wasn't climbing over
   people or anything to get out.   I just got out.   I
   don t know how I did and I am just lucky I did.

0. Somehow you got through this terrifically close and tight
   crowd?

                  Further bv THE CORONER:

0. Can I just ask you one more thing?   When you saw you
   were able to see the pitch, as far as I understood it
                                                                  89




                                                        A.   M.   DODD



       there are really three positions you describe:   one, when
       you came on to the terrace and you were a little bit away
       from the barrier.    Then you saw what looked like a gap
       to you and you went under the barrier.    Then you
       finished up on the fence.    Have I understood you
B      correctly? - A. Yes.

       That is more or less your three positions.   Which one of
       those was it you caught a glimpse of the pitch? - A. Uhen
       I first was on the terrace I could see the pitch but I
       couldn't really see what was happening.

       Did you at any point, and if you didn't, say so, get a
       sufficiently good view of the pitch so that you could see
       what was going on? - A. There wasn't one time when I
       could get a clear view of the pitch.

            THE CORONER:     Anything else?   Thank you, Mr. Dodd.

                            ERIC WOOD Sworn

                            By THE CORONER:

    Q. Are you Eric Wood? - A. Yes, I am.

    0. Is it still                            Sheffield? - A. Yes.

    Q. I think you are an industrial chemist? - A. I was then,
       but I have since been made redundant.   I am self-
       employed now.

       Of course   we are not interested in your career in a
       sense, we   are interested in your activities with
       Sheffield   Wednesday.   Were you in fact a programme
       seller? -   A. I was.

       Mad you been one for some years? - A. Quite a number of
       years, yes.

       Were you programme selling on the 15th April, 1989? - A.
       Yes.

       Was this in the concourse area behind turnstiles A to G?
       - A. Yes, that is correct.

       I think you were positioned with your back against a
       dividing brick wall which divides the concourse area? -
       A. Yes.

    0 . So you were looking towards the River Don, Gate C, and
        the backs of the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

    0 . There was one episode where you had to call for some
        police assistance? - A. Yes.




H
                                                                   90




                                                              E.   WOOD


    0.   Was that earlier on? - A. No, I should say it was    about
         twenty to three, something like that.

    Q. It was one individual who was doing it?   We are not
       talking about dozens.   It was somebody who did something
B      which wasn't quite right, put it that way? - A. Yes.
    0.   Where did you get the police officer from? - A. I just
         shouted for one.  There were one or two scattered about
         then.

    Q.   In that   area? - A. Yes.

    Q.    In fact, in the end it got sorted out and I don't   think
         we need to deal with it any further. - A. Yes.

    0.   You say this was   about twenty to three? - A. Something
         like that.

    0. You couldn't see what was happening outside? - A. No.

    Q. All you could see was what was happening inside? - A.
       Yes.

    0. Up to then what was happening inside, was that relatively
       normal? - A. Yes.   Well, "relatively normal", we had
       just been saying at about half past two that there
       weren't many people who had come in, to what usually
       comes in before half past two.

    0. So you had noticed there were fewer? - A. Yes, there were
       a lot fewer people in.

    Q. Those who were in were all well behaved apart from this
       one incident, which we draw a veil over? - A. Yes.

    Q. So what happened after half past two as far as the
       concourse area was concerned? - A. Well, I stand with
       another chap.   We had just been saying at about half
       past two that not many people had come in.   We wondered
       where everybody was and then after about twenty to three
       people started coming in all the more frequently.   Then
       you could see people climbing over the top of the
       turnstiles.

    Q. What time was that that you notice that? - A. It would be
       after that. Round about twenty to three/quarter to
       three.   They said people were crushing and pushing to
       get through the turnstiles, so that a lot of them were
       coming over the top.   Some were waving tickets, some
       weren t waving tickets, so who had got them and who
       hadn't we don t know.




H
                                                       91

                                      E. WOOD



Q. You don't know? - A. But then much later on all I heard
   was the concertina gate moving, sliding, because while
   we are serving programmes we are not watching anything
   only just dealing with what is immediate in front of you
   and then all of a sudden there was this great big surge
   came through and they just ran towards this tunnel.

Q. How fast did they move as far as you can recollect? - A.
   Well I should say they were running rather than walking
   fast because it was getting on. You know, 10-to-3 the
   match started at 3 o'clock so they were just trying to get
   in for kick-off.

Q. When the gates open and the crowd comes in there is a
   phalanx at the front and then there is a middle bit and
   then there is a tail end. Are you saying that the whole
   lot were running or was it just ....   A. I should say the
   whole lot was running because it is natural instinct that
   when you have got through you are trying to get towards
   the pitch.

Q. Which direction were they aiming for? - A. Well immediately
   they come through that concertina gate they can only see
   this tunnel part. They can't see to the right-hand side
   to go round the right-hand side of the Stand. There is
   nothing to direct them to go round this right-hand side.

Q. What about, there is a hole in the wall near where you
   were standing? - A. Near where we were stood but they
   weren't letting people transfer you see because they had
   gone through the other turnstiles into that bit. There
   is some more turnstiles.

Q. Who was not letting people transfer? - A. Well one or two
   Stewards and a few Police.  I mean this is what happens
   before ....

Q. No, I am talking about 15th April 1989. Are you saying
   that the gateway in that wall was blocked off? - A. Only
   by people, not by the gate itself, the gate was open.

Q. When you say "people" do you mean fans, Police Officers?
   - A. No, Police or Stewards.

Q. You won't be able to name them but how many Stewards did
   you see at that gateway? - A. Probably a couple outside.

Q. And how many Police Officers? - A. Well they move about
   you see in between, they are coming and going different
   Officers.

Q. Are you saying then as far as you were concerned nobody
   went through the gateway.  Is that right? - A. Other than
   people who were permitted to, people who work there yes.
                                                              92

                                             E. WOOD



    Q.    Even after the big concertina gate was opened? - A. Well
         I could not say to that because people wanted to buy
         programmes so I was not looking then.

_   Q.    I see, so you don’t know what happened at that time.
B        Because once they came through some went down the tunnel
         I think you said? - A. Yes.

    Q. Are you saying that some did come to you to buy programmes?
       - A. Oh yes, yes, there is always somebody wants a programme.

    Q. So you are saying you were actually busy at that point?
       - A. Yes.

    Q. And you didn't have a very good view, at least because you
       were looking down? - A. Well we weren't looking because
       we were working you see.

    Q. And your main observation really then is that 2.30 you
       had the impression that very few people had come in,
       relatively speaking? - A. Yes.

    Q.    And that     afterwards there was a big number came through
         when the big gates were opened? - A. Yes.

    Q. Didyou. see anybody - and if you didn't don't guess -
       did you see anybody try and block off the tunnel in 1989?
       - A. No because we were about 10/15 yards away.

    Q.   Have you ever seen the tunnel blocked off?   - A. I can't
         say as I have no.   I do know there are some shutter doors
         on it though.

    Q.   But you can't recollect? - A. No, we only stand there for
         the semi-final matches, other games we are outside.

    Q. I see, were you there in 1988? - A. Yes.

    Q.   You presumably were busy that year as well? - A. Yes.

    Q.   And you may not have seen anything but did you see anybody
         attempt to divert, block off, seal in any way the tunnel?
         - A. Well I can't really say but I do know the year before
         people came a lot earlier and it was a steady stream all
         the time so probably when it did get full I just can't
         say.

    Q.   You did not find out something had gone wrong .... A. No,
         not till I was counting my money up way after.

               THE CORONER:   That is no blame on you in any way.




H
                                                            93

                                          E. WOOD



                     Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

    Q. Mr. Wood, your evidence about somebody blocking off the
       gate or preventing the passage through the gate in the
       wall comes as rather a surprise? - A. That is not the
       tunnel wall I mean.
B
    Q. Let's be clear what we are talking about. Would you mind
       for a moment just stepping over to this model and stand
       to one side of it and just point to the place you are
       talking about? - A. Just here, that gate there.

    Q. Right, thank you very much, come back to the witness box
       if you would not mind. Now certainly so far as I represent
       the Police and no doubt you will hear shortly from the Club,
       so far as we are aware no Policeman had the duty at all to
       prevent anybody passing through that entrance way.  Do you
       understand? - A. Yes.

    Q. And so far as we are aware no Policeman did, he certainly
       was not instructed to. - A. I don't know then.

    Q. You are not saying it for a fact are you that that really
       happened? - A. Well nobody has ever been allowed to go through
       that door before.

    Q. Quite, I understand how the difficulty may have arisen.
       You are an experienced Programme Seller and you have gone
       to a lot of other matches.  Is that it? - A. Yes.

    Q. Now what I am asking you about is this particular match
       because the jury are going to hear that the arrangement
       for the use of the turnstiles at this particular match was
       different from what it is at other matches. Do you under­
       stand that? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you actually know that yourself? - A. There was different
       Policemen in charge this year to previous years, wasn't it?

    Q. No, I asked you about the arrangement for the   use of the
       turnstiles.  Did you know? - A. No.

    Q. So I am only asking you please about this particular match.
       Do you understand that? - A. Yes.

    Q. Right. Now then do you actually know whether any Policemen
       prevented people from going through that gate or not? - A.
       Well no not really but. You see we were busy when the
       crush was on but I know they like to keep them separate
       which turnstiles they have gone through and they are
       separate turnstiles at the other side of the wall.

    Q. You are speaking about the Policemen who were manning the
       turnstiles are you? - A. Yes, stood behind the turnstiles.




H
                                                         S4


                                        E. WOOD



     I am under the impression if they went through the turn­
     stiles at the other side of the wall they went upstairs
     in the seats. Where we were it was just for standing
     accommodation only and I am presuming that is why they
     weren't allowed to transfer between, through this gate.

Q. I understand that you have got this in your mind but you
   are not leaving it with the jury that you actually saw
   Policemen stopping anybody going through, are you? - A. N o
   not really, no.


                    Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q. Mr. Wood just one or two points.  First of all it was
   obvious to you as a Programme Seller at about half-past-2
   that not many people had arrived.  It was obvious to you?
   - A. Yes, obvious.

Q. You yourself only had the job of selling programmes? - A.
   Yes.

Q. That was no doubt a very busy job but if you had had the
   job of having to make an assessment as to how many people
   had already come and how many more people ....

           THE CORONER: Mr. King, is this the right chap to
     ask an opinion on Club management?

           MR. KING:  I am not asking about Club management sir.
     I am asking this witness a question based on his evidence
     and if sir you don't allow me to ask the question that way I wil
     ask it in this way.

           THE CORONER:   Yes.

Q.         MR. KING: Your yourself as an ordinary programme
     seller was it obvious to you that the majority of people
     you were expecting, because that is what you were telling
     us about what you were expecting, had still to come? - A.
     Yes, for whatever reason.

Q. For whatever reason, that is all right. You are saying
   that you from your expectations as an ordinary programme
   seller at about half-past-2 from your observations you
   were expecting the majority of people had still to come?
   - A. Yes, because we had got a lot of programmes left to
   what we usually have.

Q. Now then I want to ask you again about your observations
   because it is helpful because you were there on the
   concourse.

           You understood that people who came through turnstiles
     A-G and I wonder if the Officer with his very helpful stick
                                                                 S5


                                             E, WOOD



         could point out A-G, that anybody coming through those
         turnstiles were going to go standing? - A. Yes, that is
         what I thought.

    Q. Take it from me that is correct. You also understood
B      that anybody going through the other turnstiles on the
       other side of that dividing wall they were going to be
       sitting somewhere? - A. Yes.

    Q. Take it from me you were correct on that.

               THE CORONER:    Not quite, Mr. King, I am sorry.
         You can get up into   the Stands. Can you point to the
         stairwell, that one   over there and in fact we know that
         there were Stewards   there to stop people going, so you
         could ....

               MR. KING:   Sir, with respect I have not put my
         question.
               THE CORONER: No, I am just saying that you are
         saying that he is correct that the turnstiles A-G could
         not serve the Stands.
               MR. KING: Sir, I was not putting that in that way.
         Not what could happen but his understanding that the
         arrangement was that anybody who had been issued with a
         ticket for the standing area, the terraces, was expected
         and directed to go through A-G.

               THE CORONER:    Yes, that is correct.

               MR. KING: And anybody who had a ticket for a seat
         was expected and directed by his ticket and if anybody
         asked him and gave him the correct answer through the
         other turnstiles, and to that extent his expectations
         were correct sir.
               THE WITNESS: That is what I thought because you
         can get all along the top of that.

    Q.         MR. KING: Of course and from your understanding of
         that your evidence was, before any of these gentlemen asked
         you questions, was that if anybody had tried to get through
         that little gap in the wall, if the Officer can point it
         out, having come through A-G, if the Officer can point that
         out, so someone with a standing ticket your understanding
         was they would have been prevented from getting through
         that gate?
                MR. PAYNE: Now it is extremely rude of me to
          interrupt before he answers, but he really should not be
          asked what his understanding is. He should be asked as
          I did what he saw. That is what we want to know.
                                     E. WOOD



      MR. KING: Sir, I am entitled to ask what his
understanding is.

      MR. PAYNE: No, what does he mean - I object to
that - what does he mean by "understanding".  The witness
can describe what he saw. He is standing there and he
can describe what he saw. To be asked what his understanding
was is asking him to speculate and give his opinion on.

      MR. KING: Sir, again I am not asking him to give
his opinion, I am asking and I am entitled to ask him what
he understood the position to be before the day started and
I can ask him before he started selling his programmes, I
am entitled to ask him what he understood and expected the
position to be.   I am entitled then to ask, and anybody
else can ask him, upon what that understanding was based
as to what someone had been told instructions or otherwise
sir. I am not the first person to ask a question as to
what they had expected to be. We have had a number of
questions to Officers what they were expecting, what they
understood was going to happen. They have not all flown
from my lips sir.    I am entitled to ask the witness what
they understood the position was going to be.

       THE CORONER:   What is it that you are trying to find
out?

      MR. KING: Well I am trying to find out, sir, whether
or not, and I don't know I am just listening to the evidence
like everybody else, whether or not his evidence which I
am investigating as to people being prevented or otherwise
from getting through that gate is a correct recollection or
not and I am entitled to investigate it, sir, just as my
learned friend is entitled to investigate to see whether
it is incorrect.

      MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, with respect may I support
Mr. Payne in this respect.

      What Mr. King is seeking to ask this witness as a
Programme Seller is what his understanding was of someone
else's duties before the match.  That must be so because
with respect he is asking about what Police Officers or
what Stewards were doing on that gate. That is an entirely
different job with respect from his job which is to sell
programmes and to that extent the question phrased by
my learned friend is actually seeking his understanding,
his opinion, of something which he does not have any direct
knowledge.

      THE CORONER: With great respect what we want to
establish from this witness is not what the planning was,
not what X or Y or Z was doing, was this gateway blocked
                                                     97


                                   E. WOOD



off on that day or wasn't it? That is all we are
interested in. Not whether it was blocked off 20 times
in the last ten years but was it blocked on this day.

      Now I agree with you you are perfectly entitled to
probe him as hard as you like and try and establish if
he is able what the position was with regard to that but
it does not make much difference whether he understood it
should be blocked off or not.  Even if he says "I understood
it" it would not get you anywhere would it?




                 MR. KING:   Sir, his evidence was
                                                E. WOOD




     MR. KING:   Sir, his evidence was, and I was
looking at it before anybody cross-examined him,
because you were very properly asking him, sir, about
where the people were going to when they came through
the gate, was that they could not go to the right,
there wasn't anything to direct them, they weren't
allowing people to transfer to the left. That was his
evidence, sir.

     THE CORONER:   That was his initial evidence, yes.

     MR. KING:   That was his initial evidence, sir,
and I am only, in the light of what my learned friend
is seeking to establish, that that was not the case, as
to whether or not that recollection is right or wrong,
and one can start with what he understood the position
to be for this reason, sir, that if he had - I don't
know, I have not had an answer yet - but if he was
given some sort of information by those in charge of
him, because he is selling programmes, he therefore
knows what the position is, then that may help us, it
may not help us, to decide whether or not his evidence
which he gave you, sir, be right or wrong.  It may be
right, it may be wrong.

     THE CORONER:   Well why don't you tackle it from
that angle? You can find this out as you have just
indicated, find out what instructions he received, and
okay it may be getting at the same point from a
different angle, but it will get to the point, so why
don't you attempt it that way?

     MR. KING:   Sir, as I understood it, asking the
question, "What was your understanding to be?", is
exactly the same question as asking, because all that
one would ask is, "What was the basis of your
understanding?", is exactly the same way of approaching
it, but sir I get the impression with all due respect
that whenever a piece of evidence emerges which perhaps
does not tie in with that which is expected by my
learned friend, if I try and investigate it on what his
understanding or opinion is it gets shouted down, but I
would listen with interest, sir, to other opinion
evidence on other matters.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, I don't know what Mr.
Payne does but I try not to shout you down.  I try and
hold a balance and I want you to have an opportunity
because if it is true that people were being prevented
from going to the left, that is an important piece of
evidence.  I don't deny that for one moment, so in that
sense it is an important.  I think it is also true that
it is new, relatively speaking.
                                                   E. WOOD




     MR. KING:      I agree, that is why I am interested.

     THE CORONER:   Exactly, so I have no objection, I
am not stopping you exploring it.  I think it is
important though that we explore it, particularly
because if you like it is novel, that we explore it as
well as we can.

     MR. KING:   Sir, can I try and approach it from an
entirely different angle?

     THE CORONER:      Yes.

     MR. KING:      I will do my best:

Mr. Wood, when you were saying in answer to the learned
Coroner that people were not being allowed to transfer
to the left, were you meaning being allowed to transfer
from the concourse area outside A-G through that
gateway into the concourse area outside the other
turnstiles? - A. That is what I am under the
assumption, yes, before it got busy.  I can't say what
happened when it as busy.

No, I am dealing with it before it got busy. - A. Yes.

Let me ask, because you used the word assumption so let
me investigate it, on what was that assumption based? -
A. Just my own personal experience actually, of being
stood there at other previous semi-finals.

Did you see stewards and/or Police Officers in or
around that gateway between the wall, in the wall? - A.
Yes.

In the semi-final of    1989? -A. Yes.

You saw them there.   Did you see anything else which
gave you to understand, from what you saw, that they
were acting in the way you have described, that is,
making sure that people did not get through to the
left? - A. If they had not got tickets for that side,
yes.

Did you see things which made you say to yourself,
"That's what they're doing"? - A. Well,people  were
wanting to go to the other side, yes.

What happened to those people? - A. They was turned
back to go, "That's where your ticket's for, this
side".

Did you see that happen in the semi-final of 1989? - A.
Yes.
                                                          100



                                                      E. WOOD




               Cross-Examined by HR. CATCHPOLE

Q. This is really quite important.  I appear for the Club
   and like my friend, the gentleman who asked you
   questions for the Police, I am quite surprised by your
   evidence.  I want to just try and establish what
   exactly you were doing on that day. You were standing
   by a wall and you were selling programmes? - A. Yes.

Q. While you are doing that you are concentrating on what
   you are doing, selling the programmes? - A. Work in
   hand, yes.

Q.    Do you have someone with you who is taking the money?   -
     A. No, we take it ourselves.

Q.   So you were actually busy, you weren't completely
     unoccupied through the time you were standing there
     from 2 o'clock or earlier onwards? You were actually
     engaged in selling programmes? - A. Working, yes.

Q. How often were you making trips back to the Portacabin
   round the other side, was it? - A. No, we have them all
   stood at the side of us because we have some railings
   in front of us shielding us from the crowd.

Q. Was there someone taking that money away from you? - A.
   Yes.

0. So you had to keep an eye on what money was going out,
   back to the Portacabin, and what was coming? - A. That
   is right, yes.

Q. That is your primary job, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. That you concentrate on? - A. Yes.

Q. Obviously when you are standing there you also look
   around and you see what is going around you? - A. When
   you are not busy, yes, you have got time to look
   around.

Q. You are not told by anyone at the Club what particular
   stewards are told to do? - A. Oh no.

Q. You don't know what their job is, do you? - A. No.

Q. What you can say, as you said in answer to the Coroner,
   is that throughout the time that you saw that gate on
   15th April it was open? - A. Yes.

Q. And I think you said that the numbers of people changed
   round it? - A. Yes.
                                                                  101
*
                                                           e   . Wo o d




        Q. So there were one or two stewards, one or two Police
           Officers, maybe none, is that fair? - A. I could not
           say there was none but I was under the impression that
           they were coming and going and patrolling around you
    B      see.

        0. They weren't actually physically standing on that gate
           all the time? - A. Not any one individual Policeman,
           no.

        Q. What about the stewards, were they similarly moving
           around? - A. Yes.

        Q. You have also used - this is no criticism at all - a
           lot of words like "I was under the impression", "I was
           under the assumption", "That is what I thought", and is
           this fair, you knew and you said, I think, or started
           to say in evidence, that they like to keep people
           separate, that is what the wall was there for? - A.
           Yes.

        Q. Is it fair to say that because you had that knowledge
           from your previous experience, presumably at league
           matches and other semi-finals, other big games, what
           you saw, which I will come onto in a moment, was you
           assumed what was happening was that people who wanted
           to go into the other concourse were being turned away
           because they didn't have the right ticket? - A. Yes.

        Q. It is right to say, isn't it, that there are two
           stairways that lead up to the seating area? - A. Yes.

        Q. They have different gangway numbers? - A. I don't know
           about that.

        Q. Take it from me there are different gangway numbers - I
           may show you a photograph if necessary - but each of
           those stairways is either side of that brick wall? - A.
           Yes.

        Q. People coming in through the turnstiles would have
           different tickets? - A. Yes.

        Q. One would take you up to seating and one would take you
           down to the standing? - A. Yes.

        Q. You don't know, for example, because you .... - A. I am
           not interested in that, no.

        0. So you would not have seen any people going up to a
           steward or Police Officer on this gate, what they were
           actually saying to them? - A. No, not at all.




    H
You would not know whether this person was saying,
"This is my ticket and it's a seating ticket for a
certain gangway which is the stairway over by the
tunnel", or whether it is one on the other .... - A. I
only thought there was one entrance to that stand until
just now.

What we are trying to understand is what you actually
saw and I imagine that you were concentrating on lots
of things, and this was not something that was sticking
in your mind? - A. Oh no.

I imagine also that when you saw it, it was only one or
two people that you saw going up to them? - A. Yes.

We are not talking about hundreds and hundreds of
people? - A. 0’
              n no, just a few.

           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Wood, do the fans who come through turnstiles A-G
usually go down the tunnel?  Is that their usual route
onto the terraces? - A. It is the one they most see,
yes.

So fans coming in   at the match in 1989, if they had
come in from that   direction, whether it be through a
gate or turnstiles A-G, you would have expected them to
use the tunnel, wouldn t you? - A. Yes, because that is
all they could see.

You say you saw Police in the gap, the area that leads
to the left hand side? - A. Yes.

Not all the time,   I believe you said? - A. Yes.   I was
not looking all the time, I was busy.

But they were there sometimes.  Had they been there
when the large surge came in, that could discourage the
fans from going to the left, couldn't it? - A. I doubt
whether they would have seen anybody at all because
they are just getting where they can see straight in
front of them.

               Further by THE CORONER

Can I just ask you one other question - I think it is
only one anyway.  How long have you been a programme
seller, or were you in 1989? - A. Since 1953.

Have you always worked in the same position? - A. No,
we only work in that position for semi-finals.
                                                                103


                                                           E. WOOD




    Q. When was the first semi-final that you worked in that
       position, do you know? - A. No, I could not remember.

    Q. I think you said that you were surprised to learn that
B      there were two entrances into the stand? - A. Yes, you
       see we only go there for semi-final matches.  We are
       outside the ground normally.

    Q. Are you a fan yourself? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Where do you normally stand or sit when you go   and
         watch? Are you a Sheffield fan? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Where do you normally go? -A. North Stand.

    Q.    So you really had no occasion to examine thisstand? -
         A. None at all, no.

    Q. Mr. Wood, thank you very much.

                     (In the absence of the Jury)

              THE CORONER:   What I wanted to mention was this:
         in fact, it was Mr. Payne's instructing solicitors who
         wrote to me with a comment which had half crossed my
         mind once or twice, but I had not pursued it, and I
         have not yet taken a decision on it, but I thought I
         ought to put it to you so that you can think about it,
         in case you wanted to make any comment or submission on
         it.

              The point that they raised was this. As you know,
         there are several people who have made PACE statements,
         and these in quite a few cases are exceedingly lengthy
         - we are talking about hours, perhaps more than that to
         hear them. The point which has been put to me is this
         - normally speaking these are, of course, read as we
         already explored ad nauseam in a sense, right at the
         beginning, and that is the reason why I wanted to deal
         with them in the same sort of way.

              The point that has been made to me is that if, in
         fact, the witnesses who have given the PACE statements,
         are in fact prepared to answer substantially all the
         questions which are put to them, would it be economical
         of time if instead of listening to the PACE statements
         first we listened to the witnesses, and in in the event
         we had heard everything we needed to hear, we could
         then dispense with the statement.

              Of course, the witnesses would have to be warned
         from time to time about incriminating remarks, or they
         may have to be warned, I don't know - it just depends
         what questions they are asked - and it may be that they




H
                                                    104




will wish to exercise that right.  If they do then we
either have to take a decision that we do need to
listen to all the PACE statement, or maybe only that
part of the PACE statement which deals with that aspect
of the matter on which they have exercised their
rights, or at the end of the day we say no, we have got
to listen to them anyway.

     Now I, as I say, have not made up my mind on this
matter yet, but I thought that before I take a decision
on this matter it is only right and proper that I
should alert you to it so that you can think about it,
and if, particularly if. you don't like the idea then
please say so. You don t have to say so now because
you may want to think about it overnight and we can
deal with it tomorrow.




              From my point of view .
From my point of view it makes no difference because
whether we are here another five or six days does not
matter to me personally because if I gun not sitting here
then I am probably sitting down the road and so it does not
make any difference to me but, on the other hand, we do not
want to waste time if we can find ways of achieving it.

    MR. KING: My immediate reaction would be to be against
the proposal, sir.  I would obviously consider it but until
one hears the PACE statement one does not know what is in
it.

     THE CORONER:   I realise that.

     MR. KING:   It can be very crucially important in the
light of the right of the witness to refuse to answer the
question in this forum that one should know it in advance
in the normal way.  I see no advantage in doing it the
other way.

     THE CORONER:   As I say, please do not misinterpret
this, but I think this was a proposal put forward - and I
have accepted it in that way - as a genuine attempt to try
and help the Coroner's Court in dealing with these matters.
I am willing to listen and this is the whole reason why I
mention it.

     MR. MANNING:   I represent a person who has made a
Police and Criminal Evidence Act statement.  I would find
it impossible to try and deal with the situation where, for
example, a witness was being asked a question and he very
properly said that that was not a question he should be
obliged to answer and that you then tried to take a bit of
the Police and Criminal Evidence Act statement, as it were,
saying, "This in any event can by read out".  It is my very
firm view that the only way to deal with a PACE statement
is for it to be in totality before the Jury.  I do not
think there is any differing view from that and I think it
would be endangering upon a miscarriage of justice for it
to be in any way edited by anybody and I say that with the
greatest respect to you, sir. On that basis there is
agreement upon your initial ruling as to the way in which
matters had to come before this Inquest, that you would
cause the statements to be read.

     The only questions that then arise are, should the
Officer who took the statement be the person who read it,
should the tape of the interview actually be played because
it is a contemporaneous tape or should we go further than
the Police and Criminal Evidence Act ordinarily provides
and let the Jury see the interview being conducted and the
answers able to be visualised as well as heard, namely to
play the video tape? I have reservations about the last
matter because I would not want, for. example, a Jury to
think that because I had my jacket off at the time, that I
may have smiled, that I may have nudged a client or that I
may have stopped a particular question, to draw any adverse
inference and what I personally would like, although I
appreciate you are ultimately the person who would make the
                                                      106


ruling, is that I would like the opportunity to actually
see what it looks like if it is in your mind to actually
play the audio tape and the visual tape together and to
have that opportunity. That I know is a different point.

     THE CORONER:    It is a different point, yes.

     MR. MANNING: Of course, it is a different point but
it touches on those matters which you have done.  I agree,
and it is no surprise that I agree, with Mr. King but
perhaps for a very different reason that it is undesirable
in the extreme to do anything other than hear it from top
to bottom and I think it should be heard first because it
may very well save the necessity for anything else or it
may very well make a question unnecessary which might have
been asked and for which an objection would be taken, and
it would be quite clear to see that that question could not
possibly be asked. At the end of the day, and I am sure
you have already hinted at this, time is the important
feature of this Inquest, an important Inquest, to determine
how and if it takes a day or so longer or even five days
longer because we have got to listen to five lengthy
statements, well then so be it.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Hale, did you want to say
something?

     MR. HALE:   All I would say, sir, is that I have an
ambivalent attitude towards it. My client's statement, as
you are probably aware, consists of two lengthy written
statements in addition   to the audio and visual. As to
those, I have no idea how they will come out and if you
were to ask me to say an I in favour or not I would say I
have no idea.  I would have to wait and see.    I am entirely
ambivalent on that and if you wish to do it then I am happy
to go along with that.    If you wish to adopt the
alternative I would be happy to go along with that,   largely
because we all know a great deal more now than when those
statements were taken and I have no doubt there will be a
lot of repetition and stuff that we know so much about that
time could have been saved but I will go along with
whatever is the consensus view.

     THE CORONER:    I have heard what you said. As you
know my initial feeling is that I want to play these.   I am
conscious of the time. As I say, it does not affect me but
I know that it affects everybody else and it is an
exceedingly expensive business, time is, and I am conscious
of that as well but in the final analysis, as you say,
whether we spend another five days bearing in mind the
amount of time we have already spent is in the end neither
here nor there.   I will sleep on it tonight and make up my
mind on it tomorrow morning.   I will then say what I think
on it.  I do want to make it quite clear, and Mr. Payne you
will realise why I say this, that I have read the letter of
course because it was addressed to my Officer and it was
perfectly clear to me that the suggestion was an entirely
helpful one and not in any way to try and avoid evidence
being put before the Jury.  I have no*doubt whatever about
that and I want it clearly understood.

     MR. PAYNE:     Thank you.

     MR.   HALE: Could I just add one thing, sir? I am not
as   young as I used to be.  I am going deaf. I am quite
aware of that.   If the statements are to be read out, would
it be possible to have them read out by somebody with a
strong and clear voice?

     THE CORONER:   No, I do not want them read out, may I
say, because they are going to be played?

     MR. HALE:   There are quite extensive written parts,
certainly in my client's statement.

     THE CORONER: Fair enough.    If there is anything
which is not viva voce, so to speak, then I accept we will
try and get somebody to read it who is audible and whose
diction is reasonably clear.  Can I come back to your
point, Mr. Manning?

     MR. MANNING:    Yes.

     THE CORONER:   The position with regard to the format
in which they are going to be used, technically the only
PACE statement there is is the audio tape.  That is the
procedure under which the statement is taken and if one
wants to be a purist then that is what we need to listen
to, the audio tape. Now it happens that in some of the
cases, not all, the proceedings were also video-ed.  You
know that and I know it but nobody else knows it and the
Jury certainly do not know who was video-ed and who was
not. The videoing was done by consent of the people who
agreed and on the understanding it would only be used if
the person agreed for it to be used.

     If anybody who was video-ed says, "On reflection I
don't want the video to be used" then that is -the end of
the story. There is no question of it being shown against
their wishes, bearing in mind that the Jury do not know who
we are talking about and that there are some who were not
video-ed - and I will be making this clear to the Jury so
that no adverse inferences are drawn from those that are
on audio and those who are on video - in those cases where
the person consents to the video being used then I prefer
to use the video. The main reason is because on the whole
we are all used to watching TV now and it is infinitely
easier to actually take in what was being said when we can
see a picture.

     It also has, if you like, a spin off effect which is
not really relevant to this Inquest but you know as well as
I do that one is beginning to talk about videoing
procedures and if there is somebody willing to agree to it
then it is a golden opportunity for somebody to actually
see how it works. That is not the reason why we are doing
it.  I just say that as an aside.  I do want to make it
absolutely crystal clear that any party who has given a
PACE statement and who had agreed to having it video-ed
(and I am not saying who they are) and who feels he does
not wish that video to be played then that will be done.
They cannot object to the audio tape but they can object to
the video tape and they are entitled to do that. No
criticism will be made of that in any shape or form.  I
hope that reassures you a little bit.

     MR. MANNING:   It does, sir, and one of the
considerations you will have to take on board is whether it
will in any way influence the Jury that they have seen some
people on film and they have heard other statements.  That
is a matter entirely for you.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

     MR. MANNING:   What concerns me, and I do not in any
way seek to be flippant about it, is that there are stars
of stage and there are stars of screen. There are those
who can do radio and those who look awful on television.
What I would not want to happen is in my particular case,
and I put my cards on the table immediately, my client was
one of the people who agreed at that stage to be video-ed,
for there to be anything to his prejudice in anything which
occurred either from him or indeed from the interviewing
Officer which is to his detriment and that is why I said I
would welcome the opportunity of actually seeing them.

     THE CORONER:   I will think about that.

     MR. MANNING:   I have not actually been provided with
a copy.

     MR. HALE:  I was going to say, sir, it is surprising
if my friend has not had a copy.  I certainly have had a
copy of the interviews and have seen them.

     THE CORONER:   We will look into that.

     MR. MANNING:  Historically, sir, it may be
interesting in your reflection to know it that when it was
put to me that the Police in their interview wanted to use
the usual two concurrent tapes and also wanted to use the
video camera, the reason that was advanced for that was
that there would perhaps one or two occasions during the
course of the interview that they would want to refer to
something themselves on a television screen via video, in
other words, "Will you look at this particular incident
occurring?" which is very difficult to come over on a tape
and, therefore, would be easier to record on a video film.

     THE CORONER:   I was not there.

     MR. MANNING:   I make that remark because I was there
and I wondered whether it would be within your knowledge or
not, but again it is just something else to add to the fund
of knowledge being gathered.
     THE CORONER:   When I say it i s ‘not within my
knowledge, it is certainly not within my recollection. Mr.
Beechey will see you and you can have a look at it. As I
say, we do not want to prejudice people unfairly.    If there
is prejudice in what was said or what was done that is bad
luck, if you like, but nothing unfair so far as we can
avoid it.

     Just a small aside on the question of editing, and not
listening to the whole of the PACE statement.  It is
possible to do because I have done it on occasions when I
do RTAs and I may say that there are pages and pages of
stuff on say minor offences or even on other offences which
have got nothing whatever to do with the Inquest and I do
not say we will listen to every single word of it but in
this particular instance it would be exceeding difficult to
in fact lead pencil it without getting into terrible
trouble.

     MR. MANNING:   I absolutely agree.  I think these
statements ought to be read in totality.

     THE CORONER:   I think if we are reading them then I
agree with you that we are reading them as they are.  Is
there anything else we want to do? I am most grateful to
you, gentlemen and ladies.   We will meet tomorrow at ten
o'clock.

       (The Inquests were adjourned until 10 o'clock
                   the following morning)
