HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sex, BM, BS, MRCGP

         (Her Majesty*s Corone r)




                   At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                   On

           26th November,   1990




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




 From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.
      Official Shorthand Writers,
  55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                   Page

    P. LOMAS Recalled

         By The Coroner (Cont)                       1
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Hale                  1
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne                 2
         Cross-Examined by Mr. King                  9
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole            19
         Cross-Examined by M r s . McBrien          21
         Cross-Examined by Miss Addelman            26
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell              27


•
         Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Hale         27
_        Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne        28
         Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King         29
         Further Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien     29
         Further By The Coroner                     30

    R.M. WRIGHT Sworn

         By The Coroner                             32
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Hale                 48
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne                52
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning              54
         Cross-Examined by Mr. King                 59
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole            71
         Cross-Examined by M r s . McBrien          74
         Cross-Examined by Miss Addelmann           76
         Cross-Examined by M r . Russell            77
         Further Cross-sExamined by Mr. Hale        78
         Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King         80

•
         Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole    81
         Further by The Coroner                     82

    A .J . MURRAY Sworn

         By The Coroner                             84
         Cross-Examined by Mr. King                 91
         Further by The Coroner                     91

    L.J. HINTON Sworn

         By The Coroner                             93
         Cross-Examined    by Mr. Manning          106
         Cross-Examined    by Mr. King             106
         Cross-Examined    by M r s . McBrien      109
         Cross-Examined    by Miss Addelmann       109
         Further by The    Coroner                 110

    DISCUSSION REGARDING PROGRAMME                 111
                                                            1

                                                      P.. LOilAS




                   SIXTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                 HONDAY, 26th NOVEfIB£R' 1D90

        THE CORONER:   Good morning.  I hope- you had a
   reasonable weekend, and that goes for everybody.   Can
   we press on with Hr. Lomas.?....

                    PHILIP LOIiAS Recalled

                   By THE COROttER (Cont.)

Q. Good morning, Mr. Loraas.  I think that as tar as I was
   concerned I had uore or less finished with my
   exaiaination in chief and I paused, and wa are now going
   to turn to the gentlemen and ladies sitting over there.

        HR*- MAXWELL:.   No questions, .thank you,, sir.

                 Cross-Examined by MR... flALE

Q. Just to'recap.,...it is a long time now since you were
   giving your evidence. You saw a great deal of evidence
   of cans of lager and drinks of all kings xa the hands
   of the supporters, is that right? - A. That is correct,
   sir, yes.

0. And although many of them ware well behaved some were
   not? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Q. And it was put to you that part of your duty ni?ht have
   been to interfere with the people who were aisbehaviag-
   and arrest them? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Q. But as you said that was not possible because of the
   ratio of your iaen to the ratio of supporters? - A. Yes,
   sir, that is correct again, sir.

Q. There is just one thing and that is that a great deal
   has been said and will be said again, I aa sure, about
   the crowd being good humoured.  Did you get tne
   impression of good humour? - A. No, sir,.

Q. Could it nave been aistaken, anyone who tnought they
   were good humoured, could that nave been oistaken for
   the glow of drink? - A. Yes, sir.

•Q. Have you had experience of dealing vitn large crowds
    before? - A. Yes, I nave, sir, but not on the sane
    basis as this particular day.

Q. Is it your experience these days that crowds are
   willing to do as you ask then to do? - A. Very rarely,
   sir.
                                                                                                      2

                                                                                              P.    LOMAS




0. And then it cones to be -a question of force if you want
   to lake thea'do something? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And is .it your, experience that when you attempt to. use
    force, m a t effect does that have on the crowd? Do
    they become easier to manage or lass easy to manage?- -
   ..A,: .Less .easy to .manage,., sir. .

0. Thank you.

                         Cross-Examined by nR. PAYliE

Q. Sergeant Lomas, I wonder if you would help the Jury,
   please, to follow a little more about trie planning, of
   the Police operation by reference to the Operational
   Order, and if the bundles are still available perhaps
   it would be helpful if the Jury were to have a copy,
   and you will be given a copy as well.

        Mil. PAYNE:  Sir, it ;aay be easier for the Jury to
   follow if the aap of the area can be put up on the
   SCiTereui,     aiiliCtl    irf


          Xiiii                       n ilu   u IC   v / p ^ i T d li U i td i   O’tiitSlT,   LOC    Lilci
   rcicoru, is. C2o5. jeurgive me t o e £ tt£ .t±ccin* to tuese
   numbers, but in five years ti:se' waen somebody reads
   tnis ....

   MR. PAYHE:                Quite.     It is important to refer to the
   numbers:

Q. In the Operational Order, Sergeant Loraas, wiiich is our
   number C285,. can you turn to tne page which affects
   you, whic.i is nuooered 35, -in the bottow rignt hand
   corner, Serial 23.   Sergeant Lootas, do you see in tae
   left nand coluun Serial 23, with your naae at the aead
   of the list of people in the Serial? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And at the top of this page do you see that you are
   part of Sub Sector 10? - A. Yes, sir.

0. Under the coaraand of Inspector Ilurapnries? - A. That .is
   correct, sir.

0. And just to complete the                    picture, under Sub Sector 10,
   if one looks at tae left                    hand column, there is Serial
   22, under tae control of                    Police Sergeant ilodgitts,
   which is responsible for                    pablic order .at riisfdlawoon
   Road, do you see that? -                    A. Yes, sir.

0. inen there is your Serial 23, public order Hiddlewood
   Road.  Over the page, Serial 24 under Sergeant Dolan,.
   also public order aiadlawood Road.- - A. Yes, sir.
                                                              ?*., LOMAS




       And Serial 25, public order Hillsborough Precinct,
       under Sergeant Perry? - A. Yes, sir.
B
    Q. So it' looks, as if under Sub Sector 10 there were tour’
       serials allocated, each of eight'Officers, each
       commanded by a Sergeant? - A. That is correct, sir.

    0. ■Now conse back, to- your: particular:serial, will"ydu,..-■"'■■■
        •which, is 23, and I would like you just to -go through
      . vmat your orders were.      Was it divided, like all the
        otner serials and the whole operation, into -tarae
        pnases,' one oefore the natch, two during the .natca and
        three after the match? - A. Yes, that is correct, sir.

    Q. And wnat were your duties at Phase 1, please? Just
       read it out. - A. "PC’s will patrol in pairs ,in
       Middlewood Road froas Uadsley Lane to Hinto Road to
       •uaintaih order and prevent any clash of suportars.
      •Direct supporters to side street parking and maintain .
       security of business premises,•paying special attention
D      to local public houses and shops'*.

    Q. Right, now just to' fill in the picture there in fact
       were three serials- allocated to Hiddlewood-Road,. as we.
       have just.seen, of which yours was nunber 23, tae
       others being 22 and 24? - A. Yes, sir.

    0. Just remind the Court, will you, which part of
       Middlewood Road your particular serial was allocated
       to, and it would be helpful to show by tne raap, please?
       - A. I was responsible for patrolling fcon wadsley Lane
       to .".into Road.

    Q. I a;i sure the Jury know tne area.   Could you just go
       and point for us, please? (The witness illustrated
       ais evidence o n .the nap ) Go back to uadsley L a n e -
       there is Wadsley Lane coming in fron the left - you can
       just see the word "Lane" and then out to tne left is
       the word "Uadsley**. That is wacisley Lana down to where
       - iiinto Road* - A. Yes.

    Q. So the north end of your Sector was just approaching
       the big junction where if one goes ,oore or less
       straight across one corses into Leppings Lane? - A. Yes,
       sir.

    Q. Thank you very «mch.   Please return to the witness box,
       will you? Just complete your orders - after. Paase i
       was completed, that is to say wnen tae .aatcn was
       started, what did you nave to do in Phase 2? - A. I was
       to taice refreshments at Claywheels Lane wnen authorised
       by ssatch control.
                                                               4

                                                       P.   LpiS.AS




O. Tnen Phase 3? - A. "On ca^aei'iiceaent of Paase 3, this
   serial will resume patcol in location ..."(as in Phase
   1) "... paying particular attention to shops and
   prevent any clash of supporters11.

Q. On the left hand column of these instructions,
   underneath the lis.t of ..people in your, serial, you. ware ,
   given directions as to your seating for the briefing,.
   is that right? - A. Yes, that -is correct, sir.




             /(•• You told tne Jury
                                         P. LOMAS



0. You told the jury on Friday that you attended the
   briefing on the morning of the match? - A. Yes, sir.

0. In your allocated seats? - A. Yes, sir.

0. When you were addressed by senior officers? - A. That is
   correct, sir.

0. I want you to just amplify...   That is the planning for
   the operation.  I want you to just amplify something
   which you told the court on Friday. The expression you
   used was "At about 2.30 pm it was if someone had flicked
   a switch"? - A. That is correct, sir.

0. I want you to explain that in your own words and to fill
   it in so the jury can get a picture of what you are
   describing.  First of all, from what position you
   personally, speaking only from your own knowledge,
   whereabouts where you at that time? - A. I was at the
   junction of Uadsley Lane and ?-1iddlewood Road, sir.

Q. From where you were, if you looked across the junction,
   could you see the mouth of Leppings Lane? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. From where you were could you see down Uadsley Lane? - A.
   Y es , sir.

O. And also in both directions up fliddlewood Road? - A. Yes,
   sir.

0. At that time - we are talking about 2.30 pm - first of
   all, describe the scene in terms of numbers ot pe ople
   about and what they were doing? - A. There were many
   thousands of people       can use the term "thousands",
   over a period of time.   The majority were standing
   around drinking cans of lager up until 2.30.

Q. I want you to put as much flesh and bones as you can on
   to this by giving the jury the picture of what you could
   see.  Go over to the map and put yourself in the position
   where you were.   Just point to it. - A. I was standing
   here on this corner and just over to that corner as well.

0. Keep your voice up as loud as possible and describe...
   I am only interested in the period just before 2.30 at
   the moment in terms of numbers of people, what can you
   see? - A. All the people attending the football match was
   walking up W'adsley Lane - this area - to an off-licence
   somewhere in this area here and also over...    I believe
   it is uphill and I believe there is a public house
   somewhere down here.    All the flow of the traffic, the
   pedestrian traffic, was walking up Wadsley Lane and away
   from the ground.    Then at 2.30, just as if a flick of a
                                                            6


                                          P. L0MA3


     switch had occurred, all the pedestrian traffic then
     started to walk back down Wadsley Lane towards
     Hillsborough.

Q. Now that is Wadsley Lane.   What was the picture like on
   Middlewood Road? - A. This area around here, there is a
   lot of take-away shops, fast food shops, there were
   crowds of people eating food and drinking beer and lager.

0.        THE CORONER:   When you say "This area here", there
     is a road there, I can't quite read it? — A. from
     Middlewood Road to Catchbar Lane, there are a lot of
     take-away food shops.   One serial was deployed in tnat
     area and that was obviously where the majority of people
     would be.

0.        MR. PAYNE:   What were they doing before 2.30 pm? -
     A. Just drinking alcohol and eating food.

0. Were they moving in any direction? - A. Away from the
   ground.   Up to 2.30 here were very few people who were
   actually walking down to the ground.

Q. Thank you.   You have dealt with it really, but at 2.30,
   about that time, what happened? - A. The flow of traffic,
   just like a tide turning, commenced to then start to walk
   towards the ground.   Before 2.30 they were walking away
   from the ground and then at 2.30 they were tnen walking
   down to the ground.

0. What kind of numbers are you talking about? - A.
   Thousands.

0. Which route did they take to the ground? - A. They came
   down Wadsley Lane and straight down Leppings Lane.

0. How long did this flow continue, can you help? - A. For
   approximately twenty-five minutes.

0. In what sort of numbers? - A. Thousands again, sir. The
   road was completely blocked.   It started off at 2.30
   with the pavements being heavily blocked and then half
   the road was blocked and then the full road was blocked.
   Traffic just couldn't flow at all.

0. Where was this flow all going? - A. Conning down '.ads lev
   Lane towards Leppings Lane and then towards the ground.

0. Along Leppings Lane? - A. Along Leppings Lane, sir, yes.

0. There is one other topic I want to ask you about, please.
   You have described in your evidence that you rieard shouts
   of alarm over the radio about the problems that
   Superintendent Marshall was having at tne ground? - A.
                                                                7



                                           P. LOMAS:


     Th&t is correct, sir.   Mow I must say I am assuming it
     was Superintendent Marshall,   I heard afterwards that it
     was Superintendent Marshall.   It could have been
     anybody.

Q. But the jury remember what you said about that and I am
   paraphrasing what you said.    You gave the details on
   Friday.   There was obviously some kind of emergency
   developing? - A. That is correct, sir.

0.   What time are we speaking of now? - A. As far as I   can
     recollect, sir, it would be about five to three.

0.    Is that when you made your way towards Leppings Lane? -
     A. No, sir.I considered moving      down to Leppings Lane
     but people were still coming towards the ground.
     Obviously I had my duties to do so I remained in ray
     position, although it was considered that I should go
     down there, but to go down would have then left my
     position completely void of manpower.

0.   I see.    Did I understand you to say in your evidence
     there was a time when you made your waytowards the
     bridge? - A. Yes, sir. Ue were waved down by either a PC
     or a Sergeant, waving us down to go down to the gates and
     we then ran down.

0. About when was that? - A. I would say approximately
   between three o'clock - the kick-off had occurred so I
   would say about five past three.

Q.   Just to help to understand this I would like you to look
     at a photograph, which is number C.2 55.   On this
     position your position of deployment is off to the right,
     isn't it? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

0. That road we can see diagonally in the top right hand
   corner of the photograph must be Middlewood Road?   That
   is where it would fit on the map. - A. I think that would
   be Parkside, sir.

0. Parkside, yes, that's right.    Catchbar Lane would be
   just off the photograph to the right and tnat bit where
   we can see a few cars .in the top right hand corner would
   be Parkside. - A. Yes, sir.

0. So your place of deployment is about where the officer is
   standing with the pointer? - A. Yes, sir,.

0. Relative to what we, can see? - A. Yes, sir.

0. J/hen you made your way down to the ground just after the
   kick-off, as you were saying, as you approached the
                                           p. LOMAS


   bridge did you see some supporters? - A. Yes, sir, there
   were about i50 to 200 remaining in the gateway.

0. Did you approach close enough to h e a r .any thing being
   said? - AY-By whom, sir?

0. By any of the supporters in the area? - A. They were
   complaining because we would not let them ifl£Q the
   ground.   On our arrival we formed a cordon across the
   mouth of the turnstiles and the supporters were
   complaining because we would not. allow them into tae
   ground.




                ✓
                \\   Did you see anyone
                                                                        9




                                                          P. C. LOMAS


Q. Did you see anyone on the bridge as you approached?
   Any supporters on the bridge? - A. No, sir.  Prior to
   me moving down there I saw quite a large group of
   supporters on the bridge, on the opposite Side to the
   turnstiles.

Q. Can we see that? - A. Yes, sir, that is correct.                It
   is where the pointer is.

Q.   What were they   doing? - A. Just sitting there,                   sir.

Q.   What stage was this that you saw these people? - A.
     Prior to us going down before the shouts or the radio
     message that there were problems there.

Q. When you went down there did you hear any of those
   people saying anything? - A. No, sir. All those
   people were gone.  There was nobody then on the
   bridge at all.  The road was virtually clear.   There
   was like 150 to 200 people just in the entrance to
   the turnstiles.

                  C   r   o   s   s   K   I   N   G   :

Q. Sergeant, looking at the Operational Order you had
   all your instructions seem to have been directed to
   what I could say was maintaining law and order? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. Was that in fact the gist of the briefing you got
   before you set out that day, that large briefing? If
   I could summarise it in that way was it various
   aspects of maintaining law and order? - A. Law and
   order and safety, sir.

Q. What was said about safety? - A. The safety to people
   attending the match both inside the ground and
   outside.

Q. What was said about it? - A. That we had to look at
   the safety aspect of all the people who were coming.

Q. You have repeated that three times, Sergeant.  What
   was said about safety? - A. I cannot remember the
   exact words that were said.

Q. What was said about law and order? - A. Just to
   maintain law and order.  To be fair but firm with the
   people attending the match.
                                                          10




                                            P. C. LOMAS


Q. Were examples given of what you had to do? - A. No,
   sir.  To be fair but firm covers a multitude of
   instances.

Q. The Operational Order which I am looking at, which is
   the Serial 23 Order which Mr. Payne has directed our
   attention to talks about maintaining order,
   preventing clash of supporters, paying attention to
   local public houses, shops and so forth? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. That is the detail which was obviously gone into in
   terms of law and order? - A. No, that is my personal
   briefing to my men.

Q. Tell me, did you regard yourself as understaffed on
   that day? - A. No, sir.

Q. I only say that because the evidence you gave earlier
   was that you did not feel you could make any arrests
   because of the ratio of Police to supporters? - A.
   What I said was that it would be tactically wrong to
   arrest under those circumstances.

Q. Let me ask you something else. Were you given any
   instructions as to the sort of numbers to expect
   going towards the ground? - A. I knew we were
   expecting 54,000 people that day.

Q. Were you given any instructions about the sort of
   numbers you were expecting to be going towards the
   ground at the point at which you were to be
   stationed? - A. That X cannot remember, sir.

Q. It does not look as if you were? - A. I cannot
   remember, sir.

Q. It certainly did not stick in your mind then? - A.
   No.

Q. You say you have been to football matches before
   whilst on duty, have you? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Which football teams? - A. Manchester United.  I have
   done two semi finals plus numerous other football
   matches.

Q. You come from the Doncaster area? - A. That is
   correct.
                                                                     11




                                                       P. C. LOMAS


    Q. Do you ever police the Doncaster games? - A. Yes,
       sir.
B   Q. What sort of gates do you get at Doncaster? - A. Up
       to 6,000.

    Q. A totally different situation to the sort of game
       that this was? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Tell me this; what time were you expecting the
       majority of fans to arrive? - A. From half past
       twelve to one o'clock to be making their way down to
       the ground then.

    Q. Why? - A. Because of the sheer numbers of people that
       would be attending the match.

    q   . why were you expecting this sheer number of people
          attending the match to be arriving between half past
          twelve and one o'clock? What led you to believe
          that? - A. So that they could get into the ground
D         with the minimum of fuss, sir, without having to
          queue for long periods of time*

    Q. I can understand your saying that is what you might
       want to do. Why were you expecting this crowd of
       people to arrive at that time? Was it something said
       at a briefing? - A. No, sir.   It was my
       interpretation.  If you had got 54,000 people coming
       to a match then they would attend early.

    Q. I just want to know why you would expect this? - A.
       It is my impression.

    Q. Have you ever seen a ticket for this particular
       match? - A. Photocopies of a ticket, sir, yes.

    Q . Do you know what it says on the reverse of the ticket
        as to the time that people who had these tickets were
        expected to be there? ~ A. No, sir, I did not examine
        them closely.

    Q. Have a look, Sergeant. —       A. Yes.

              MR. KING:      Sir this is   a photocopy of the   ticket.

              THE CORONER:      it does not matter.    Just read it to
    him.

           MR. KING:  Sir, I would prefer if he read it for
    me, sir. You will know what I am looking at.  (handed)




H
                                               P. C. LOMAS


         THE CORONER:     Yes.

Q.       MR. KING:   Would you read out what it says? - A.
     "You are requested to take up your positions 15
     minutes before the kick-off".

Q. Have you yourself ever looked at the Leppings Lane
   turnstile area? - A. No, sir.  Not closely anyway.

Q. So before the game you certainly did not have a look
   at it? - A. No, sir.

Q. You have not had a chance even after the game by the
   sound of it? - A. I have had the chance to look at it
   but that was not part of my detail.

Q. Would you agree with me there are just seven
   turnstiles for all the people who were going to have
   to go into the standing terraces of the Leppings Lane
   end? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Would you agree with me it is going to be impossible
   with that small area in front of those seven
   turnstiles to .get thousands ..-of peo ple.through -in a
   short t&tfe, just impossible.

     THE CORONER:   Just a minute.  I want to give you
reasonable latitude and I do not want to shut you up but I
do not want you to put something to a witness who is not an
expert on turnstile throughput.

       MR. KING:   That is a fair point.  I am developing
the slightly different point of where he was standing and I
will perhaps do it in a different way, sir.

       THE CORONER:     Yes.

Q.        MR. KING:   You know enough about football
     matches to know that if a lot of people come at once
     that is more difficult so far as turnstiles and
     people getting in is concerned than if people come in
     in an even flow.   You must know that much? — A. Yes,
     sir.

Q. Were you given any duties yourself in your briefing
   by way of monitoring the flow of people arriving at
   the ground? Were you told anything about that aspect
   of the matter? - A. We were told to expect large
   amounts of people, sir, who would be arriving at the
   ground to watch the game.
                                                          13




                                               P. C. LOMAS


Q. I understand you were told that. Were you told
   anything about monitoring? You understand
   monitoring? - A. Yes.

Q. Monitoring the flow of people, the sort of numbers
   who were arriving, to keep an eye on the flow and the
   rate at which people were arriving.  Were you asked
   to do anything about that? - A. That I cannot
   remember, sir, although we were expecting 54,000 and
   obviously 54,000 people were going to arrive.

Q. I am trying to be fair and as I said to other
   Officers you are just a foot soldier.  I do not mean
   that rudely.  You just had a small task to do and you
   can only do what your orders are.  It does not look
   as if you were given any specific task about keeping
   your eye on the flow, the rate at which people were
   arriving? Your job was just maintaining law and
   order.  That is basically right, is it not? - A. Our
   job was to ensure that the public could walk along
   the streets safely, yes.

Q.   Maintaining law and order.   You see, what interests
     me is this, Officer, you tell 'the  Inquest, and this :
     is after 2.30, that you were aware from your radio
     that something was happening at the Leppings Lane
     end? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.   What was that something which    you heard on the radio?
     - A. That the request was for the gate to be opened.

Q. No, I think it was before that that you had the
   specific message? - A. For the kick-off to be
   delayed.

Q. Those are specific things,  perhaps that is what you
   are referring to, I do not know. My note was that
   you were aware from the radio of something happening
   in the Leppings Lane end and fans were still coming
   and you kept your men where they were? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. What was your first indication of something going
   wrong at the Leppings Lane end? What was the gist of
   what you were hearing? - A. Just that I took it to be
   congestion, sir.

Q. Congestion at where? - A. The Leppings Lane end.

Q . In your mind what did you think w a s , therefore,
    happening at the Leppings Lane end, given that
    message? - A. From what I had seen earlier, sir,
                                                              14




                                              P. C. LOMAS


   there would be a lot of people, non-ticket holders,
   saying that they were going to go down to the ground,
   I believed that it was people with no tickets trying
   to get into the ground.

Q. You misunderstand my point.  That is speculating as
   to why people were there. What I am asking you i s ,
   in your mind what did you understand would be meant
   by congestion? What did you think was happening? -
   A. Congestion or fighting.

Q. You mean there would be congestion at the turnstile
   ends, that is the impression you got? - A. Yes, sir.
   I took it that there was trouble at the Leppings Lane
   end.

Q. You got the impression that the turnstiles were
   blocked from the message you could hear from
   Superintendent Marshall? - A. No, I got the
   impression that there was trouble at the Leppings
   Lane end.

Q. Then you heard Superintendent Marshall saying that
   the turnstiles were blocked^ - A. No, ■sir,- I never
   heard Superintendent Marshall'say that the turnstiles .
   were blocked.

Q. I beg your pardon because that is my note.     I
   apologise for that.

       THE CORONER:   This witness was going rather fast,
was he not? I have a small advantage in that X have the
transcript in front of me.  I think I have found the right
bit.  Can I read you what he says (Day 5-1Q4B) because it
may just he l p :

   "A. That is right, sir, yes.  It became apparent,
   because I heard certain radio transmissions, that
   there were problems down at Leppings Lane end.      I
   thought about deploying some of my manpower down
   there to assist them but fans were still coming in
   quite large numbers, albeit they d i d n ’t spill out on
   to the road, so then that again would have left my
   sector void of all manpower. Being aware that there
   were other serials down there I didn't deploy them,
   sir."

Do you want me to read any more or is that sufficient for
you?
                                                                  15




                                                  P . C . LOMAS

   MR. KING:   I am interested in the message from Sergeant
Marshall which he heard, sir.

     THE CORONER:     I will read the whole section.       It will
not take so long:

   "So you kept them up where you were? - A. I kept them
   where they were sir.

   Q. And presumably the situation continued as you have
   described until it started easing off at about what
   time? - A. It eased off, sir, about 5-to-3 time, like
   I said.  The road cleared of pedestrians. I could
   see down Leppings Lane at that stage towards the
   bridge, and I then allowed traffic to low back down
   there.

   Q. Yes, at about 5-to~3, as far as you were
   concerned, you opened the road again? - A. Yes, sir.

   Q. Can you remember, you may       not be able to remember,
   do you recollect whether any       vehicles did actually go
   down after you opened it, at       5-to-3, apart from
   emergency vehicles later on,       of course? - A. I think
   some did, sir, but it wasn't       that many.

   Q. Did you hear any messages at all about delaying
   kick-off? - A. Yes, sir.

   Q. Tell me a little bit about that? .- A. I heard
   Superintendent Marshall - like I say, radio
   transmissions were very, very poor, but I heard
   Superintendent Marshall to say that the turnstiles
   were blocked and he did request that the kick-off be
   delayed."

       MR. KING:      I am obliged.

       THE CORONER:      Do you want me to go on?

       MR. KING:      No, that is fine, sir.

Q. Let me go back to when you first heard there were
   problems.  What you have said to us today, and the
   words you used were your words, that one of the
   thoughts in your mind was that there might be
   congestion at the turnstile? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Tell me, the fans at that stage were still coming
   because that is at the stage that you blocked off the
   road? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                          16




                                            P. C. LOMAS


Q. In the light of that did you take any initiative to
   send a radio message to anybody to say, "Look, there
   are lots of fans still approaching towards the
   turnstiles"? - A, No, sir.  It was quite obvious that
   there were many, many fans coming down.


Q. Obvious to whom? - A. To the people at the
   turnstiles.

Q. It was obvious to anybody stationed at the turnstiles
   that there were lots of people still coming? - A.
   Yes, sir, the road was blocked.




                                  /Q.   So you were.
'   ii>
:v '•                                                                        17


                                                             P.   LOMAS


               Q.   So you were in a position where if you had wanted to radio
                    did you have a radio? - A. Yes, sir.

               Q. Who would you be responsible to? - A. The control room.

          jj Q. Who in particular? - A. Inspector Humphries.

               Q.   It does not look as if you had been asked to give any sort of
                    radio message orindication to control as to the numbers
                    arriving? That seems to be the case? - A. Yes, sir.

               Q. That is the case, is it? - A. That is the case, but having
                  said that, we are also expected to work on our own initiative.

               Q.    It is all right.  I have got the picture, Officer. The
                    picture is this, is not it, that for whatever reason you say     a
                    lot of fans suddenly started coming after about 2.30.   That
                    is the picture, is not it? - A. All the fans started coming
                    after 2.30.

               Q.   All right.   You say all the fans started coming after   2.30.
                    That is the picture, is not it? - A. Yes, sir.

          JJ   Q.   You were concerned with law and order? - A. I wasconcerned
                    for everything that was going off around me.

               Q. Yes, but your primary concern was law and order? -A. Yes,
                  because of the condition of the fans.

               Q. Yes.  The fans, however, just walked past you and went towards
                  the ground, this large group of fans? - A. Walked, staggered
                  and was carried.

               Q. Yes, walked, staggered, carried.  But that was the way they
                  approached the ground? - A. Yes, sir.

               Q. There is no question on that evidence of a whole load of fans
                  running towards the ground? - A. There was nobody running,
                  sir.

               Q. No.  As far as you were concerned - I am not criticising you
                  for this;  you were doing what you were expected to do, no
                  doubt - you were just standing, watching, observing? - A.
                  Standing, watching and talking to the fans.

               Q. Y e s . N o w , let me move on to another matter. You have given
                  evidence to this Inquest that these fans were not in good
                  humour? - A. That is correct, sir.

               Q. What made you say that? - A. Because of certain instances
                  that I saw and heard.

               Q. What were these instances which you      saw and heard? - A.
                  Swearing, obscenities to members of      the public.

               Q. Why does that mean a group of fans is not in good humour? - A.
                  If somebody is telling you where to go and shouting and



          H
                                                           18


                                            P.   LOMAS


   swearing at residents, then I take that not to be in good        .
   humour.

Q. So obscenities is the lack of good humour.  Anything else?
   Just the general behaviour of the fans, the atmosphere that
   there was around.

Q. What was this atmosphere around?  It is very easy to state.
   What what it? Give us some flesh on this allegation? - A. You
   can get a feel for a situation whether fans are in good humour
   or not.  It is an overall feeling, an overall picture.

Q. Tell me this.  Is it your view, Officer, making the estimate
   you are, that all the thousands of fans who were coming after        ■
   2.30 had all been in public houses and off-licences? - A.
   Certainly the very vast majority of them, because they were
   still carrying beer on the way down there.

Q. I want to analyse that statement.  How many thousand people
   are you talking about? - A. The width of the road wide for 15
   minutes, everybody shoulder to shoulder.

Q. How many thousands are you saying to this Inquest you are
   talking about? - A. I would say about 10,000 people.

Q. You are saying 10,000 people have been in the local public
   houses? - A. The vast majority were carrying cans, carafes of
   wine, beer.

Q. How many public houses to your knowledge were there in the
   area where you were standing? - A. To my knowledge, I d o n 't
   know Sheffield, so I can't say.

Q. You have been good enough to give your view as to where you
   think they were going.  Perhaps you could give us your view as
   to how many public houses you felt were in the area? - A. I
   don't know how many public houses....

         THE CORONER:   If he does not know it, he does not know
   it.    You can't ask him to say something he does not know.

         MR. KING:     Fair comment, sir:

Q. You see, Officer, you have been very ready to tell this
   Inquest your opinion of where all these people were going when
   they were going up the road, because you have told us you
   thought they were going to some public house? - A. They were
   going somewhere, wherever they were going, and then they were
   coming back with beer.  So from that when I say it is my
   opinion, they were obtaining drink from somewhere.  So I am
   assuming it would be either an off-licence or a public house.

Q. So you are saying that 10,000 people were all in your view
   people who had been going to public houses? - A. I said the
   vast majority were the worse for drink, yes.

Q. 10,000? - A. Yes.
                                                                   19


                                                 P.    LOMAS




    Q. You gave an example at the very end of forming a cordon across
       the turnstiles? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. How is that done, forming a cordon?            A line of Officers
B      standing shoulder to shoulder.

    Q. And what is the purpose of a cordon of that sort?         A. To
       prevent people going past.

    Q. Is that something which is unknown to you as an example of
       Police technique or something which you have seen in operation
       before? - A. It is something I have seen in operation before.

    Q. It is a ready example of what Police control can do to stop
       people progressing, is not it? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Putting a cordon across the road? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Just as a simple example, if you wanted and you were in charge
       to stop people going along Leppings Lane from a certain point
       you could put a cordon of Police across the lane? - A. If I
       had sufficient Police Officers.
D           THE CORONER:      Mr. Payne wants to intervene.

            MR. PAYNE:      I was just wondering which people he was
       talking about.

            MR. KING:   No, rather like Mr. Payne I am giving a
       hypothetical example.

            THE CORONER:   I have got distracted,        What was the
       answer to the question?

            MR. KING:      The answer is, "If I had sufficient
       manpower", sir:

    Q. I am interested in Police techniques in this question, because
       I was interested in the fact that at the end of this incident
       you were giving an example of a Police cordon.  A Police
       cordon across a road is a well recognised technique of
       stopping anybody progressing along a road? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Thank you very much.

                    Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPQLE:

    Q. Sergeant, you have been asked a lot of questions by my learned
       friend, Mr. King, about the arrival of the fans to the ground.
       He slipped in there, if I can put it like that, a question
       based on a ticket that was given out.  He quite plainly said
       it. You had not seen a ticket.  You read from it.  I want to
       go back over that with you, if that is possible.  Can.I hand
       you up an actual match ticket.  That would be much easier to
       look a t .




H
                                                                            20

                                                        P.   LOMAS


           THE CORONER:       Which colour is it?                                 .
       /


           MR. CATCHPOLE:            It is a red one.

           THE CORONER:        Remind me which ones the red ones were?

           MR.   CATCHPOLE:     The West Stand, sir.

           THE   CORONER:     Shall    we number this as an exhibit.

          MR. CATCHPOLE:          I would like that one back, sir.    It is
     the only original I        have got. Perhaps    we could make some
     photocopies of it.

           THE CORONER:       Yes.     May we photocopy it?

          MR. CATCHPOLE:        I have an unmarked one.              I will hand it
     up to the Officer.

          THE CORONER:    We obviously d o n ’t want to deprive you of
     the original.  Is it all right if we notionally number it.      We
     won't write on it and then we will make a copy of it and treat
     the copy as the exhibit.    Is that satisfactory to everybody?
     We are not going to be too worried about it, are we?       What
     number will that be?   (Marked Exhibit C.287)

Q.        MR. CATCHPOLE:   If you turn over, Sergeant, you will see
     on the back the wording Mr. King read out, "You are requested
     to take up your position 15 minutes before kick-off”? - A.
     Yes, sir.

Q. What that does not say is, "You are requested to arrive at the
   ground 15 minutes before kick-off", does it? - A. That is
   correct, s i r .

Q. If you turn back to the front, Sergeant, you will see there
   are two portions to the ticket.  The bottom on the left-hand
   side as you look at it it says "To be given up"? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. And then there is a perforated line, and then on the bottom at
   the right-hand side it says, "This portion to be retained”? -
   A. That is correct, sir.

Q. That quite obviously is when you go through the turnstiles
   they take one half of it and the fan will retain the right-
   hand side? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. On the right-hand side you will see a number of words which
   has "Gangway"? - A. Yes.

Q. What does your ticket say? - A. ”W ” .

Q. Gangway W.       Then it has "Row"? - A. Yes, sir, "Row 20".

Q. And then beneath the word "Row" there is "Seat”? - A. 65.
                                                               21


                                            P.   LOMAS


Q. So that would be the position you would assume that the fan .
   that had this ticket would be taking up in the ground? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. If you turn back over and read the passage Mr. King said to
   you, whi-c'h is, "You are requested to take up your position 15
   minutes before kick-off", what does that mean to you? - A.
   That would mean, sir, that I would have to enter the ground,
   find out where gangway W i s , row 20 and seat 65, and be sat in
   my seat 15 minutes prior to kick-off.

Q. Thank you very much, Sergeant.

                  Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Sergeant Lomas, is it usual for the fans to ask you where they
   can get a drink when they are arriving at the ground? - A. It
   is the first time that I have encountered it on this
   particular match.  Since then, yes, some people have asked me
   where they can get a drink prior to kick-off.

Q. You say there were people, residents, complaining about the
   behaviour of the vans.     Were there any serious incidents? - A.
   No, there were not.     All through my operation I only saw Sne
   small fight.  I d o n ’t know who it was between.  It very
   quickly calmed down and the people were allowed to go o n #heir
   way.

Q. There was no serious incident? - A. No serious incident, n o .

Q. Do you carry a notebook with you and a pen to jot down
   anything that is causing you some alarm so you can pass on
   that message to somebody else? - A. Yes, I do have a pocket
   book and pen for making records of any instances that take
   place.

Q. Do you put down the times when these incidences are occurring?
   - A . Yes.

Q. I remember you saying that Inspector Humphries thought there
   was going to be trouble.  Did he do anything about this? - A.
   Yes, he asked me if I would bring two of my men to supplement
   another Serial.  So I got two of my men and along with a
   second Officer I remained at that location.

Q. What kind of trouble was he thinking about? - A. Fighting.

Q. You have just told me that there was nothing serious? - A.
   There was not anything serious.  What I said was that it
   appeared that there was likely to be.   You asked me if there
   was any serious incident.  A potential serious incident is
   different to an actual incident taking place.

Q.   So you just felt there was going to be trouble? - A. Yes.

Q.    What made you think that? - A. The atmosphere that was    in the
     air.   It sounds very - it is very hard to describe it.     A
4
                                                                      22


                                                       P.   LOMAS


             crowd of people, you can get a feeling of what is emanating
             from them, and the feeling that we were getting was not good
             vibrations.

        Q. What time was this, please? - A. From, I would estimate,        and
    B      it is only an estimation, from about quarter-past-1.

        Q. As early as that? - A. Yes, but I would say the feeling was
           because of the amount of intoxicants that were being consumed.
           Somebody who has got intoxicants in their system act
           differently to when they are completely sober.

        Q. If they had been taking so much alcohol why were not there
           any serious incidents taking place? - A. Basically because
           they were one lot of fans.  It is not that often that you
           do get fighting between one batch of supporters.  Same as
           if I can relate it to the Doncaster Rovers fans, the
           Doncaster Rovers don't fight Doncaster Rovers' supporters.
           They all fight the away team.

        Q. Did the fans only start walking on the road once the road j?as
           closed, or were they walking on the road before? - A. No, they
           were walking on the road before.  That is why I closed off the
    D      road when the fans started to arrive in larger numbers. They
           were mainly walking on the pavement, but the pavements were so
           blocked then they started to talk on to the ro a d .

        Q.   So it was you who closed the road? - A. Yes.

        Q.   Don't you think it would have been better to insist on   those
             fans keeping to the pavement? - A. There were far too    many.
             You just could not keep them onto the road.   The full   road was
             blocked.  As they were walking down Wadsley Lane they    closed
             the road themselves.

        Q. I find that difficult, that part, because - X -think to close the
           road off you are going to have congestion near the turnstile
           area and the main gate.   I think it was better to keep them in
           a long line along the pavement, even though it would go back a
           long way. - A. That would be a physical impossibility.      On
           that day it would be a physical impossibility for any cordon
           of Police to keep people on to the pavements,     because at some
           stage you would have had a vast congestion at some other
           point, and that would be on a road.   So we would have people
           walking, if you like, orderly on the pavements, but some
           distance away there would be vast congestion at some point.




                              /Q. Could not barriers




    H
                                                                  23




     /


Q. Couldn't barriers nave been erected 'aIon® the pavaaenc
   to ensure that they stayed on the pavement? - A.. People
   unfortunately don't do wftat we would .like tries to do.
   People would have climbed over the barriers and...just
   walked on the other side of the barriers.    we can't
   barrier off a road.

■ Q»; I have, seen it. quite of ten by the ■ removable''. barriers,d :
     and people do keep behind .those .oarriers.       If they
     don't they would be put to the end of queue and
     probably not even be allowed into the ground at a i l . . I
     think people must be «ade to do' these things really. -
     A. I take wnat you are saying., but .it is a anysical
     impossibility under certain circumstances to do.that.
     Yes, in theory you .can do it. In practice it is
     completely different.

Q. .1 think the Police .really .should be tougher with tae
    people .......

                 THE COROLiER:       Mrs. McBrien, enough.

                 h RS.   tfcBRIEH:   That is an opinion, sorry:

0. You say that you are -there to. keep law and order,   well
   there roust be rules and peo.ple must obey these rules, .
   for safety reasons, mustn't tney? - A.. That '-is correct,
   but in a practical .situation - we are talking;now in', a .
   practical situation - what I a,-a saying to you is. that
   in the situation we were faced with, or I was faced
   with, at ay location it would have been a physical,
   impossibility to get chose people onto the paveaeats. to
   for,.! an orderly line.

0. But there is a photograph, if I. may refer to that, that
   Hr. King has,, showing the state of the road at, I triink
   it is 2.25 or 2.26.

            THE COROtiER;  I think I should remind you, tirs-
     McBrien, that this Officer, ais evidence -iss cean
     categorical that the tide or flow    or crowd, or whatever
     y o u like,  occurred at after 2.30, so I .will show that
     photograph to -him but it is not going to help very
     aucn.. It is number 282..

0.        HRS. IscdRIEH:  Looking at this photograph- here,
     it looks as though tne crowd could be '.controlled. - A.
     Yes, can I just make one point on tnis photograpn?-
     Ihese people are coding fro;e the opposite direction to
     where I was standing so we are looking away fro;?, -c.y
     position.  This photograph does not relate to where I
     3 i.i l •
                                                                       24

                                                                    LOi iAS




    0. You were at the -shottar and of Leopin-is' Lane? - A. That
        is correct.    This is the photograph f rora Lappings Lane
        looking towards Penistone load.       I. an at. Lappings Lana
D      loo icing towards. U'adsley Lane,, so the. flow of people is ..
        coding frosTi the opposite direction to the photograph..
        Trie photograph has nothing to. do with- iw position.

    Q. So there'was cora-siderafely'gr'ea'tet fIaw'/-froiSv-^.was'.i t"--:;
       the roundabout? - A. Fro;n wads ley Lane.       Yes, I voui.fi .
       agree with you that the pedestrians on tnis side, you
       could control thenj, and when the flow of pedestrians
       was like this and we saw people waIking on tna road,
       then we did tell them to go onto tna pavement, out what
       I aia referring to, that whan they folly blocked tne
       road with people walking down, it would -then be a
       physical impossibility for you to get tne.a o n t o .the
       pavement.

    Q. I .was outside of -the aain entrance of Lappings-Lane:
       last Saturday, a wee'ic last Saturday. - it was' 17'th
       hoveusber.  I did notice that no re fans do coese down tna
n      road, rather than froa the garage,, up that longer end.
       I do understand tnat there is a greater prohles.       It is
       a snort stretch of lane though, isn' t it, .there?,- .Are -
       we talking about coding froa the garage?

    0. Compared with the other one? ■ A. Yes, froKi wiadsley
       Lane it is a shorter section.

    0   . Yes,    you would say it was impossible at that tiis? -
                 30
          A. It certainly was impossible for us to get tneci onto
          the paveaent.

    Q. I suppose tnat would create a problems really.. .Did you
       know tnat Gate .C nad been opened at 2.52? - A. I snou
       that a gate was opened. The times,, l i k e .I said, 'they; .
       are approximate wnich I have given.- If. you tell' tie
       that the gate was opened at 2.52 -then I will accept
       that.

    0. Yes.  So way do you think Superintendent Marshall would
       request delaying the kick off after the decision to
       open the gates had been .made?

               THE COKOiiES:   ■ So, that is an impossible .qu.estion
          for tnis witness:

    0. Don't answer that question, and I don't allow you 'to
       answer it.

    U.         -A'dS. iicBklEh: Once Gate C was opened, were .tne
          supporters who were filling the paversent along Lappings
          Lane and approaching the ground, able to .waik'-straight
          into the stadium?




H
                                                                           25


                                                                 '    L Q 1 4 A S :




            THE CORGiiER:   sirs, dciirien, this witness wasn't. ■
     .there.   If he answers tnis question he is telling' you
     wnat he has. read in .the papers,, waat ne has heard in.
      trie Inquests.   Ha wasn't tnere,--die. has. told .us'' quite. ;-
     clearly he wasn't there.      You- can't ask hiu waat he
     couldn't see. . You can ask .him uhetner he could see
     Q * i fc A   C*

0. Could you see Gate C? - A. wo, sir.

                  THE CQRGHER:    You can' t ask that .-question.

          HRS. McBRIEM:    I an sorry, about ■taat, but. I. did.
     actually raake notes:

Q.. You actually said those- things-. X .have- just -turned it
    into a question.   I nave recorded that part on. Friday. '

          -       THE CGiiOiiEE: I an? sorry. ■ Does a n y b o d y else in
     tneir        notes - I don't recollect this witness say inn
     tnat,        but does anybody in their notes, recollect tnat
     being        said?

           HR. KING:.   I suspect firs. I-icSrien is referring to
     the end of the Officer s evidence, where he said., *‘Wa
     were waved down, to Leppings Lane*’. . I suspect -lirs.
     Hcfirien is- at that stage of his evidence. .

          THE CORONER:   what he said about kick-off..                Mrs.
     dcBrien, I aa not allowing the question anyway. •

Q.        HRS. McBRIEH:    You say you formed a cordon of
     Officers and you   stopped about 150-200 fans ..entering
     the ground? - a . Tuat -is correct, yes.

Q. I. believe these' had tickets for the aatch? - A.; Yes,
   that is correct.

Q. were tnese fans carrying alcoholic drinks? - A. I
   didn't see any of then carrying alcoholic drinks but,
   yes, s o a e w e r e tne worse for drink.

0. Just one aors question, .Sergeant. You heard tne
   delaying request, a request for a delay of. the kick                     .
   off, di d n’t you? - A. Yes.

Q. And you did say that you knew it was Superintendent
   Roger Marshall? - A. I learnt afterwards tnat it was
   Superintendent Marshall.- I didn't know his voice at
   that tine.

0.. I may have evidence to contradict tnat. - A. If.
    somebody now told rae tnat it was somebody else I will
    accept, that. I didn't, know Superintendent Harsnall's
voice.  I just believed -that it was Superintendent /
Marshall who said it.

I do believe- it was somebody else. -,'A. I will accept -
that.

Thank you vary auca,. Sergeant.,. /                 , ,

           Cross-Examined by MISS ACDL£hA^

Officer, you have told us tnat in the past -you had bean
involved in policing -two other semi-final football
matches, is that correct? - A. That is correct, .sir,
yes.

Can you tell rae this, were similar numbers involved in
tnosa two patches - number o f .supporters'expected? - A.
I believe so, sir, yes.

Looking to that previous.experience o? yours, if you
can imagine naif an -hour -before .kick off, 2..30 .ti:~e,
what were the numbers approaching to enter the ground
half an hour before kick off, compared to the *39
situation? - A. Thera was far less, than there was in
*89, far less.

You told us that'-when you received the radio aessa^a,
or heard the radio message, you thought"that there was .
soae congestion? - A. Yes, that is correct.

 And tiiat you believed that people/with no ticicets were
 going to tne ground? - A. That is correct, sir.        I
 heard many people ware asking for spare tickets, to
.say, "C ox ae on, we. -will get in” , and I just couldn't
 understand, it because without a ticket, how would you
 gat in past .tne turnstiles?

And can you say wnat tine you were nearing this? Was
it throughout the afternoon, or -just when? - A. up
until 2.30 tine people were asking for spare ticicets.,
After 2.30 they then nade their way down to tne ground
and like I say,. I heard aany say, "we will get in*', and
I just couldn't understand how you can get it without a.
ticket.

I would like to ask you about a question that was put
to you by ;ay learned friend, that was with regard to
tne practicability of cordoning off tna' .area to relieve-
congestion - putting a cordon across the r o a d . - A. To
put a cordon acros-s the road would have caused -nore
congestion, albeit away frors tna turnstiles, but a vast
amount of congestion would have occurred.
                                                                  27


                                                         ■ P r_ L iM S



Q«. -So if you had had sufficient manpower would you have
     considered doing such a thing? - A* Yes, or certainly .-
     to slow cue flow down a little bit,..but I would have .
     needed a vast amount of --Manpower. :

0 . What sort of manpower do- you think we would be talking
   .of? - A... To. form a. cordon effectively .I..would, want. at-. -
                                                                    ,
    least two to. three Officers deep, shoulder ;to-"shoulder* .
    a line,    riy experience of cordons in public order
    situations, where you have on 1/ got one line of Police
    Officers, a crowd that has got their eye set.on
    reaching a goal will, push at the cordon, and at its
    weakest point it will oreak, so to pot a cordon on
    sufficiently you would need at least, a line -of bobbies '
    two to three deep.

Q.       raa-ny in. total would that aean? -- A. I would 'be
     looking at about 50 Officers.

0. Thank you, Sergeant.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL          ,

Q. Officer,, you have described the atmosphere that you '
   sensed on that afternoon and you have just been
   explaining the. size of cordon in your view would be
   required to have provided.an effective cordon.      At what ;
   point at you postulating 50. Officers .would nave .been.. /
   sufficient to fora a cordon? - A'. Xo get a cordon into ..
   place we would have had .to have known to expect, taat
   volurae of people, and get it there before the numbers
   of- people arrived, so the 50 Officers y o u .would need
   them prior to 2.30.

Q.    In view of the atmosphere that you nave described what
     do you think the effect would have been to nave impose-;:
     a cordon to keep ticket holding fans, for example, fros             -'
     getting into Leppings Lane? - A.. I think that we would,
     have n a d .a serious public order incident.

0.. Well, that is. perhaps Police jargon.   uhat do you sean
    by tnat? - A. fighting would have occurred.. People
    would nave.tried to have got down to the ground to see .
    if they could get sooie tickets, froa down there* '

Q* Thank you.

          MR.. dAL£:   Sir, can I put one sna'Il point?

              Further C-ross-Exacained by iYA. :ML£

Q.   I say sraail point: you have.been asxen by various•
     people, indicating thatyou raust nave been aistaken and
     that notaing would nave happened with tnese tans, no
                                                            28


                                                    - P . LO, ;AS:




   fighting- or anything. Is it your correct recollection
   that a serious incident did oc
   Yes, sir.

Q. was anyone killed? - A. Yes, sir.                                 "


Q. Ihank

         HR. PAYNE:    Sir, I wonder if I may be. .permitted
   to ass. a question?

             Further Cross-Examined by MR. rAYftE

Q. Sergeant, this follows the subject which -has been
   explored by several Counsel already.   It is about your
   experience of numbers arriving at the ground.   You have
   dealt with two previous serai-finais where you ixava bean
   on duty? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. At which ground were they? - A. At Hillsborough, sir.

0. And you have compared this experience with those.
   previous matches? - A. Yes,.sir.

0. And you have given your answer about that.   How, I waat
   you just to help a little sore.. You also told Mr* King
   tnat you have experience of Police duties, at Doncaster?
   -- A. Yes, Barnsley and Sheffield - Sheffield Wednesday,
   Sheffield United.




           /Q. You aientiooed that .....
                                         P.   LOMAS


     ✓
Q. You mentioned that they had gates of 4,000 to 6,000? - A .
   Yes.

Q. So your most useful comparison is between this semi-final
   and the other semi-finals at Hillsborough? - A. Yes,-sir.

Q. Have you ever seen such a large crowd arriving so late? -
   A. No, sir, never.

             Further Cross-Examined by MR* KING;

Q. Was it your impression on the day, officer, that the
   expectation of yourself was that the crowd would have
   arrived much earlier? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Did you get the impression from your briefing that
   everyone else was expecting the crowd to arrive much
   earlier? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. It would be fair to say that the whole - from your
   impression - that the whole police planning was    geared to
   people arriving much earlier? -   A. Yes, I would say that
   that would be correct.   Going on previous experiences we
   were expecting the same thing to happen.

Q. And that the planning seemed to   be on the basis    that
   everyone would be arriving more   or less evenly flowing
   over a period of time? - A. No.   I would say you are
   incorrect there.   People who arrive very early because
   they wanted to get their seat, then you do get a large
   amount of people arriving and then tailing off.

Q. Did you regard the position after 2.30 as unpoliceable
   from your point of view? - A. Not unpoliceable, but with
   difficulty.

         THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien.

           Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. I would just like to come back on the point.   You say it
   would be impossible to filter out ticketless fans that
   day? - A.

Q. If that was so, it would be impossible to continue with
   the football match, I would have said?

        THE CORONER:   No, that is a conclusion you are
   drawing.   You can ask him a question.   He has answered
   what he thinks but you are asking for a conclusion of
   Sergeant Lomas who was posted in one location to do a
   particular job.   Next question.
                                                                30




                                               P.   LOMAS


Q.     ' MRS. McBRIEN:     Do y o u think it was necessary to
     filer out ticketless fans that day? - A. I didn't feel it
     was necessary at that stage because I honestly believed
     that without a ticket they couldn't get into the ground.

Q. Would you think that somebody farther down the road was
   going to have problems if all these people without
   tickets were going to be congested in that area? - A.
   Yes.   I was very naive. There were serials deployed at
   the turnstiles and I assumed that they would then filter
   out the ticketless fans there and they would walk away on
   their way.   They would accept that they weren't going to
   get into the ground.

Q. Did you warn the serials at the turnstiles about this
   problem? - A. I didn't do that personally, no.

                      Further by THE CORONER;

Q. I just want to pick up one point.    You have estimated
   the crowds coming down the hill and you have put a figure
   on that.   Can I just be quite clear; you didn't count
   them, did you? - A. No, sir.    I said10,000 on the basis
   that the sheer volume of people who were walking on the
   road and over the period of time that they were walking.
   It may have been 5,000.   It may have been more.    I said
   10,000. That is purely an estimation.     I have no doubt
   I may be far wrong, sir.

Q. What you are trying to say is that this was a very large
   crowd? - A. It was a very very large crowd, sir.

          THE CORONER:   Mr. King, I don't want to cut the
     ground from under your feet.   Do you want to...?

          MR. KING:   I don't think so, sir.   We are all
     dealing with propositions and testing propositions of
     thousands of people, all drunk, all been to the public
     house, the jury can draw its own conclusion.

          MR. PAYNEs   That is not exactly what the witness
     said - "all drunk" - he didn't say that.

          THE CORONER:       No.   Then Mr. King isn't giving any
     evidence, is he?

          MR. KING:      I   am sure Mr. Payne is relieved!

          THE CORONER:     Ladies and gentlemen, when the time
     comes I will do my best to sum-up this evidence for you
     and I will do my best to do it fairly as to what the
     witness has said and I may possibly give you some - in
     fact I am entitled   to give you some guidance - but in. the
     final analysis it will be your decision as to whether you
                                     P.   LOMAS


believe the witness, whether he is telling the^ truth,
whether he is telling the truth but has made mistakes,
errors of recollection or what have you, how much weight
you put on this bit of his evidence as against that bit.
That will be, in the end, your decision.

     Although I have already explained to you this is an
inquisition and not a trial, it is very difficult to -
and I am not complaining - but it is very difficult not
to allow people with a particular interest to put
particular points of view.
     You have got a difficult, but interesting, task
ahead of you. Well, not just ahead of y o u but throughout
this time when you are actually sitting, thinking about
it.

     You would agree with that, wouldn't you?

     MR. KING:   Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:   There is one point which has crept
into this evidence, and I mention it because it is
opening another avenue, and that is the issue about
whether or not - I am not sure whether it is an issue for
these Inquests, but it has crept in - whether or not it
is permissible to filter out ticketless fans.     In other
words, does a police officer have authority to prevent
somebody walking down a public highway simply because he
doesn't have a ticket, even if   there is a match at the
other end of the road?

     I think it may be that other persons would be in a
better position to deal with that, but anything you wish
to say to me on that point?

     MR. KING:   Sir, I didn't ask any questions of this
officer, but may I say this, sir, to help:    there is a
body of evidence which no doubt we will hear as to what
happened at the 1988 semi-final.   Sir, if I refer you to
paragraph 214 of the Taylor Inquiry, you will see that
that issue as to the filtering of tickets, evidence that
it occurred in 1988 and didn't   occur in 1989, is a live
issue which can be gone into.     This officer can't deal
with it.

     THE CORONER:   That is my feeling.     I think it
would be very unfair.

     MR. KING:   If it helps you, sir, on the issue of
permissibility, certainly there is a body of evidence
that in 1988 that is what happened.
                                                                    32



                                '               P.   LOMAS


        ' MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I didn't interrupt the first time.
     Mr. King mustn't give evidence. We are hearing the
     evidence here.

          THE CORONER:   I appreciate that, Mr. Payne.         I
     don't think Mr. King was intending...         I think he was
     intending to be of assistance to me.         Maybe this is a
     point which we ought to d i s c u s s at some point without the
     jury to determine whether or not this is an avenue which
     we need to explore, but we will not explore it with
     Sergeant Lomas anyway.

          Can I say to y o u , thank you very much indeed for
     being here for the three days you have been here.

                         (Short adjournment)

          THE CORONER:     I have just put that up.          That is
     the ticket.

          The next witness is Mr. Wright.

                      ROSS MARK WRIGHT Sworn

                           By THE CORONER:

Q. You are Ross Mark Wright? - A. Yes.

Q. Of                                                        Devon? -
   A. Yes.

Q. You in 1989, and may still be, were a self-employed
   painter and decorator? - A. That is correct.

Q.   Is that still your occupation? - A. Yes.

Q.   You are a supporter of Liverpool Football Club? - A. Yes.

Q. You belong to the Cornwall Liverpool S u p p o r t e r s '   Club? -
   A. That is correct.

Q. On the 15th April, 1989, I take it you and quite a lot of
   others - 40 to 45 you said - set off to come and watch
   the semi-final? - A. That is correct.

Q.   You travelled by coach and the coach came from Truro -             at
     least the firm came from Truro.   That is just inside
     Cornwall? - A. Yes, it is down the bottom end.

Q. You had a £6 ticket? - A. Yes.

Q. I think your recollection is that it merely said
   "Liverpool end".   Can you just put that ticket up again?
   It may have been a different colour, your ticket, but can
                                                               33



                                           R.   M.   WRIGHT




     you just look and see whether your recollection is that
     it looked something like that? - A. Yes, but the terrace
     tickets were slightly different.

Q. Yes, but that sort of general shape? - A. Yes.

Q. I think I am right in saying that as far as you were
   concerned, coming up from Devon, you said there were no
   real traffic delays? - A. No.

Q. You managed to get to Sheffield.   Can you remember
   approximately what time you actually arrived in
   Sheffield? - A. I think it was between half past one and
   quarter to two.

Q. You did notice as you were driving through Sheffield
   there were quite a lot of pubs open? - A. That is right.

Q. And there was a mix of Liverpool and Nottingham people
   who appeared to be drinking at the pubs? - A. That's
   correct.

Q. You couldn't, of course, see into the pubs.   I take it
   this was because you saw people outside in the car parks?
   - A. Yes, it was a nice sunny day.

Q.   It was a beautiful day.    You had been to the     1988 match
     as well? - A. That's correct.

Q. The coach found its way to Halifax Road, is that right? -
   A. I think that's the road.

Q.   I know you don't know Sheffield and if you don't know
     just say so, but can you recollect whether it was in the
     same area as where the coach parked last year?    I take
     it you came by coach then? « A. Yes.    It was a totally
     different area.

Q. It was different? - A. Yes.

Q. Did the coach driver have any difficulty finding a
   parking space? - A. Back in 1988, as we turned off the
   motorway to come into Sheffield the police had stopped us
   and officers had come on board to ask if we had any
   alcohol, "If you have got it, hand it over."   If we were
   stopped again we would be turned back and sent back down
   the motorway.   We then proceeded into Sheffield and we
   were stopped just as we started getting into the centre
   of the city and then we had an escort back out to come
   back in around Liverpool way.   However, in 1989 we went
   right through. We didn't get stopped at all.
                                        R.   M. WRIGHT


Q. So you came off the motorway, drove into Sheffield and
   then - did the coach driver have any idea where he was
   going or did he just sort of follow what appeared to be
   cars and coaches? « A. I think there was a police officer
   on one junction who was directing the traffic because
   obviously we came in the Nottingham Forest way.

Q. Yes, because you were coming from the south, of course.
   In fact the coach eventually stopped and I think you have
   a recollection there was a Gateway supermarket and a
   Queensway store and a Comet store in that vicinity? - A.
   Yes, that*s right. We came in and the Secretary of the
   supporters* club had to get an extra seven or eight
   tickets. We dropped him off down by Sheffield
   Wednesday's ticket office at the Spion Kop end.   We were
   waiting there and then the police officer came and said,
   "You are a Liverpool coach at the Forest end, you can't
   wait here, you are going to have to go up to where the
   Liverpool people are parked."

Q. I am interested in what you have to say about the
   Secretary getting off to get some more tickets. That is
   an aside really, but were these tickets actually waiting
   for him? - A. Yes.

Q. They were ordered? - A. Yes, they were ordered.

Q. It was just a matter of picking them up? - A. Yes, that's
   right.

Q. In fact the police officer, or somebody, moved the coach
   on from that area because they realised you were
   Liverpool supporters? - A. Yes.

Q. Eventually the coach parked at about what time? - A. I
   think we parked up around quarter to two, something
   around there.

Q. I'm sorry? - A. About quarter to two, quarter past two.

Q. That's is the time you arrived in Sheffield? - A. Oh,
   sorry, about quarter past two.

Q. Can you remember how many coaches were parked in the area
   where you parked?   First of all, did you count them, let
   me just check that? - A. First of all we thought it was a
   bit strange because I think it was about three coaches.
   I am not positive but I think there were-just three
   coaches when we parked up there first of all.

Q. You are quite sure because in your statement you thought
   there were about twenty-five?   That's a big difference.
   - A. Yes.   What happened was we parked up and we had to
   go down because we thought our Secretary had our tickets.
                                                               35



                                            R. M. WRIGHT


      We walked all the way down the hill to round about
      Leppings Lane. We met the Secretary and he informed us
      that the tickets were on the bus.  We had to turn around
B     and walk all the way back up the hill and by then there
      were several more coaches all parking up.

    Q. So how many coaches were there there when you got back up
       to pick up your tickets? - A. I think there was going on
       towards twenty coaches there.

    Q. So you parked at about 2.15, you walked down the hill
       towards a big roundabout? - A. Yes.

    Q. At the junction of Leppings Lane, and there is a petrol
       station there. - A. Yes.

    Q. You met your Secretary who said the tickets were on the
       coach? - A. Yes.

    Q. Everybody turned round, back up the hill to pick the
       tickets up and... - A. Then come back down.
D
    Q. How long did that take?   What time did you arrive at the
       ground? - A. We got down to the ground about ten minutes
       to three.

    Q. You walked up and down this road which is in fact either
       Penistone Road North or Halifax Road - take it from me
       that that is the name? - A. Yes.

    Q. If your times are right from between quarter past two and
       about ten to three, including the Leppings Lane bit,
       that's right? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you walk as a group with all the Devon and Cornwall
       supporters, the people in the coach, or had you split up?
       - A. We seemed to split up because you have got young
       friends and you stay with young friends.

    Q. How many were in your particular group just with you? -
       A . T wo.

    Q. So there were three of you in fact? - A. Yes.

    Q. You were walking up and down these roads, did you see
       other Liverpool supporters? - A. Yes.



G

              Q. Can you say
                                           R. M. WRIGHT


Can you say in what sort of numbers?  I aim not asking
you to say there were exactly 332 or anything like
that-  I want to find out what sort of range we are
talking about? - A. Hundreds.

In which direction were these people walking in the
main.  You were walking up the hill actually part of
the time? - A. Yes.

Was that what the others were doing as well? - A.
Generally they were walking down.

Were there any Nottingham Forest supporters? - A.
There were a few Nottingham Forest supporters, y e s .

But they were a small minority? - A. A small
minority, yes.

There was not any problems? - A. No.

I think I am right in saying that you are the first
supporter whom we are hearing? - A. Yes.

Did you see during this period or at any time during
this period people who were drinking from cans? - A.
There was a few drinking from cans.

Pardon? - A. There was some drinking from cans.

The stuff they were drinking from the cans, could you
see the cans sufficiently clearly to say whether it
was soft drink or alcoholic? - A. Alcoholic.

Were people carrying one can, two cans, packs of four
or what? - A. It was a mixture of between one and
packs of four.

Between one and four? - A. Yes, some had one can and
some had four.

This is a very difficult question and please think
before you answer it and say whatever is true;  you
have told us there were hundreds of people walking
but proportionately what percentage would you say
were carrying cans of alcohol? - A. A minority.

You would say a minority? - A. Yes.

Apart from the cans did you see anything else being
carried? - A. Soft drinks.
                                         R- M. WRIGHT


You did not see any fighting or anything like that? —
A. No.

Did you see anything that you would describe - you
have used the word drunkenness - as drunkenness? Did
you see anything of that? - A * Not really. I would
mention that there were a couple of people happy but
I would not go as far as saying they were really
drunk.

How would you describe the atmosphere? - A. It was a
Semi Final.  Liverpool were on their way to another
Cup Final.  Everybody was just happy and jolly.

Was there singing, chanting and people just being
generally merry? Is that what you are saying? - A.
Yes^
You turned up at the turnstiles or in the vicinity of
the turnstiles I think you said about ten to three.
It might have been a few minutes earlier? - A. Yes.

You had a ticket for the terraces or for the stand? -
A. The terraces.

Did you know which turnstile you were supposed to go
in at? - A. Just generally our end, the Liverpool
area.

So you did not know where it w a s . Can we put up one
of the slides, C256? That is not all the turnstiles.
The ones you can see on your left are known as 1 to
16.  Put the A to G one up as well, C257.    Those are
the other ones.  Can you remember? Does it sort of
bring it back to you? - A. Yes.

Which turnstiles were you aiming at, these or the
other ones? - A. The other ones.

Put 1 to 16 up. What you were aiming to do was that
you were aiming for somewhere in the middle of that
block basically? - A. That is right.

What was it like as you arrived? - A. As we come down
towards the ground there were hundreds of supporters
there.  The first impressions we had was that the
kick-off more than likely would have been put back
because of the volume of supporters.  Right beside
where the wall is, there is a little wall there, I
                                                               38




                                                  R. M. WRIGHT

       think there was a Land Rover with a PA system and a
       group of mounted Police.  It was congested but as you
B      got inside the gates it got really, really tight.

     Q. You have mentioned the Land Rover.  Apart from its
        being there was anything happening in relation to
        that Land Rover? - A. It was there saying, "Take your
        time.  Everybody will get in" sort of thingv

     Q. Can you recollect whether any comment was made about
        not pushing? - A. I think generally it was just,
        "Take your time.  Everybody will get in".

     Q. When you first heard the sound, was it through a
        loudspeaker? - A. I think they had a pole with about
        three loudspeakers attached.

     Q. It was not just somebody shouting.  It was somebody
        broadcasting through a loudspeaker? - A. Yes.

TQ   Q. When you first heard it, how far back from those
        outer perimeter gates were you? - A. I think we were
        just past - I think there is a shop there and I think
        a couple of houses.

     Q. Put the aerial view on, C255.  That is the area and
        obviously you did not have that view of it but just
        point out where the perimeter gates are if you would
        and can you point out where the road is? Do you know
        where the sweet shop is on the corner? Are you
£       saying that you were there or was it at that corner
        of the road when you first heard it? - A. I think it
        was about a couple of houses back.

     Q. From where the Court Officer is pointing at the
        moment? - A. Yes.

     Q. So in between the corner of the block next to the
        perimeter gates and Vere Road? ** A. Yes.

     Q. I think you have also mentioned that you saw a couple
        of mounted Officers? - A. I think it was about three
        or four mounted Police Officers.

     Q . Where were they located? - A . Around the Land Rover.

     Q . The Land Rover, agaiin where did you say it was
         positioned? Look ait the photograph on the screen? -
         A. It was between the middle - at the end of
         Turnstile 16 I think there is like a perimeter wall
         and there is like the two gates coming round.   It was
                                                              39




 '   ■       ~                                     R. M. WRIGHT

         inbetween.    It is easier to see it on the
         photograph.

Q . Let us see if there is something better.  Put C256 up
    again.  That is the sweet shojTwhich you have
    mentioned? - A. That is right.

Q. Is the position of the Land Rover on that photograph
   or is it just off? - A. It is on that photograph.

Q. Show me where? - A. Roughly where the wall is, around
   where the wall is, about there but on the roadside.

Q. On the roadside? - A. Yes,

Q. Can you see where the pointer is pointing at the
   moment? - A. Yes.

Q. Are you saying there? - A. No, it was back.

Q. A little bit further? - A. Obviously he was back.
   The Land Rover was more or less back against the
   fence.

Q . What you are saying is that the Land Rover was almost
    adjacent as far as you remember to the perimeter
    gates? - A. Yes.

Q. With its back to that wall? -A. That   is right, and
   it had like the pole with the loudspeakers on top.

Q. But, of course,       on this side, the roadway side, with
   its loudspeaker       sticking up. You could hear it you
   said about two        or three houses past that corner? - A.
   That is right,        yes.

Q. As you approached the turnstiles which you were
   wishing to enter, apart from seeing the Land Rover
   and seeing those horses, I take it the horses did not
   impede you? You were nowhere near these horses, is
   that right? - A. No, we were right down on the corner
   near the shop.

Q. Near the shop at the far end.. Before you got through
   the perimeter gates, what was the crowd like out
   there? - A. Some of the supporters were going up to
   the Police and saying, "Do something about the
   crowd".

Q. What was it they were concerned about? - A. There
   seemed to be a lot of confusion about how to get in
   and where to g o .
                                                          40




                                            R. M. WRIGHT


Q. Is it because you did not know which of the
   turnstiles you ought to be aiming for? - A. I knew
   where I wanted to go because I was up there the
   previous year but some supporters, even on our coach,
   did not have any idea what to do.

Q . Where the supporters moving forward? In other words,
    were they approaching the perimeter gates or were
    they stationary? - A. They were moving towards the
    gates.

Q. Can you remember whether at this time, at about 2.50
   or so, the perimeter gates were open or shut? - A.
   They were open.

Q. You managed to walk through? - A. Yes.

Q. You did not climb or anything like that? - A- No, all
   the gates were like double gates, as you can see on
   the photograph, and they were open.

Q. We are talking about you going through the end gate
   in the end, the one nearest the shop? - A. No, we
   were over by the shop and I think we more or less
   ended up going through the middle because I was
   trying to get through the middle*

Q. Were you able to walk quite normally up to those
   perimeter gates or were you being pushed forward? -
   A. You were able to walk quite normally into the
   area.

Q. Once you got into the area what happened then? - A.
   Things just seemed to get tighter and tighter.  There
   seemed to be no room for anybody to expand because
   obviously you had the wall either side.

Q. Within that, what I will call, enclosure - in other
   words between the perimeter gates and the turnstiles
   which you were hoping to go through - were there any
   horses in that area that you saw? - A. No.

Q. Or indeed any Police Officers within that area? - A.
   I think I saw one Police Officer between one of the
   turnstiles and the wall.

Q. Did you see him when you got near to him? - A. No, I
   think he was over more towards the higher ratio gates
   than the one I went through.

Q. So he was not near you? - A. I do not think so, no.
                                                              41




                                                R. M. WRIGHT


Q.    When  you entered this area     which I think you would
     describe as crowded, would you not? - A. Yes.

Q. It was a solid mass of people first of all.      That is
   right, is it not? - A. Yes.

Q.    What   I am interested in is that I want to find out
     what people did once they were through those
     perimeter gates.   Did they stand still, did they move
     forward, did they push, did people try and get past
     others? What happened so far as you yourself can
     remember?   I am not asking you about what you did.     I
     am asking you to tell me what you saw others doing? -
     A. We were going in and we were still trying to move
     forward still through the turnstiles. I think there
     was a small lad at the front.     He was getting really
     faint and the supporters pushed on everybody and I
     think it was his father or some relative took him
     out.   We were then about halfway through and we were
     just going with the crowd. We were just going
     forward towards the turnstiles.

Q. Presumably just after you entered the perimeter gates
   you could have turned round and come out again? - A.
   If you were right up by the gates, yes.

Q. From the way you have described the situation? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Once you got beyond a certain point it would have
   become very difficult? - A. It would have, yes.

Q. Were people actually trying to come out because they
   were in the wrong area? - A. Some people were coming
   out because it was too tight.

Q. Was this tightness coming because people were joining
   at the back? - A. Yes.

Q. As soon as you entered the perimeter gates were you
   able to see that there was a crowd in this space? -
   A. Just before I went through the turnstiles.   I
   would say that I was going to follow somebody who was
   tall, being small, and I thought I would have a
   better chance.  He was about 6 feet, 6 feet 2, and as
   we got near the turnstiles he turned to look for
   somebody and I carried on through with the crowd.   My
   shoulder got stuck and I had to wrench my shoulder up
   over.  Then I looked and I could see that it was
   pretty packed as you went through the turnstiles.
                                                              42




                                                 R. M. WRIGHT

Q. In the event, as it happened, you got through the
   turnstile? - A. Yes, we got through the turnstile.

Q. You did not see any gates open? - A. No.

Q. Can you say approximately what time you got through?
   If you cannot say please say that you do not know,
   because I do not expect you looked at your watch? -
   A. It was right near kick-off because you could tell
   from the noise.

Q. Having got through you get into a rather largish
   concourse area, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. I do not know whether you went to the toilet or not.
   It does not really matter? - A. As we got through the
   turnstile the first thing we went to do was to get a
   programme.

Q. So you were setting yourself up to enjoy the match? -
   A. That is right.

Q.   You had been there before? - A. That is right.

Q.   So you knew there was a tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q.   You could see it presumably? - A. Yes.

Q.   You did not go down it, is that right? - A. That    is
     correct.

Q.   Why was that? - A. Because from the year's before
     experience, as you come through the turnstiles you
     can see the goal in the tunnel and we went down there
     the year before.   As we were standing in there then,
     I was pushed nearer the front and you had the
     perimeter fence.   Of course, it is just like looking
     through a metal grid at the pitch and so we decided
     to get out and find another vantage point.   So we
     left and we found this other vantage point in 1989.
     So we knew they were going to be tight behind the
     goal and we knew there would be no way you could get
     a view.  So I said to my friends, "We will go up
     where we were the year before".

Q. What time did you enter the ground in 1988 as a
   matter of interest? About? - A. It was about half
   past one to two o'clock time.

Q. Quite a bit earlier than in 1989? - A. Yes.
                                                               43




                                                 R- M. WRIGHT
      ✓
Q. In fact I think you went round to Enclosure 7? - A.
   That is correct.

Q.    You knew how to get there because you   had been there
     before from last year, is that right?    - A. That is
     correct.

Q . it is right that you did not see any signs? - A . N o ,
    no signs at all.

Q. Did you look just as a matter of interest? - A. Yes,
   I did.

Q. You could not see them but you managed to find your
   way? - A. Yes, because there was nobody around.

Q. That was the next question*  Was there anybody whom
   you could have asked had you wanted to that you can
   recollect? - A. As we came through the turnstiles
   there was two,like, boxes where they were selling
   programmes from and there was, like, the crowd
   barriers that you see in parades and that, little
   metal ones, and there was a PC stood there.  There
   was also a group of Police Officers by the gates in
   that section.

Q. Is that the gate which we can see on the photograph
   right at the back there? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. Either side, of course? - A. Yes.

Q. How large a   group was it, can you remember? - A. I
   think there   was one PC standing by the crowd barrier
   and I think   it was two PCs and I think it was a
   Sergeant on   the inside of the gate.

Q. Not a huge crowd of Officers? - A* No.

Q. You were in fact in the minority going off towards
   the left, is that right? - A. That is correct_because
   as we came through there was a group of, I think it
   was five, Liverpool supporters and they were shouting
   at these Police Officers on the inside of the gate to
   go outside and do something and in the end they were
   more or less told to p-off or else they would be
   next.  So we then went round the side and as we went
   to go up the steps to get into Section 7 there were
   about six or seven people actually going up there and
   we thought we were going to have a very hard job
   getting a good vantage point because obviously we
   thought the section was going to be full because of
   the amount of people not going up the steps.
                                                 R. M. WRIGHT


Q. You drew the conclusion that it would already be
   full? - A. That is right.

Q. And that is why people were not going round? - A.
   That is correct.

Q. In fact when you got there you had no problems at
   all? - A. No problems.

Q. How populated was it would you say? - A. How could
   you say? You could get to where you wanted to
   comfortable but there was enough people there.  You
   had enough room on the terraces to stand where you
   wanted to stand.

Q. By the time you took up your vantage position, as you
   term it, the match had already kicked off? - A. That
   is correct.

Q. Do you know about what time it was when you took up
   your vantage point? - A. I think it was something
   like three minutes past three.

Q. Three minutes you say? - A. Yes.

Q. Having   done that you looked around? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. What did you see? - A. Liverpool fans were in Pens 4
   and 3 behind the goal.

Q.   4 and 3? - A. I think it is 4 and 3, yes.

Q.    Those are the numbers, yes. - A. In those pens there
     were a lot of numbers in the pens either side on the
     corners. There were supporters but there was plenty
     of room.

Q. In the   pens on either side? - A. Yes, by the corner
   post.There was a lot of singing and     chanting in the
   pens behind the goal and we were thinking to
   ourselves, "Cor, we wish we were in there" because    we
   always stand behind the goal sort of thing.




                          /So you were actually.
                                                           45


                                           R.M.   WRIGHT


Q. You, were actually a little sorry you had made your choice? - -
   A . Yes.

Q.   At that point in time, because it appeared to you to be quite
     nice? - A. Yes.

Q. Am I right in saying, and correct me if I get this wrong, that
   one of the pleasures of being behind the goal is in fact being
   with such a lot of people in close proximity? Is that right? ;
   - A. That is right.  The atmosphere is totally different than
   if you sit down.  Everybody has a laugh and a joke, etc.

Q. So your first impression was there was singing and chanting
   and you were a little sorry you had not gone that way? - A..       .
   That is correct.

Q. What happened? What did you notice after that? - A.   Fans
   started to climb right over on to the perimeter.  First of all
   we thought it could be a bit of a protest because we had had
   the smaller end, but then we started to notice they were not
   encroaching on to the pitch.  Everybody was standing behind
   the line.

Q. So you you saw a few fans come over the perimeter fences, and
   your first impression was, "It's  a protest"? - A. Yes.

Q.   Because I think it is right to say that it was not a popular
     decision that Liverpool were at that end of the ground? - A.
     That is right.  I think there was an allocation of about 6,000
     tickets, and the average gate between Liverpool and Nottingham
     Forest is quite sufficient for the Nottingham Forest
     allocation of tickets....

Q. We d o n ’t need to go into that, but there was a bit of feeling
   that it was unfair? - A. Yes.

Q.   And then you realised or noticed that the people were not
     actually running on to the pitch? - A. That is correct.

Q. What did you see then? - A. I think Liverpool had a shot or
   something, and they hit the crossbar at the Nottingham Forest
   end, and we glanced over and we looked back again, and by then
   the pens, they were different.   It is hard to explain, but
   people, if you were in a tight situation you use your elbows,
   and they did not seem to be doing much.

Q. So I can get this clear in my mind, and I am interested in
   what you saw and how you observed it.  At 2 to 3 minutes past
   3 when you first took up your vantage position, it looked OK.
   People were chanting in the pens? - A. Yes.

Q. When the crossbar was hit, and that I can tell you was,
   according to the information which I have got was 4-minutes-
   past, just before that people were beginning to climb out? -
   A. That is right.

Q. At that stage you   thought it might possibly just be a protest,
                                                             46


                                            R.M.   WRIGHT


     but, you were noticing that people were not encroaching? - A . -
     Yes.

Q. And you were beginning to think, "What’s going on?".  When
   you then turned back after that strike, the appearance of the
   pen had changed? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. And you thought, "Something is going on"? - A. Yes.

Q. And then a few moments after that I think the match was
   stopped.  Is that right? - A. Yes, there were more people
   climbing right over, and one of the supporters ran on to the
   pitch to the Liverpool goalkeeper, Bruce Grobbelar, and then
   not long after I think a Police Officer ran on and talked to         .
   the referee.

Q. And then everybody disappeared? - A. That is right.

Q. And then people started going on to the pitch and lying down
   and you saw resuscitation and various other things taking
   place? - A. That is correct.

Q.   You may not have seen this, and if you did not please say so.
     Did you see - on the perimeter fences there are little gates.
     - A. Y e s .

Q. There is a gate for Pen 4, there is a gate for Pen 5 and in
   fact there is one for 7 as well. - A. Yes.

Q. And there is one for 3. Did you see any of those gates open?
   - A. There were Police Officers opening some of the gates and
   they were letting some supporters out and then they would shut
   the gates again.

Q.   At what point do you say this was happening? We have three
     points, if you like.   We have the time you took your viewing
     position, the time you noticed people were climbing over but
     you thought it might be a protest, I think was the word you
     used, the time around when Beardsley hit the crossbar.   It is
     only a 2 minute period, actually, all this.   At what point did
     you see the gates opening and shutting - shutting is what I am
     interested in? - A. About 3 or 4 minutes afterwards, something
     like that, in between.

Q. Are you saying that the gates were being opened and shut after
   the players had left the field? - A. Yes.

Q. You are quite certain that is what you remember? - A.
   Positive.                               '

Q. The reason why I have ask you is because we have seen a video,
   and certainly on the video evidence the gates appear to be
   open in fact certainly before - definitely - after the
   game had stopped.  I knew this was your impression from
   your statement, but I want you to think carefully because
   it is obviously an important point.  How certain are you
   that the gates were being opened and shut at these "two
                                                             47



                                           R. M.   WRIGHT


   perjs after the game was stopped? - A. You could see the         -
   Police Officer, he was opening the gate and there were
   some people coming out, and I don't know if he was
   completely shutting it but he was pushing it.

Q. Did you notice around that time anything else of significance
   at the perimeter gate or anywhere else which you feel you want
   to tell me? - A. There were supporters..... (Witness
   distressed) '•• .

Q. Have a drink and have a little rest. - A. There were
   supporters climbing up over fence, and as they were climbing
   over there is the spiked bit at the top, and as they were
   trying to climb over the Police Officers, as they were
   climbing up over, the Police Officers were pushing them back
   again and banging on their ankles.

Q. At what time - I am sorry, I have to find out - but at what
   time are you saying that happened?  If you fix it in relation
   to after the match having stopped, which is just before 6-
   minutes-past-3. - A. I think it was about quarter-past-3.

Q. And you are quite sure about that time? - A. As close as I
   could say.  I was not looking at my watch or anything like
   that.

Q. But you are saying it was well after the match was stopped? -
   A. It was a while after the match was stopped.

Q. The reason why I am asking you this, Mr. Wright, is not
   because I am trying to distress you at all.      I promise you
   that, and in fact I am very sorry because obviously it is
   bringing it all back to you - 1 quite understand that - but
   what I am concerned about is the timings and to see how
   accurate your evidence is, because I want to be sure that (a)
   we have got what you want to say and (b) to be able to test it
   against the other evidence which we will be hearing to decide
   how much credence to put on it.      That is not to say for one
   minute that somebody has told a lie, but itoccasionally
   happens that people c a n ’t remember properly.   That is why I am
   anxious to make sure we get it right even though it is
   upsetting you. - A. Yes.

Q. Last year - I want to go back to 1988 for a moment - you were
   in fact in one of these enclosures, were not you? - A. That is
   right.

Q. Which one were you in? Can you remember?        Was it the one....
   - A. The left-hand side.               '

Q. So therefore it would be No. 4? - A. Yes.

Q. The one nearest to 7. - A. Yes.

Q. And you in fact finished up near the front, I think, you said,
   and you were peering through the little squares and you did
   not like that? - A. Yes.
                                                           48



                                           R.M.   WRIGHT




Q. Just as a matter of interest, were you discomforted last year?
   When I say "last year” , I mean in 1988? - A. Yes, because as
   more people came in, with the pens being so high, you could
   not expand, and you only had a limited amount of room you
   could go to.  So ;you could not find your feet somehow.

Q. So there was quite a bit of pressure you are saying in 1988
   inside there as well? - A. Y e s , at the time we were there.

Q. One final question.  This is for interest's sake really for
   me.  Did you know that the ground was licensed under
   legislation as being suitable for having football matches in?
   I don't want you to tell me what you know now.  I want to know
   whether you knew it then? - A. It must have had some
   authorisation because it is held sometimes there before, so I
   take it it must have been.

Q. Who would you think would have issued that licence or the
   authorisation, which is the word you used? You tell me who
   you think might have authorised it? - A. I think like the FA
   must have said where they would like to hold the Semi-Final.

Q. In other words, you say the FA would say? - A. They would put
   somewhere forward.

Q. Apart from that, you were not aware of other people who Blight
   be involved with licences? - A. No, because basically I was
   there just to watch a football match.

Q. That is what I thought you would say.

Q. Now, all these ladies and gentlemen are entitled to ask you
   questions, and I am sure they will do, but don't worry.

        THE CORONER:   Yes, Mr. Hale.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. H A L E :

Q. Mr. Wright, I will not go through lots of details with you
   about inside the ground and so on, because there are lots more
   witnesses to come, and some of those will deal with those
   matters.   I would just like to deal with your unfortunate
   situation on the day, and it is that something happened to you
   that you could not foresee in the time that you arrived at the
   ground to get in.   Is that right? - A. That is correct.

Q. Of course, you had been very responsible.  You had made
   arrangements to get there quite early? - A. Yes, that is
   right.

Q. As you did on the previous occasion? - A. That is correct.

Q. And it was just a sheer accident in your case that somebody
   made a mess with the tickets and so you had to walk all the
   way down the hill and then all the way back up again? - A.
   Yes.                                     -
                                                                49


                                            R.M.   WRIGHT


       /

Q. But the result of that was you in fact were fairly late? - A.
   That is correct.

Q.   Much later than you would have wished? - A. Yes.

Q.    Is there any reason you can think of why the thousands who
     were there when you got there .should not have been there
     earlier? - A. I heard that there was a problem with traffic or
     something from Liverpool.   I am not sure.

Q. There will be other witnesses about that, and that may not be
   so, but everybody had the opportunity, did not they, like you,
   of setting off early and getting there early? - A. That is .
   correct

Q. There was no drink at all on your coach.        Is that right? - A.
   That is correct.

Q.   And you did not have any to drink? - A. No.

Q.   Would your feeling on getting down to the bottom andbeing
     told the tickets were not there and you had to go back, would
     it be too much to say a mild panic? - A. Well, y e s , because we
     realised then we would not have a chance to get behind the
     goal.

Q.         THE CORONER:  I did not hear your reply.  I am sorry. -
     A. We realised then with losing that extra time we would not
     have any time to get behind the goal at all.

Q.        MR. HALE:    So would you be somewhat preoccupied when you
     were going back up the hill, anyway, if not when you were
     coining down? - A. Yes.

Q.   You see, many other witnesses, not all from one group or
     another, but people spread over a whole range ofoccupations
     and loyalties and so on, have spoken of the considerable
     number of people walking down Halifax Road at about the times
     you describe who were drinking heavily from cans and bottles
     and so on. - A . I saw people, as I said before, they had some
     cans, but I can't say anybody was really heavily under the
     influence of drink.

Q.   No. It would depend    what they were doing.  You would not be
     able to tell by just   looking at someone, would you? - A. No. I
     suppose not.

Q. There would be no fighting, would there? They were nearly all
   from the same club? - A. That is right, yes.

Q.   Did you see anybody urinating at the side of the       road? - A.
     No.

Q. You did not see anybody at all? - A. Not urinating in the
   road.
                                                                    50


                                                  R.M. WRIGHT


Q. Wouid it surprise you to know that many other witnesses saw a
   great number of people; - I c a n ’t say how many - but....

          THE CORONER:      I think, Mr. Hale, I know what M r . King
     is thinking.    I think it is fairer to say many of the
     witnesses whom we have heard up to now.    Would you accept
     that, M r . King? I think that is right? We d o n ’t know what
     the other witnesses are going to say.

             MR. HALE:      I am much obliged, sir.   I accept that.     sir.

          MR. KING:   Absolutely, sir.  We have had very few
     witnesses, really, because we have only just started.   Ithink
     it would be fairer just to ask this witness what he heard and .
     saw, sir.

          THE CORONER:  That is right, but he is testing.  I think
     it is only right, because he is putting to him the evidence of
     other witnesses which we have heard, and he is entitled to
     stick to his story or to modify it if something clicks.

             MR. HALE:      I accept that correction, sir:

Q.   You come from Devon? - A. Yes.

Q.   And you obviously have a great loyalty to the club?          - A. That
     is right.

Q. And that is a feature, is it not, of a great club, and I
   readily describe Liverpool as a great club.  There is a
   tremendous loyalty? - A. Yes.  Everybody is proud of Liverpool
   Football Club and everything they have done.

Q. Does that loyalty extend to the supporters? Do you believe as
   well as the club being the greatest club perhaps in the world,
   that the supporters share in that glory and that they are also
   great? - A. Everybody I think who supports Liverpool is proud
   to be a Liverpool supporter.

Q. You would not like it to be thought that any Liverpool
   supporters had played any significant part in what happened on
   that day? - A. No.

Q. Because everybody else, all the other authorities are probably
   prepared to look to the future and to amend whatever they do.

             THE CORONER:      No, I d o n ’t think we will go along that
     line.

             MR. HALE:      That will develop later, sir.

          THE CORONER:          It may well be, but I d o n ' t think of this
     witness.

          MR. HALE:         Sir, I will ask about his own particular
     position:
                                                           51



                                           R.M.   WRIGHT


Q. You say you are a member of the Football Supporters' Club.   -
   Has any consideration been given, to your knowledge, toany
   amendment for the future of the behaviour of supporters? - A.
   No, not to my knowledge.

Q. Or any sort of guidelines about the time they should arrive at
   the ground or what arrangements they should make for alcohol
   and for toilets and that sort of thing? - A. I think the
   clubs, they are trying to put out a better thing about the
   toilets, facilities, sort of thing.

Q. I mean the Supporters' Club to which you belong.  Has
   any consideration been given to trying to make things better
   for the future? - A. In what aspect?

Q. In respect of the time of arrival, the consumption of alcohol,
   pushing, being patient, all that sort of thing? - A. Usually
   with our grounds we are usually up at the grounds by half-
   past-12, 1 o'clock anyway.  We have some distance.

Q.        THE CORONER:   What time did you say? - A. If we are
     travelling to an away to Liverpool we are usually up there
     between half-past-12 and 1 o'clock, obviously, because of the
     distance.

Q. That is what you are aiming at? - A. Yes.

Q.        MR. HALE:   I am sorry, all that I am asking you is, is
     your club merely for people from Devon? - A. No, and Cornwall.

Q. Devon and Cornwall? - A. Yes.

Q. But nevertheless not what I would say the majority of
   supporters.  You have no say in what they do? - A. Not re§lly,
   no.

Q. Much obliged.




                           \Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE.
                                                    R. hi. hkiGdl— -.




               Cross-Examined fay dR. ?Af.-g

dill you .please help the Court by. looking at a
photograph to understand snore .c l e a r l y .where".you were;' -1
when' you first arrived on the-'terrace?         I will ask you.
to look at. a photograph and I suggest perhaps 271..

      THECORONER:'- -That'is'a very .1000 point-  In
fact, I had forgotten to do it in chief and I was gain?
to do it later, but we .have got acetates of these as
plans and we are going .to try and get the witnesses to
;nark them, but you proceed as you are and we. will do it
later.

      HR. PAYIiE:     271 is not good enough.      /Try 2G7.

      TtiE CORONER:     That is not raucn better, is it?

      MR. PAYNE:      Mo, that is .no good' either, sorry*

      THE COROftER:   Put the. acetate u-;> of the terraces.
You haven't see these yet, Mr. Fayne.       de will sea
wnether that is better.    It is not a photograph but it
aiay be better.   Is that any better for you?     It. is
smaller.

     MR. PAYNE: . If it could be illustrated on. a
photograph - can we try 252, which I think probably is
the best acetate for this purpose.  dhat we really want
Is a square on view across tne terraces, so tnat this
witness and others      :

     THE CQROHER:   iiy Jury say 251. . Try 251 - the.
Jury say well be riant.

     ;iR. PAYHE:  251 is actually on tne terrace,,
though, isn't it?

     THE COROdER:   Yes, but it is looking towards
Enclosure 7, which is what I think you are ..after, isn't
it? It is in a corner there.

     tiR. PAYdE:  Wha t I want the witness to do is to
put himself on the terrace so that we can :;>st an idea
of his vantage position when he looked across at dens 3
and 4 at about 3-minutes-past-3, so that-we can get an
idea of wnat he could actually see.

     THE COROkER:      ' Gan you locate yourself on that? -
A. Yss.

ilould you like to walk up to it and point wi-tn tne
pointer where you think you were?. This is number 251.
                                                                               53


                                                    ii. .-------------------------------
                                                          if*-. WRIGHT




          .SR. P A O E : Tills is .froa Pen 1 or Pan 2, so he is
     down at the far end.

          THE CORONER:     Yes:

0. You nave pointed to an area adjacent to the North Stand
   about .a tnira ox the. way- .down,.wouin that be .rigatz


          ■UR. PAYliE: Thank you very snuch.. • Having shown us
     that, it is suggested taat t he aod ei aight he helpful.
     I don't know whether the Jury can see that..

          ia£ COROWER:       Hr. bright, go over to the 'diode1
     because that aigat be easier for you.      (rha witness
     used t h e .Jiodal to illustrate his evidence!

0.        :iR. PAYhE:    That is in a raised position.. . .If you
     look, f rora where you are, if you look -straight across
     the terrace, right t h e .whole length o f 'the terrace down
     tae far end, it is not actually siiown on that M o d e l ,
     but practically opposite you and I 'should tfti-nx. froa
     where you are demonstrating about the san-e level up in .
     the air, is the Police observation box? •- A,. Yes.

0. Is tnat about right, directly opposite? - A. Yes.

Q. So you are the sort of mirror- inage at the opposite end
   to the Police observation bos? - A. Yes, that.is
   correct.                         .

0. Okay, thank you very auch.  ilow,. that- is the position,
   that you got to at about 3-ainutes-past-3, is it? - A . :
   Yes, that is correct.

0. And froca there you looked across to your preferred
   position in tne pens immediately beaiad .tne goal? - A.
   Yes.

0. Three and four, and you wished vou were there? - A.
   Yes..

Q. I want you to give tne Jury the picture in your own
   words of what you could see at taat snornant in those
   pens behind the goal.   You said taat they were
   cneering? - A. Yes, tiiey. were cheering and chanting..
   It was like the start of any serai-final, tne'y was
   looking.forward to their taan winning .‘and going on to
   »«enibley.

0. Yes, tney looked happy? - A. Yes.

g. It was the atmosphere taat you thought, you were goin^'
   to ,aiss by being out on the wing? - A. Tnat is correct..
                                                                    54


                                                       iU H. WrtlGHT




Q. And it certainly at tnat moment didn't occur to.you
   that, anything was terribly.wrong? - A. You could see
   that- there was a lot of people in....the area compared to
   the pens on the sides , but everybody was- happy,,-.. t h e y '■■
   were singing and shouting, so’ the conclusion'you would
   draw was everything was all right, sort, of thing.

Q. Th.e;.point is i t d£dh*'t 'cross your a iad at that tiae
   that anything was wrong?       In fact., you wished you were,
   there? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. Indeed, the people who were in the pen cneering and         ...
   chanting, they seeded to think everything was all right . •
   as well, as far as you could see? - A. I think 'they
   asust have done, yes.

Q. It was shortly after that that we know that it hecaae
   apparent that the disaster was occurring, and you .have .
   spoken about seeing Police. Officers, apparently pushing .
   people back into the pen? - A. Yes. .

0. We have actually seen, the video and I expect -.the Jury
   will see the video again, later on,- which is not. a
   continuous picture but it gives a pretty good idea of-
   what was happening at that. time,, and everybody -has seen
   the video so everybody has got their own irapression,
   but as far as I can recall we haven't actually seen
   anything like that.   What we saw was' soae Policemen
   standing u p outside the railing, and snoti.oning with
   their hands? - A. Iso, I can say I saw, there was people
   trying to climb back over and they were being pushed ,
   back in.

Q. Yes, on the video also people can be seen being pulled
   over the fence? - A. Oh, that's right, yes.. I .think
   said in fay statement .that some Police Officers were
   helping, they were getting stack in.

0. What, pulling people out?       - A.. Yes, they   were helping
   people.

Q. Thank you.

                 Cross-Examined by ^k. nAkk.I^C

0. All things.being equal, what .tirae would you have hoped
   to nave arrived at the ground? - A.. I. would have hoped
   to nave been in place by .half-pas't-2, quarter-to-3.

Q. That was probably about an hour later than the year
   before? - A. That ’s right, yes.

0. Had you set out fra,u Truro at the same tirae as tne year
   before? - A. Yes, I beli-eve so. .
                                                                             55

                                                       I . .   M .   w   R I G iiX




Q. But you. had arrived at tha ground earlier tha /ear
   before? - A. Yes.

Q, When you got down to, the .roundabout .and then. had' .to
   turn back, were there a lot of people "'around- at that'.--.
   tiiae? - A. Yes.

0. A n d ’what, .sort" of tiiae, trying to ;.wark-l3abkwa^
   that nave been? - A. Around half-past-2.

Q. So just to be sure about it, froa half-past-2 you had.
   to walk back up to the coach? - A. That's right, to gat
   our tickets and co.ne back.

0. Goiaa back down the hill again and then continue your
   journey to the ground a n d ■that took, in all, about 20 .
   rainutes? - A. Yes, something like that.-

Q. iJhen you got down to the ground a t .10-to-3 ware you ,
   surprised by the nunbar of people that were still .
   outside? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you said you were one of a., nuiaber of people
   that were staking their way down to the ground at tnat
   time? - A. Yes,, that is correct.

Q. Did anybody join the -back of the crowd after you got .
   there? - A. Yes.

Q. Quite a lot of people? - A. Yes..

Q« In fact, I think you described being pushed yourself                        .
   forward? - A. That is correct.

Q. You knew you were such later than you had wanted to be?
   - A. Yes.

0.    But of course you had a good reason for being so lata..
     You raust .nave thought to yourself, “why o n aartn are
     all these, people so late getting here"? - A. Yes.

0.    You   were able to get .frdia tne gates and into the inner
     enclosure and then through tne turnstile just before
     kick-off tiine? - A. It aust nave been around, that ti::ia,
     yes..

0. You would know .it was kick-off itself because there is
   usually a roar from tne crowd? - A. That is correct.

O. But you felt tnat you wanted in any event to nave a
   programme? - A.. Oh, yes. It is one of the souvenirs,
   yes.
                                                                     56


                                                    R.   ii»   d R I G jlT




Q. Absolutely.  Was there any queue at the pro/jraarae
   kiosk? - A. No, just walked right up and purchased-.

,Q. And then y o u -walked,/ or I don't k n o w -whether you
      hastened or c a n t o get to a position up the terrace?
      A. we cacae back froia where the programmes' was a ad aiade
,-...:our way up. to .where we., went.:.-;

Q.- And that took another two or three minutes at nost, or
    three minutes certainly to then get into that part and
    to then get a. position on the. steps and then .to see
    what was going -on? - A. Yes.

Q. As you were going up there could- you sea at all what
   was happening down, outside the gates?  Did .you get a
   glinpse of that? - A. ilo.     .

Q. You don't, 'whilst you were standing waiting for this
  ' queue you had heard the. Police. :aaking /appeals over the
    loudspeaker £or the crowd, not to push forward?-     A.
    Yes.

Q. Continually, whatever the specific words are.       A. I
   think it was sorae.t-iing like, "Take, your tine, everybody
   is going to get in**.

0. I am not looking for you to remember varbatia,. but. tnat
   was being said on a continuous basis? - A. I -wouldn *t
   say it was continuous.  They would say it and then
   there would be like a little break and then they would
   repeat it.

0. And did you do your best to take regard for what the
   Police ware saying? - A. Yes.

0. Hot to push the people forward? - A. That's rignt.

Q. So must it be the case that people behind you were
   responsible for that pushing forward? - A. Everybody
   was carried with the aionentufn; they were goin» forward;
   they were trying to. get into tne turnstiles..

0. But at the ti;ae that you got there you were, cor that
   moment, the back of the. queue? - A... That's rignt.

Q. And you weren' t doing, anything in disregard t o 'what tha
   Police Officers- were asking?   In other words, you
   weren't pushing forward, you were taking your tT.iS,.
   assuming you would get in? - A. Yes, we.assumed that.

Q. But a time catae- when you were being, by moment ua pushed
   forward? - A. We were being carried, yes. .

0. So there was pushing frota behind you? - A. .Yes.
                        -   -




                                                                       57    ';-


                                                     R . h i . ' W R IG I.fi: ..




Q. ay people who- had arrived after you? - A. 'Yes..

0. who you were surprised were as late as that? - A. Yes -
   like the person -who fainted,: this young ,lad, i t :.was
   tight but it wasn't tight because people made r o o a ,.
   enough rboo for nia and his relative, whoever'it was,
  .to, 1st aim. get out.                                     h;--:/.:::.g.

Q. Did it appear to .you that there were p e o p l e 'there -who
   didn*-t have tickets in. their possession? - A . .Yes...

0. Did you see tnose people still Dressing on towards.the .
   turnstile? - A. It was - going back to 1938, people .     .■
   were, the Police were then checking to see if you had a
   ticket and if you nad a ticket you was allowed to
   progress, whereas-in *89 you would h a v e 'been .able to
   get right down there.

.Q. Did you think to yourself,; “I 'wonder -how. they; think
    they are going to go in? What on earth are. the/, doing
   .in this queue if they haven't' got a ticket?” - A. well,
    I just took it that everybody' what was in .that- confined
    area going towards the turnstiles had got tickets
    anyway.

0. Yes, but you knew that there were people there who'
   didn't have? - A. Yes, because.it was.quite obvious
   that, anybody could walk right up.

Q. Just tell ina a little,, please, about the feelings of
   tne Liverpool supporters at what tney thought was a
   pretty rura decision to give thess. tne smaller end again?
   - A. After '83, when they d e c i d e d .they was going to
   hold tne '39 semi-final there, Liverpool supporters I
   think took it generally we would have tne bigger end
   this time.

Q. And tnen it was announced you were to have tne ^saae end
   as the year before? - A. Tnat's correct..

Q. And I think tnat you described that peo.ule felt
   somewhat aggrieved by tnat? - A.. Yes,, because .1 tnin-<
   even Liverpool Football Club put in a protest 'about it, -
   but as usual these things were put to one side.

Q. Do you think taat that had changed tne at.aospn.era of
   tha people who were there £co~, the previous year? - A.
   No.                                 ‘

0. You were not aware of people suggesting tnat they nan
   coaa- anyway? - A. ilot really. You always, get a
   majority of people to go without tickets because they
   know there -is going to he ticket touts.
                                                        ii •   2-4*. ti Li   11JL




i'hey know there are going to be ticket touts? - A. Yes.

Was there aqt. a feeling this tirae o f .a grievance w h i c a .
was, "They have.cut us down on our allocation .but we
are going to see tne snatch •anyway'*? - A', rlo.

 Sp'- w e nave .a,-.somewhat..strange., situation. o£,,>wi.tnia;,.yau.r;.
.knowledge,,/people. being-annoyed ';that"-Liverpool;;-:aad;art' V:
 received a sufficient quota of. tickets; within your,
 knowledge people turning up without tickets; within .
 your knowledge people in tne queue going down to tne
 turnstiles who you knew not to nave tickets; and witain
 your knowledge a lot of people coming after you, you
 yourself being late, wno were joining tne queue later
 on? - A. That is correct.

And then pushing forward notwithstending what tne
Police were saying? :- A. ¥as..

Thank you vary 'cauch. :

     THE COROriER:  What time is your train back to
Devon? - A. 12-ninutes-past-5.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, would you prefer to start
or would you prefer me - you. are not going to finish in
seven minutes, are you, or.are you?

     liii. KIMG:  Sir, whenever an invitation coines fro.a
a Tribunal, as the one you are giving sue,. I think it
would be rsore sensible to rise. now.

     THE COROl'lER?  we are not going to finish before,
lunch because we. have got to have proper breaks in tne
interests of everybody, so we will rise now and try .and
start at about 5-to-2 or definitely spot.on 2:

Be here in good tiiae - say you are here at 10-to-2,
Please re.nenber you are Still on oat a.   You should not
and must not, in fact, discuss your evidence or
anything else, in tnis interregnum. . uJa are .not putting-
you under lock and key or anything like taat,.but we
rely upon your honour and integrity that you won't do
it because it would be quite wrong, and I. aro sure you
understand that.

                    (Luncheon Arfjourniaant) . .
                                                            59

                                         R.   M.   WRIGHT




     '   THE CORONER:   Yes, Mr. King.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q. Mr. Wright, I understand you went to the same game in
   1988? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. That was also the semi-final of the FA cup? - A. Yes.

Q. Between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest? — A. That's
   correct.

Q. As far as you know was it a sell-out on that day? - A.
   Yes.

Q. I was interested in the evidence you gave just before we
   went for our lunch where you said that in 1988 the police
   were checking whether or not you had a ticket? - A.
   That's correct.

Q. Where did these checks take place? - A. The first check
   was up at the roundabout at the top of Leppings Lane.

Q. So the roundabout before you entered Leppings Lane? - A.
   Yes, they had a police cordon going across the road.

Q. What happened?   If I was a spectator in 1988 going to
   the game and I had got to the roundabout, could you
   describe what the cordon looked like? - A. It was just
   like a row of policemen going across the road.

Q. As a spectator what would happen to you when you
   approached the cordon? - A. They would say, "Have you got
   a ticket?"   You would show them your ticket and they
   would say, "Right."   If you didn't have a ticket you
   would be turned away.    ~

Q. Anybody who didn't have a ticket in 1988 just would not
   have got into Leppings Lane from that roundabout? - A. I
   expect some would have found some way to get through, but
   the.

Q. Some would, but anybody who came to the cordon...
   Right.  In 1989 was there any system like that in
   operation? - A. Nothing at all.

Q. Going back to 1988, when you got through that cordon with
   your ticket were there any further checks in 1988? - A.
   Yes.   I think there was something like a funnel system
   where the police were checking your tickets as you got
   down to where the actual gates to the perimeter were.

Q. In Leppings Lane itself? - A. In Leppings Lane.
                                                                60



                                             R.   M.   WRIGHT


Q. So that was a second check to see whether you had any
   tickets? - A. That's right.

Q. Did I understand your evidence correctly that the reason
   why you thought in 1989 that in the area where you were
   standing in front of turnstiles there may well have been
   people without tickets was because there h a d n 't been any
   checks? - A. That's correct.

Q. It wasn't that you yourself had been seeing whether or
   not they had tickets?   That isn't correct? - A. No.

Q. On the tickets - I did ask, I don't know whether an
   opportunity has been taken - I see they have.   If we
   could have an example of a Leppings Lane end ticket for
   the standing room?

          THE CORONER.*     Now that is C.288.

Q.        MR. KING:   Mr. Wright, as I understand it you
     actually had a ticket for the terraces? - A. That is
     correct.

Q.   If you were a    Liverpool supporter going to the game that
     year - 1989 -    you could have had a ticket for the
     terraces, as    you did, or you could have had a seat
     ticket? - A.    That is correct.

Q. The seat would have been for the West Stand? - A. Yes.

Q. Possibly the North Stand? - A. Correct.

Q. We can see on the ticket you had that our ticket shows
   that you had "Leppings Lane - standing"? - A. That is
   correct.

Q.   Now can I ask you the officer to remove the ticket    for a
     moment and I will return to it in a second.   Could we
     have a look at the. outside of the turnstiles?    Perhaps
     256 to begin with.    That is a view of the outside of the
     Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes.

Q. We can see we are looking at the left hand side, as you
   are looking at the turnstile area, and one can see that
   there are a number of turnstiles on the left hand side
   and they have letter A over it, do you see that? - A.
   Yes.

Q. If one then moves to 258, which is the same area but
   looking further to the right, on the left hand side we
   see the continuation of the shot we have just seen^and
   you can see that the turnstiles there — you can still see
   one with the letter A over it in the top left hand
                                                            61

                                         R.   M.   WRIGHT


   corner.   If the officer moves along you can just see
   turnstiles with the letter C on it? - A. Yes.

Q. So you have to the left hand side of those turnstiles a
   series of turnstiles which have either the letter A or
   the letter C over it, do you see that? - A. Yes.

Q. Then there is a dividing line in which there is clearly a
   wall down the middle and we move on to another series of
   turnstiles which are lettered letter B over them. Do you
   see that? - A. Yes.

Q. Now those turnstiles letter B are the turnstiles for
   going to the standing room.   That is to say, the
   terraces? - A. Yes.

Q. Now you may not be able to see it from where you are
   sitting, and the jury will be able to see it in due
   course, if you look under the letter B on those right
   hand side turnstiles you can also see further letters -
   in fact it is lettered A to G in much smaller letters
   under the big Bs, do you see that? - A. Yes.

Q. I am being offered some assistance, C.257 shows that,
   sir. One can see much more clearly the letters A to G? -
   A. Yes.

Q. So if I can just go back for a moment to 258, which is a
   more long shot, if you were fans standing outside those
   turnstiles, as you were, Mr. Wright, and you had not been
   there before, because you had been there before, hadn't
   you? - A. Yes.

Q. And you were looking for lettering, the lettering would
   be the big letters, from the left hand side working along
   those turnstiles, a number of turnstiles with a big
   letter A, then a number of turnstiles with a big letter
   C, and then a number of turnstiles with a big letter B? -
   A. Yes.

Q. A, C, B.   Underneath the ones with the big letter B,
   there were little letters of A to G? - A. Yes.

Q. Can we go back to the ticket which you had? That
   actually shows you, doesn't it, at the top of the picture
   on the left hand side, there is an entrance marked which
   that ticket is supposed to take you through? - A. Yes,
   that is correct.

Q. It shows letter B.   Do you see that? - A. Yes.

Q. If you were looking at the reverse of the ticket, which
   is shown below, do you see there is a plan there? - A.
   Yes.
                                         R.   M.   WRIGHT


Q. Before we look at it can I just remind you, Mr. Wright,
   the jury and everyone else - we have already seen the
   photographs - that when you look   outside that ground you
   see big letters A, A, and so forth, C, C and then B?     It
   goes A, C, B? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you see the plan   on the    back ofthe ticket where the
   Leppings Lane entrance is shown?     Perhaps the officer _
   can show it with his stick at the bottom?     I wonder if
   could show the witness much more closely and he can
   follow it with me.     Do you  see how onthe plan Leppings
   Lane is shown and it   is shown as if it is straight- ^
   across, not like an arc, it is just shown as a straight
   line? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you see the lettering which is shown to anybody
   looking at the plan?   Could you  read it outto us what
   it says? - A. A, B, B, C, D.

Q. So if you were looking at the back of the ticket, it_^
   looks as if there is an A, B, B, C, C, D, something like
   that? - A. Correct.

Q. Whereas if you were looking at it from the outside you
   see A, A, C, C, B? - A. Yes.

Q. Then underneath the Bs you see, if you were looking
   outside, you would see A to G? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you yourself as a fan think that that is the clearest
   layout you had ever been to? - A. No.

Q. Did it surprise you in view of that that some      people, as
   you have said, were confused as to where they      would be
   going? - A. That is right.   On our own coach      there were
   people on the coach, they had like section B,      and they
   didn't know where it was.

Q. We know on your ticket you are supposed to go through
   entrance B? - A. Yes.

Q. I wonder if we could go back to 258, the photograph?
   Does that show the area you entered?    If I can just
   help you, we are looking to the extreme right of the A to
   G little turnstiles and to the left... - A. No, we went
   through A.



                  Q. So you in fact went through
                                                      63



                                         R. M. WRIGHT

You went through? - A. Through A.
✓
You in fact went through the turnstile which was
different to what was on your ticket? - A* That is
right.

No one will criticise you for that? - A. No.

You knew what you were doing. When you got through
the turnstile, if we could have a look at Plan 274
it is shown on the left hand side, the turnstiles
which you were going through, the Officer could
perhaps the perimeter gates in front of (a) to (g)
first of all.  That is not the area you went in,
was it? - A. No.

That is in fact the area which you should have gone
through if you were following your ticket for
(b)? - A. Yes.

If the Officer then moves to where you did go
through, which is the much larger area there, and
the Officer uses his stick as if you went through
one of the turnstiles marked A, you would turn to
your left to get to Enclosure 7? - A. As you go
through the turnstiles, you come through and you
have got to veer off to your left and there is like
a spiral staircase to get up to the terracing.

You knew where you were going. Was there any
signing there to tell you to go that way? - A. I
couldn’t see any.

Was there anybody there to direct you? - A. No.

Let us take somebody who went through the    correct
entrance and you did not. If the Officer can show
us with his very useful stick going through a B
turnstile he gets to that area where it says A to
G? - A. Yes.

To get to an enclosure where you want to stand at
the side in Enclosure 7 you would have to go which
way, if going through that turnstile, would you go
left or right? - A. You would have to go right.

You were going in? -   A. Ido not really know
because I have never   been in that way.

No, but if the Officer can show us with his stick I
can help you, and in fact you would have to go to
your left through that wall? - A. That is right.

If the Officer can show us with his stick you would
have to go through that wall and then round? - A .
Yes.
                                                              64


                                             R- M. WRIGHT


Q.   Although we know we can see from the tickets that
     everybody had a standing ticket had a letter (b) to
     go through, the best route, which is the one you
     took, is the one which took you through letter (a)
     to get to a side enclosure? - A. Yes.

Q.   Those side enclosures, on any view, were less full
     than the two centre ones? - A. That is correct.

Q.   You were asked a number of questions, Mr. Wright,
     about what you say as regards people carrying cans
     of drink and so forth. Now obviously you are only
     giving your impression, are you not? - A- That is
     right.

Q.   Are you giving an impression which is one you had
     on the day? - A. Yes.

Q.   Was it your impression that although there was a
     minority carrying cans, the impression you had was
     that the majority were not carrying cans? Was that
     the impression you had? - A. That is the impression
     because the impression I got was that everyone
     seemed to be arriving late and were trying to make
     their way down to get into the gate-

Q.   Obviously you can only give your evidence of what
     was an impression.  When you got to the area of the
     turnstiles, that is Leppings Lane, and you got
     there about ten to three, to get there you had to
     go down Leppings Lane, did you not? - A. That is
     right.

Q.   Were you conscious of any Police Officers in
     Leppings Lane as you were going along it going
     towards the turnstiles? - A. There were a few
     Police Officers.  Some were walking back towards
     the roundabout and there were a few Police Officers
     going towards the other way.

Q.   Did they stop anybody from what you could see? - A.
     No.

Q.   This is 1989? — A. No.

Q.   Then you arrived at the turnstile area? - A. Yes.

Q.   We now know that the area which you joined was
      through the perimeter gates leading to the
      turnstiles which are marked with either a big A or
      C? - A. Yes.

Q.   Those gates were open? - A. Yes.

Q.   There was nothing to stop you joining the crowd     in
                                        R, M. WRISHT

there? - A. That is correct.
/
Your evidence - and I want to see if you can help
us on what you meant by this - was about supporters
going up to the Police saying, "Do something about
the crowd”? - A. Yes.                ~ >

Where were you when you heard that happen? - A. One
instance was as we were going down towards the gate
there were mounted Police and the supporters were
saying something to them there about the situation.
Then as people were going through the turnstiles
people were saying to the Police.

What was the situation which, as you understood it,
people were telling the Police about? - A. They
were saying that it was getting overcrowded and
there were too many people for the area to go
through.

Which is the area you are talking about? - A. Area
A.

That is in front of the turnstiles? - A. That is
right.

Between the perimeter gate and the turnstiles? - A.
Yes.

You have also given evidence that as you got to the
turnstiles yourself something happened to your
shoulder.  What was that? ~ A. We were coming in
and it was just after we had made room for a lad
what had fainted.  Things were tight and so X chose
to follow somebody who was taller than me because I
thought I would have the best option of getting
through all right. At the last minute as we got
down to the turnstiles he decided to stop and he
turned around.  I was carried on with the momentum
and my shoulder got left behind and as I was pushed
on through my shoulder was wrenched and pushed
around.

You have talked about momentum.   You have been to
many football matches I am sure.   Is it your
experience that a crowd entering a football ground
has a forward momentum? - A. Yes.

A quite natural phenomenon and it has a forward
momentum? - A. Yes.

No one has suggested to yourself, Mr. Wright, that
you are anything other than a law abiding
citizen? - A. Yes.

I am sure you are pleased about that.   If you had
                                                           66



                                             R. M. WRIGHT

     wanted to go backwards would yOu have been going
     with the crowd or against the crowd? - A. I would
     have been going against the crowd.

Q.   How difficult would that have been or how easy
     would it have been for you to go against the
     movement of the crowd? - A. Not very.

Q.   Not very what? - A. Not very easy to go against the
     crowd.

Q.   Was your impression of the people around you that
     they were deliberating trying to exacerbate the
     situation, the people around you? - A. No.

Q.   What was your impression as to why the crowd kept
     moving forward? - A. Everybody just seemed to want
     to get in before the kick-off.

Q.   The crowd has a natural forward momentum of its
     own? - A. That is right.

Q.   When you got through into the concourse area on the
     other side of the turnstiles you gave evidence
     about a group of supporters saying something to the
     Police about going out and doing something - I was
     not quite sure what your evidence was on that.
     Could you tell us again exactly what you saw and
     heard? - A. We went through the turnstiles.   We
     veered off to the left to go down to the programme
     sellers, got our programmes, and on the way back
     there was a couple of Police Officers standing by
     the big gates.  There was a group of Liverpool
     supporters there saying, "Go out there and do
     something.  Someone is going to get hurt".

Q.   Did you yourself know what they were talking about?
     - A . Yes, because of my shoulder. I had hurt my
     shoulder.

Q.   What did you think they were talking about? - A. To
     go out there and stop the crowds coming in so fast.

Q.   This was being said to whom? - A. The Police
     Officers.

Q.   How many Officers about? - A. I think there were
     three.

Q.         THE CORONER;   How many? - A. I think there
     were three.

Q.         MR. KING:   What was their response to that? -
     A.First   of all they just tried to push it to one
     side and they kept on protesting and then they
     turned around and said, "P-off or we'll nick you".
                                                R. M. WRIGHT


Q.   I am sorry I missed that? - A. They said,    "P-off or
     else we will nick you” .

Q.   I am not trying to be unfair to those Officers but
     was the impression you gained from that that they
     were making it very clear they were not interested
     in what the supporters were saying to them? - A.
     The Police have got to handle this situation all
     the time. -

Q.   Quite. - A. They are always getting complaints
     about different things I suppose but I suppose on
     hearsay they just thought it was just another load
     of supporters moaning about the conditions or
     something like that.

Q.   I was interested in what you say, "otherwise we
     will nick you".  That presumably meant they were
     going to arrest you? - A. Yes, because they were
     quite adamant in their protests towards the
     Officers.

Q.   Did they say what they were going to arrest them .
     for? - A. No.

Q.   Let me take the situation up inside the ground when
     you are watching the scene.  You yourself, an
     obvious question, were not put there in that
     enclosure to keep an eye on the crowd behind the
     goals.  That was not your function, was it? - A.
     No.

Q.   You are only giving your evidence of your
     impression having a look across to the crowd? - A.
     That is right.  I can only say what I saw.

Q.   You were there as a spectator? — A. Yes.

Q.   Can you help us on this though;  you have been in a
     large crowd behind a goal? - A. Yes.

Q.   I am sure sometimes you have been near the goal and
     sometimes you have been away at the back? - A. No,
     we stand behind the goal usually.

Q.   You are behind the goals? - A. Yes.

Q.   Have you ever had the experience of being at the
     back of the crowd though? - A. Occasionally.  Only
     like half-time when you are making your way back
     down.

Q.   You may not be able to help on this then;  how easy
     is it for someone at the back of a crowded pen or
     enclosure to know what is going on at the front of
                                                 R. M. WRIGHT

     the pen? - A. Hard.
     /

     THE CORONER:   I think that is not an entirely fair
question because you are asking him to express an opinion
about what other people do.  I think it is fair for you to
say to him, how hard would it be for him?

    MR. KING:     I thought I had put it in that way and I
beg your, pardon.    ..

     THE CORONER:  I do not think that   he replied.        At
least I understood his reply to refer to others.

    MR. KING:   I was only trying to obtain his experience
of being at the back of the crowd.

Q.         From your experience of being at the back of a
         crowd, limited though it may have been, is it your
         experience that it is hard to tell what is going on
         at the front of a crowd in your experience? - A.
         Yes.

Q.       You by the sound of it had had experience in the
         past of seeing fans causing trouble climbing out of
         the ground and going on to the pitch.  You have
         seen that before? - A. No.

Q„        You have not seen that before? - A. Never.

Q.You have watched games on the television?        -A.   On
    the television, yes.

Q.   Sometimes we see games on the television in which
     fans causing trouble get out of the area where they
     are supposed to be and they run on to the pitch, do
     they not? - A. That is right.

Q.   They cause trouble, sometimes stopping     the game?     -
     A. Sometimes stopping the game.

Q.   In 1989 when you were at Hillsborough in Enclosure
     7 and you saw fans starting to climb out from the
     middle terracing behind the goal over the fencing,
     you first said to yourself, "Perhaps it is a
     protest"? - A. Yes.

Q.   What was it which made you realise  it was not a
     protest? - A. None of the supporters were
     encroaching on to the pitch.

Q.   Encroaching on to the pitch, can I put it this way,
      is the hallmark of people making trouble? - A. That
      is right.


Q.       But if fans do not actually go on to the pitch but
                                                           69



                                             R. M. WRIGHT

     just stay on the perimeter, that is not making
     trouble? - A. No.

Q.   You agree with that? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did it become clear to you, therefore, that it was
      not a case of fans climbing out in order to make
      trouble? - A. Yes.

Q.   One can understand Police Officers - and one can
      really understand this - who are used to being at
     matches where there is trouble? - A. Yes.

Q.   Everybody knows they have a very difficult time? -
     A. Yes.

Q.   Having to deal with people who run out on to the
      pitch? - A. Yes.

Q.   But your evidence is that the fans who you saw
      climbing out were not going on to the pitch? - A.
      They were not encroaching on the pitch.




                                       /Q.     you were.
                                                                         70



                                                            ;U l;i U R I C HIT




0. You were asked .a number of tirsas about your, evidence,
   first of all about an.Officer letting sowe people ;out
   and tnea shutting the gates... - A.. Yas* "

0. Is that something whicn is clear in your ni nd , that you
  ;.saw? - A Yas I ;saw. a, gate.; opening.,,and..t k e x -               Adgdrwd^
  ■ again.*  .;
              .                                   \ g'---;;p>.v:\;g::A.V.^x,.;.:\::rg^,

Q. This was after the players nad left the field? - A.
   Yes.

0. You gave a very graphic description next of supporters                        •
   costing over from the pens and Police Officers pushing’
   tnea back in? - A. Yes, that's correct.

0. iou said something about baaging on tiiair hands?- - A.
   Yes.

Q. who are you referring to when .you said that? - .A. ..Sods ;
   of the ?olice Officers.

0. Gould you demonstrate with your hands what they'viece ■
   doing? - A. You. had. like tne spiked part at the top of
   the fence conies   over on the angle like that and a s 'the
   people were climbing up they were putting their nands.
   on there, and. some of the Police Officers was. knocking
   on their knuckles, knocking the;a bac--; down..

0. This obviously is something which stuck in your hind? -
   A. Yes.  It was   like I was saying, before, some of .tne
   Police Officers   ware brilliant, they were getting s.tuc-c
   in and helping, but there was lack of co-ordination
   between wnat soars Officers- sere doing ana what other
   Officers were doing.

0. Did you get tne impression that soae -Offleers- knew wast
   was happening and other Officers didn't? - A. Yes.

0. Soae Officers realised what was happening and were
   dasperata to help, sorae Officers just thought it was
   crowd trouble? - A.. Correct.

0. And were pushing people back? - A. Yes.

0. And your impression was a lack of co-ordination 'oetwaen
   the various Officers? - A. Yes.        •

0   . Can I just take you back to your experiences of 133 for
      one accent? You. say that evan in IdidS in those pens
      you had some experience of discocnfort? - A.. Y e s .

0. Could you explain again what tnat was? - A. As Wa go.t
   in we took up our vantage point to where we wanted to
   watch, the game, but as time went or; ;nbra supporters
                                                      a . ii.:



   cama in and w-e wara pushed nearer the front, lixa I was
  ..saying, and looking through trie wire .fence,- anti so .,
   obviously that.is not one of- the bast vie w s 'so we:-
   decided to leave and try out this other vantage point,'"-
   whicn. turned out to faa a very good place.

0. L have 'no- further: .questions,/'thank- .yoti.d-'k'-kv       •

                Ccoss-Exaaioed cyh-iR. CArC-dPJLE

0. Can I just concentrate very bristly on. tne- tickets dr.          .   . ‘
   King was referring to?  Before I do tiiat I vondec if
   Sergeant could put up a copy of tha osap of'
   Hillsborough..

         THE C0R0HEA:      The street nap you raean - 231?

         HR. CATCitPOLE:     Yes, the .scale ,raap::.;   :

0. Mr. wright, if you look at that cnap, that, is a fairly
   detailed plan of the area around the Hillsborough.-
   Ground, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. Perhaps I could, hand you back tna paotocopi.es of tha
   tickets that Mr. iking handed up to you.     If you look on
   the second page, you see the reverse of the tickets - I. .
   think you have got a transparency of taose.as W e l l ­
   and it would ba fairly obvious to you looking at. that,     .
   that it i s n ’t either to scale or in any .particular
   detail,, is it? - A. Mo.

Q. It is just a representation of roughly where things
   are? - A. Yes.

0. what you w o u l d .be interested in whan you got your
   ticket, you turn over and look at the front page,
   Leppings Lane Stand,, it says Entrance B? - A. Yes.

0. Presuraa bly if you don't know where you are going you
   look at tne diagram on the hack and it tells you it is
   at the Lappings Lane, and then.you g o 'and loo^.on a r?ao
   to find out the proper directions to get -there? - A.
   You look at your ticket to see where you are going aaa
   then as you get up to the. ground you are   trying to find
   tne nupher co-ordinating with what is in your ticket.

0. Don't get me wrong, I an not even going to suggest taat
   tne letters that you see on tha back of t-ne :ticket are
   the same as you see outside the ground - it quite
   plainly isn't.   This taay sound very silly but I aa not
   trying to be fuaay or silly, when you are going
   somewhere where you don't know the area, you know
   roughly wnat you are Looking, for, in this case.. Entrance
   ;i, qo you walk along the road fixedly staring down at
                                                                72




                                                       M.- i-J-RIGciT




     the ground, at the back of your'ticket, and shuffle
     forward and try and get into- the ground by some sort of ,
     telepathy? - A. Mo,, I /usually -ask- a Police Of ficar. f

Q. And there are other ways as well,, aren't they?' You
   look around? - A. fn-at" s rigat...

0. If you are going to any place you don't know you look
   for things, you use your ayes? - A. Yes.

Q. In that case, can I go back to sosse of the naotOH,raoiis
   you have already seen?   i don't know whether y o u h a v e
   got tiie bundle of documents there?    If you turn to
   G257, that is    a picture of the turnstiles at the
   Leppings Lane    end, tne standing.area.    Do you see t h e .
   latter S over the turnstiles, and I nope you can see
   above that - can you. read wnat is...written? - A..'.
  .Visitors only.

Q. Mo, immediately above the B ....

          THE CORONER:    Mr. Griffiths, just open the
     bundle.   It nay be difficult ....  I still, prefer to
     use the overheads.   Generally speaking I aa sure it is
     a better way.

Q.        HR. CATCiiPGLE:    It says letter 6,and tnen
     Visitors ..... - A. Standing Only.

Q. Then can you   see the purple coloured sign to        theleft
   of the turnstiles there? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you reaienber what- colour your ticket was? - A. Mo.'

Q. Perhaps if I hand, up this .-ticket for the no.ient, and
   take it from rae that was the. colour of tne Leppings
   Lane Terraces ticket, can you tell the Jury wnat colour
   that is? - A. Mauve.-

Q. It actually matches ..... - A. The sign.

Q. If you turn tnen to C25-8, you have already seen, you
   can see tne- A,, the B and tne C all above the turnstile
   doors, can't you? - A . Yes.

Q.. And tnen    if you     go onto   C259, can/ou -seetheletter C
    above tnat wall there? - A. Yes.

Q. Gan you read wnat it says above tne letter C? - A.
   Visitors, West Stand Seats.

C. Then if you turn to €250', you can see .the letter C
   a^ain, and by- the turnstiles there, tnere is another
   sign.  Can you tell rae what colour tnat is? - A. Red-
                                                                        73



                                                     R. ....
                                                         i-i. 'JRIGHT
                                                                i" ...........




0. If I hand you another ticket, this one does actually
   have something written on it. This is the one.we had
   earlier but I. didn't catch the C number-..

         THE CORONER:      287.

         &R*:'' CATCllPOLEr-;VThank-^ouk''’V - : #

Q. You will see.tnat that says on it that it- is a Uast
   Stand ticket, a season ticket? - A* Correct, yes.

Q. And it is red, just as those signs are red? - A. Yes.

Q. While we are on C260, if you keep it open, as you said
   •• • •

        MR.. CATQIPOLE: . Sir, tne re are problems .when-, you- .
 . blow photographs up, and;I do actually -have a copy of /
   the smaller photograph frora which .C2S0 is -taken.   C a n .I :-
   ask tha witness just to see the ssialler one for the
   purpose of the next question?

          TSIE CGR011ER: Nobody is going to object to taat.
     It is simply for clarity.

Q.        HR. CATCHPGLE:   Do you know anything about
     cameras, Hr. Wright? - A. wo.

0. You know you have problems w i t h focussing and with
   definition if you blow something up? - A. Yes.

Q.- If you look above tne letter. C that you see on that,
    can you see tne words, Uest Stand Seating? - A. Yes.

Q. You can read thea, can't you? - A. Yes.

Q. And that pnotograph was taken fro,13 the other side, of
   Leppings Lane, wasn't it? - A. That is rignt.

          hR. CATCHPOLE:    One final, photograph - sir, this
     is in the bundle that has been bandied around.    It is -a
     South Yorkshire Police,. LwlO/19A:

Q, This is a photograph taken on tne day,. Hr. Wright.
   Again, I need, your help because, you are tne first
   supporter in -the witness box. That is 'a pnotogr.apn
   frQKi roughly- the sarae- area that C2GG is taken.  Tha
   Jury will see it in a sum ant.     It has got a wnole load
   of people in the concourse area, yes? - A. Yes.

Q. You. can see, can't you, above their head's, tne l e t t er s '
   A? - A. Yes.
                                                      .   a. ji../b r i g h t




And indeed I think you can see also over to the right ,
the latter S? - A. I can see the A. Yes, I -can. just
see it.. .

So on the -other side of- Lappings Lane terraces you' can
ac.tua.ily-. .sea those-- .signs *,;.and, that ,is,.not ^surprising.,. ■
                                                                       -
because- they are above the:.door, o f :t-hev turnstile--.which':-
is considerably bigger than sios.t. people are? - A. Yes.-

     THE COROdER:-   Excuse m e. Sergeant Griffiths,
rather than do' that, take   it out.and see whether we can
get the acetate and let’s    see iftne s y s t e m works.

     MR.. CAXCHPGLE:  Sir, I a-s nappy to pass mine
round if it would help the Jury at this aoaent.

      THE CORO h ER: If it. .works, w e ,should n a v e :it. back .
in 30. seconds of thereabouts., «e. will/see. ■:

     i'iR. CAICL1P0L£: .. You weren't in this category in
1989 because you had.already been to the ground, but .if
you war a going there for the first tirae., and you knew
that your entrance was A, B or C, it does' appear' from
tnase photographs that you could at least see over the
top? You could see A, C, 8, so you had a good idea
which turnstiles those related.to? -.A. Yes.

One final point and that is when you went into the
ground you knew where you  wanted to go, didn't you? -
A. Yes, that is correct.

You weren't looking for signs that would help because
you knew.exactly where you wanted' to go and stand? - A.
That is right.

I aa very grateful, thank you.,

     THE CGROdER:     Just han> on for one aimits.      The
plan, Hr. Catchpole, which we put up, .the street plan,-
I said it was 231.    Do you agree with -that?- Can you
put 281 up for a ~iinute?   I ass sorry,, it is 2-34. . del.l,.
obviously the-systea doesn't work as fast as I .had
aoped.   vje will move-on to Mrs. 'iicBrien and cone back
to that overhead when we can.     Any questions, i-irs.
KcBrien?

              Cross-Examined by dRS. dcSRlldr

dr. bright, just one question, tnat's all.    Are you
aware of a Government rule t.iat says tnat. coacnes
carrying football supporters ....

     THd COkOiiEk:  Just a aiaute,. drs. dc3rien. .You
nave asked this question before and I asked you to
produce your evidence for it.- Ia fact, I kaov the
     answer' to the question,.and it isn't a Government rule.
     ¥ou ;nust not. put things to witnesses which are not,, in.'/
     fact, facts.      You have had. almost'a weak to draw ay
     attention         I didn't ask you to 'produce the original,-
-... I said...draw. ay, .attention-.
 :• itrup, ;butvyou: havaa t 'dona it..'        '




               /(). I an afraid ......
                                                                     76


                                                 R.M,   W R I GHT


          ✓ MRS. McBRIEN:   I am afraid I have been a bit slow on
       that, I really have.  I intend writing to our local MP about
       this matter, and Iwill do  it this evening.

B           THE CORONER:    I will ask the question
       know exactly what it is.   We did get a copy
                                                        for you, because I
                                                        of the thing you
       have got in mind, but it is not a Statutory      Instrument. It is
       not a regulation.   It is a letter of advice     from the Traffic
       Commissioners making a suggestion:

    Q. The question is, did you know that the Traffic Commissioners
       had advised coach firms not to arrive at their location prior
       to an hour before the kick-off? - A. No.

    Q. In 1989? - A. No.

            THE CORONER:    That is your question,      is not it?

            MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes, thank you.

            THE CORONER:    And you did not know it.

D           MRS. McBRIEN:    Thank you, sir.

            THE CORONER:    But be careful, because it is not a
       regulation.  It is an advice.   In fact, it has been altered
       since then, possibly as a result of this incident, but that is
       neither here nor there.   I am not trying to be difficult ,;’M r s .
       McBrien, but it is very important, as I am sure the lawyers
       will all understand, when you put something to the witness you
       have got to be reasonably sure it is right, because otherwise
       they don't know and you can mislead them.   I know you would
       not want to do that.

                     Cross-Examined by MISS ADDELMANN:

    Q. I would just like to clarify one matter with you, Mr. Wright,
       please.  In response to a question asked by my learned friend,
       Mr. King, you mentioned that you saw a gate being opened by a
       Police Constable, and then being closed, and you said your
       recollection was quite clear about that.   Do you, however,
       recall - I think it was in response to a question asked by the
       learned Coroner - that you did mention before we broke for
       lunch that you saw a Police Constable opening a gate, but you
       don't know if it was closed? You see to recollect a push? -
       A. There was a gate opened and there were some people were
       allowed out, and then I saw another Officer put some more
       people back in, and the gate, I take it, .was shut, but it
       could have been pushed.  It was definitely put back.

    Q. But you don't know one way or the other? - A. No, not
       definitely.

    Q. You could not say for sure?      A. I could only see with my
       eyes.




H
                                                           77



                                            ft-M- WRIGHT


                   Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL:

Q. Would you please turn up photograph C 253.  Are you able to
   identify from that photograph which of the turnstiles you
   recall going through?          •

Q.        THE CORONER:   Can you remember which one it was? - A . We
     went to go I think, in the end, where I was aiming, for about
     10 or 12, and I think we went through turnstile 5.

Q.        MR. RUSSELL:   But can you remember, you told us it was a
     turnstile A and that you do remember? - A. Yes.

Q. And having got through the turnstile where did you go then? -
   A. To get a programme.

Q. And how far from the turnstile did you have to go to get a
   programme? - A. 10 to 15 yards.

Q. In which direction? - A. To the left.

Q. You had to go to the left, having gone through the turnstile?
   - A . Yes.

Q. And having got the programme did you then make your way to
   enclosure 7? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you have any difficulty going from there to enclosure 7 in
   terms of barriers or gates or anything like that? - A. We had
   to make our way back after getting the programme, and they put
   these crowd barriers along from where the programmes were.   We
   had to make our way round them to go round to section 7, but
   we had no trouble.

Q. If you look at page C 274, the plan - do you have that? - A.
   Yes.

Q. We can see from that that turnstiles 1-8 give access to the
   North Stand, don't they? - A. That is correct.

Q. You say you went through turnstile about No. 5?   So although
   I am not trying to be precise about whether it was N o . 5,
   would you say it was probably within numbers 1 to 8? - A.
   Somewhere round there, yes.

Q.    There is a difference, is not there, between going through
     turnstiles with A above them and turnstiles with C above them?
     - A. Yes.                                 .

Q. And turnstiles with A above them are for the North Stand and
   turnstiles with C above them leads you into the area where we
   can see marked the Portakabins on the plan? - A. Yes.

Q.    Can you please explain to us how having gone through a
     turnstile with A above it you were able to go to enclosure 7
     and were not obliged to go to the North Stand? - A. Because we
     went through the turnstile, turned to our left, we walked
                                                                  78


                                                 R. M.   WRIGHT


   ovej~, we got our programmes, we then came back, went around
   the little barriers that were there and made our wav.

Q. Where were the barriers? - A. The barriers were coming along
   just after the Portakabin, coming back towards the higher
   range turnstiles.  There were only a couple of barriers
   there, and we turned round and made our way up to No. 7.

G. Did it appear to you at the time what you were doing was not a
   prescribed route for getting to enclosure 7? - A. It was where
   we knew we could g o .

Q. But we can see from the plan that the way to get to enclosure
   7 would be either to go through the turnstiles with B above
   them - I am sorry - either ones with B above them, as we can
   see turnstiles A to G, and then go through the hole in the
   wall that ran from the turnstiles to the back of the stand, or
   alternatively, go through the turnstiles with C above them.,
   towards 9 to 16, and then within the area where the
   Portakabins are shown.  Is that right? - A. That is right;! but
   we were aiming for higher turnstiles, but with the crowd
   momentum we ended up going through the lower on e s . So
   obviously we had th^ ticket to get in on the stands so that is
   where we had to go,

Q. Looking at the plan for the moment, or come to the plan in a
   moment.  Would it be fair to say you were about 150 feet or
   about just under 50 metres from the goal where you were in
   enclosure 7? - A. Somewhere around there, I expect, yes.

Q. Do you think it possible that you misinterpreted the actions
   of Police Officers that you saw some 50 yards away? - A. No.

Q. And that in fact what was being demonstrated by the Police
   Officers were signs to try and encourage the crowds in pens 3
   and 4 to move back? - A. No.

Q . Thank y o u .

        MR. HALE:   I am sorry to have to come back on a
   point, but this witness has unwittingly been introduced
   to the question of tickets and the checking of tickets
   the previous year:

                    Further Cross-Examined by MR. H A L E :

Q. Could I just ask you this very briefly.          The previous year you
   arrived much earlier? - A. Yes.

Q. Just remind me.       I am sorry.   About what time? - A. Around
   quarter-past-l.

Q. So what you saw as Police checking tickets of everybody
   getting into the ground was in fact something quite different
   at quarter-past-l in 1988 from the situation at 10-to-3 in
   1989? - A. Yes.
Q. You accept that? - A. Yes.
                                                                 79


                                             R. M.   WRIGHT


Q. We have all looked at these photographs.  The area of the
   turnstiles where all this terrible crush was taking place, is
   that approximately as wide as Leppings Lane down at the
   roundabout end, or is it wider? - A. It is narrower, but as
   you get towards the turnstiles it widens out a bit.

Q.    Is it more or less the same sort of width - if it were going
     to be that the people were going to be checked at the end of
     Leppings Lane, is there a very wide area to be covered if y o m /
     are going to stop people from getting through without tickets?
     - A. I d o n ’t know, really.

Q.   We are not talking about a small area of 6 or 10 feet wide at
     the end of Leppings Lane, are we? - A. no.

Q. It is the width of a road and    the pavements and so      on? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Did you see the barriers across the side roads as you were
   walking along Leppings Lane, the crowd barriers? - A. What is
   this? In 1989?

Q. In either year? - A. I cannot recollect, no.

Q. The crush that occurred at 10-to-3 in 1989 was almost
   overwhelming, was not it? It was hurting people.     Evidence
   elsewhere has been given of a photograph in which the bolt of
   a gate was damaged.  Gan you imagine anything less than the
   bricks and the steel which were of what the turnstiles and the
   surrounds were built of - that is right, is not it - it was
   bricks and steel, was not it? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you imagine anything less than that holding that crowd
   back merely by something thrown across a road? - A. I think
   if the control and the Officers had been there it would not
   have got to that situation.

Q. Well, there has been other evidence of the time people arrived
   and the numbers.  All I am saying to you is if by any
   chance the numbers had been the same as there were when you
   were present waiting to go through a turnstile, if those
   numbers had been present at that sort of time, trying to
   get into the ground, can you imagine, for instance, a line
   of Officers standing shoulder to shoulder across the road
   could have stopped them? - A. Yes.

Q. You think they could? - A. I think they could.

          MR. KING:   Could I just ask a question about the
     coloured signs which my learned friend, Mr. Catchpole, asked
     about, which had not been in the questions I had directed at
     the time.
                                                                     80



                                               R . M . „ W R IGH T


               Further Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G :

Q. Could we have a look at 256 again, please.   You can see, Mr.
   Wright, from 256, the large letters over the turnstiles, AA,
   A, CC, B, etc., and ray learned friend, Mr. Catchpole, referred
   you to the coloured signs which he also said was helping you
   to identify the turnstile you should go through.   Do you see
   the position of those coloured signs on 256, that is to say
   the height in relation to the largie letter A? Itis right, is
   not it, that the coloured sign is below the level of the large
   letter A? - A. That is correct.

Q. If I can show you the very photograph which my learned friend,
   Mr. Catchpole, put to you to show the scene from across the
   road, someone approaching those turnstiles with a crowd in
   front of it - I am looking at 10/18A.

        THE CORONER:    We had better give this a number.               This is
   the one you introduced, Mr. Catchpole?

        MR. KING:      Sir, he introduced MWL 10/18A and MWL IO/19A.1

        MR. CATCHPOLE:   I introduced one new one which is the
   one my learned friend is looking at.  The other one I
   introduced is theoriginal of one we already had.

        THE CORONER:     Can you give me the one you have
   introduced?

        MR. KING:      MWL 10/18A.   (Marked C 2 8 9 )

        THE CORONER:   Mr. Griffiths, can you find out what on
   earth has happened to our system, which does not seem to have
   worked.

        MR. CATCHPOLE:   Can I apologise, sir.  The one I
   introduced is MWL 10/19A.  The one my friend is referring to
   is KL 18A




                                 /THE CORONER:        L e t ’s start.
                                        R . M. WRIGHT



     THE CORONER:     Let's start again.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:      10/19.A.

     THE CORONER:     That is C.289.    Is that the one Mr.
Catchpole?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, yes, it is.   That actually
shows why it may be of benefit to the jury to actually
see the photograph because it doesn't show the detail...

     MR. KING:   I am quite willing for that photograph
to be used, sir.

     THE CORONER:      Can we leave it on that one?

     MR. KING:      Sir, it is only a simple point:

Although you can see letter A, if you look to the left
hand side of that photograph, it is right that nowhere on
that scene can you actually see those coloured signs
which, of course, are at a lower level and are blocked by
the people? - A. That is correct.

Finally on those letters, my learned friend Mr. Russell
when he showed you the plan said as a prescribed route to
the side enclosure, that enclosure you were going to,
enclosure 7, which was the far left of the terrace as you
are walking into the ground, it was suggested to you the
prescribed route was through letter C.   That is what he
suggested to you.   No doubt that through letter C was
the best route.   In fact the prescribed route for
anybody who was going to stand there was, according to
the ticket, letter B, wasn't it? - A. Yes.

Which meant you had to go left through a wall before you
could get to enclosure 7? - A. That is correct.

       Further Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

Mr. King has just put to you that you had to turn left
through a wall.   Are you able to walk through walls, Mr»
Wright? - A. No.

There was actually a gate in that wall...

     MR. KING:   Sir, I wasn't trying to make the point
that it was impossible:

You would have to go through an access gate to the left?
- A. Yes.
                                       R . M. WRIGHT


   / THE CORONER:    Can we borrow a decent photograph to
pass round the jury?

     MR. PAYNE:    It may be helpful while the jury is
looking at this photograph to note that in the bottom
right hand corner just visible on that projection there
are some red numbers which are in fact the time at which
the photograph was taken.    It is difficult to actually
read them. I c a n say that the timing; on the photograph
is 14.18 and I am told that is one minute wrong so it
should be 14.17 - quarter past two.

     THE CORONER:   Could you, Mr. Griffiths, borrow
Mr. King's bundle and just pass it round the jury, and
then we will return it.

     MR. KING:   Sir, it is in fact Mr. Catchpole's
bundle.   Mine is with the witness.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Would it be helpful to the jury for
me to indicate the two positions at which you...   I put
to the witness that you could see letters A and B on that
photograph.   I don't know whether it would be helpful
for me to indicate, which he agreed, exactly where they
are.   Letters A are over to the left hand side of the
photograph.   If you look towards the right you will see
a blue post and letter B is slightly out of focus just to
the left of that blue post.   If Mr. Griffiths moves his
stick to the right I think you should be able to see some
kind of blue post in the distance and letter B is
actually there on the wall.

     THE CORONER:     On the photograph you mean?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     On the photograph, yes.

     THE CORONER:   This is one of the problems of
photographs.   We don't know what lens, we don't know
what distance - well, we know very little.   It is a
snapshot in time, by chance.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   It suffices that one can actually
see them above the crowd.   The human eye is different to
a lens.

     THE CORONER:     It may be better, or worse.

                Further bv THE CORONER:

I just want to get two or three things clear and then we
have finished.   My impression was that you yourself were
not confused about either the As, the Bs, the Cs, or
whether it was A, C, B, because you knew where you were
aiming for? - A. Yes.
                                                           83.




                                         R. M. WRIGHT


Q. It'would not have made any dif ference to you personally
   what it said on the ticket because^you already knew where
   the turnstiles were.   You knew which ones you wanted to
   aim at.   In fact you were perhaps slightly defected.
   As far as you were concerned, all this stuff about blue
   colours and red colours didn t matter at      all? -     A.No.

Q. The second thing I want to ask you about is the     forward
   movement of the crowd. We have assumed that the crowd
   has forward momentum, and you have agreed with that? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Mr. King put that to you and, indeed, it has if it is
   moving.   You have also agreed it would have been
   difficult to go against the stream? - A. Yes.

Q. What was to stop the crowd, or the people at the back of
   the crowd, from becoming stationary?   What stopped the
   crowd when you hit, if you like, the wall of people, or
   the group of people, for the people at the back saying,
   "Hang on, there is a lot of people here, we will stop and
   not move forward"?   Tell me that.   Did you stop? - A.
   No, we just carried on.

Q. There was nothing to stop you? - A. Nothing to stop me.

Q. You are not suggesting, are you, that the only way in
   which you would stop is if somebody told you to stop.   I
   am talking about you now.   Supposing you were
   approaching a brick wall. - A. If somebody had cbme and
   said, "Right, hang on where you are.   No further,  you
   would have stopped.

Q. I s n ’t that what the man in the Land Rover was saying? -
   A. But he was saying that over the PA, but he wasn t
   saying, "Stop," to what I could react to.      I think he
   was just saying everybody take their time, everybody was
   going to get in.

Q. The question I was really asking you was this:  are you
   saying that if you approach - this is a rather ridiculous
   example but I want to make the point - a closed door, or
   a wall, that you will continue walking unless somebody
   says, "Stop"? - A. No, you would stop.

Q. Now I know there were pressures and there was anxiety,
   people wanted to get in. I know that andyou have   made
   that point.   Now I want to go back again to this
   business about this policeman and banging on the
   knuckles.   You have given your evidence.   I am not
   going to ask you again what you saw. What I want to be
   quite sure about is the time because I did actually go
   over this.   I think you told me it was well after the
   match stopped, is that right? - A. Yes.
                                        R. M. WRIGHT


You thought it was about quarter ^ast three? - A.
Somewhere around that time, I can t be...

Quite a long time.   However, there is no question in
your mind that that incident which you are describing,
which obviously upset you terribly, was something which
happened well after the match stopped? - A. Yes.

You are sure about that? - A. Yes, positive.

You are sure of both things - that it happened and the
time? - A. Positive.

What I want you to do.    You see that plan, what I want
you to do with a marker pen is just mark for me the
position where you were when you took up your viewing^
position?   (The witness marked the plan)    Can you write
the next "C" number on that, Mr. Griffiths, which will be
C.290.    That is a plan marked by the witness Ross Mark
Wright.    One final question:  there is no question in
your mind that you took your    viewing position - the one
you have just shown - after the match had started and you
have told me it was three minutes or maybe two minutes
past? - A. Yes.

Which do you think it was, two or three minutes? - A. As
we got up the steps the game was already in motion so it
must have been two - two to three.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed,
Mr. Wright.   I am very much   obliged to you.

     The next witness is Mr. Murray.

              ANTHONY JOHN MURRAY Sworn

                    By THE CORONER:

You are Anthony John Murray? -A. Yes.

Of                            Stoke-on-Trent? - A. Yes.

You are the father of one of the lads who died? - A. Yes.

That was Paul Brian Murray? - A. Yes.

Mr. Murray, can I just ask you one other question.      What
is your wife's name? - A. Edna Catherine.

Does she have a job or   is she a housewife? ~ A. She   has
got a part-time job in   a sub-post office.

So a part-time sub-post mistress? - A. Yes.
                                                            85


                                          A. J . MURRAY


     /
Q. Your job is what? - A. I work for Mercury Communications.

Q. I think we have got you down as a telephone engineer,
   would that be near enough? - A. Yes.

Q. I ask these questions because of the age of the lad and
   we need to know mum's names and occupation.

Q. Now you bought two tickets for this match on the 15th?
   A. Yes, sir.

Q. You were intending to go to it with Paul? - A. Yes.

Q. You were going by coach? - A. Yes.

Q. You set off at about 10.15 from home? - A. Yes.

Q. It made its way across the Derbyshire countryside? - A.
   Yes.

Q. It stopped in Bakewell at about one o'clock and you had
   some refreshments? - A. Yes.

Q. You arrived in Sheffield and I think it stopped about       two
   miles from the ground? -A. That is right, sir.

Q. Can you by any   chance recollect what time that was?   - A.
   That was about   2.20.

Q. So you then had to walk down to the ground? -     A. Yes.

Q. What time did you - I take it you and your son went
   together, of course? - A. Yes.

Q. What time did you get there? - A. It would be around
   quarter to three.

Q. You approached the Leppings Lane entrance from which
   direction?   From the roundabout on Leppings Lane? - A.
   We came down Penistone Road, is it?

Q. Yes. - A. And then up Parkside, at the side of the
   ground, and into Leppings Lane that way.

Q. Did you cross a little bridge? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. When you were approaching the entrance were there lots of
   people there? - A. Yes, there were.

Q. How...   We have already it, but was it in thousands? -
   A. A few hundreds anyway.
                                                               8 6



                                          A. J. MURRAY


Q. Did they spill into the roadway? - A. There were some
   into the roadway, yes.

Q.   Can you look at the model, Mr. Murray?     If you point   to
     the perimeter gates and then there is a   sort of area
     outside there. - A. Yes.

Q. Were there people outside in that area? - A. Yes, there
   were, sir.

Q. How close to the perimeter gates did you get before you
   realised there were lots of people there? - A. You could
   see them really as you came round the corner.

Q.   As you came down the hill you could see them? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you by chance either see or hear the police Land
     Rover which we have already heard about? - A. No, I
     did n't, sir.

Q. And you never heard it? - A. I didn't hear anything, sir.

Q. Did you see any police officers at all? - A. I think I
   saw about three mounted policeman.

Q. Where were they, outside the perimeter gates or inside?
   A. I don't really know, sir.   I think one was outside
   the perimeter gate.

Q. Whilst you were outside you became somewhat concerned
   about Paul because he was only a little boy, relatively
   speaking? - A. Well, he was 14.

Q. Well, I suppose he wasn't a little boy.   I'll take that
   back.   He was a youngster.   You were a bit concerned
   because there were so many people, is that right? - A. I
   was getting very concerned.

Q. What was it that was concerning you?   I am sorry, but I
   have to ask you. - A. Well, it was all the jostling and
   that that was going on.

Q. There was quite a lot of crowd movement? - A. Yes.

Q. Was it coming from the back of you, from the side of you,
   where was it coming from? - A. Well, it was all round,
   really.

Q. By this time where had you got to?   Had you got up to
   the perimeter gates or through them? - A. We were through
   the perimeter gates.

Q. Which turnstiles were you heading for? - A. B.
                                                               07


                                            A.   J.   HURRAY


Q. So /you were going through one of the A to G turnstiles?
   You didn't know which one it would be, but... - A. It was
   B turnstiles, yes.

Q. Whilst you were in this crowd were you gradually moving
   towards, or near to, a large concertina gate? - A. I
   couldn't really tell at the time, sir.

Q. You didn't know it was there? - A* I didn't kno w i fc was?
   there, no, sir.

Q. How much control of your movements did you have at that
   stage? - A. Not a great deal.

Q. Could you hear anybody say anything about the movement of
   the crowd that you were in? - A. No, there was just
   general noise of a crowd of people.

Q.   What happened then? -    A. After a while, I don't know what
     the time was at all, I    saw the people start to move
     forward and I realised    that then I could see the gate had
     been opened so we just    followed the people through the
     gate.

Q.    Can you just try and think back to thegate. Can you
     remember whether it was partially open or fully open?     -
     A. No, it was open quite a way.

Q. You followed... - A. ...the crowd through, yes.

Q. With the lad? - A. With my son, yes.

Q. Do you recollect at all - you may not and if you don t
   please say so - do you recollect whether you saw that
   gate shut at all after you had gone through? - A. I
   don't, sir, no.

Q. As you went through the gate I think you heard somebody
   run past you and say something about getting into the
   ground? - A. Yes, he turned to his mate and said,  I told
   you we wouldn't need a ticket," or words to that effect.

Q. But, of course, that was no concern of yours because you
   had a ticket and so did Paul? - A. Yes, sir.




               Q. Ha\£~you ever been to
                                                          88




      ,                                       A. J . MURRAY

Q. Have you ever been to Hillsborough before? - A. I
   have n o t .

Q. So it was new ground to you? — A. Yes.

Q . Having got through you were in an inner concourse
    -area?. —: A- X®s *

Q.    What did you then see? Where did you decide to   go? -
     A. The first thing we did was more or less look   round
     for a programme.

Q. Please sit forward a bit because      it is difficult for
   people to   hear you? - A. We looked round to see if I
   could see   anyone who was selling  programmes which I
   didn't at   all and I just saw the tunnel.

Q. So you and Paul headed towards that? - A. That is
   right, sir, yes.

Q.    Within this concourse area the pressure was not so
     bad because the crowd had expanded? - A. Yes, that is
     right.

Q. You and Paul entered the tunnel# that is right, is it
   not? - A. Yes.

Q. Your passage down the tunnel, what was it like? - A.
   It was quite free.

Q. It was not obstructed? - A. It was not obstructed,
   no.

Q. When you got to the far end of it, to the terrace
   side, can you recollect first of all which side did
   you exit, the right or the left? - A. We went to the
   right, sir.

Q. That we know to be Pen 3, of course? — A. Yes.

Q. Can you recollect by chance whether the game was in
   progress, whether the players were on the field or
   what was happening? - A. No, they were still kicking
   then.

Q. So they were on the field? - A. The players were on
   the field, yes.

Q. Do you know if the referee was still on the field? ~
   A. I don't, sir, no.
                                                          89




                                             A- J. MURRAY
   /

Q. You entered the terrace on the right.  Which route
   did you then take, straight down the centre to the
   right, at the back or diagonally across? - A. As we
   came up my intention was to sort of spread out on to
   the terracing.   I did not realise it was sectioned
   off into pens at all with it being my first time
   there and we sort of moved over to the right of the
   pen when we got into it.

Q. What I am trying to find out is   whether you were
   staying towards the rear of the   pen or whether you
   had moved into the pen and then   were moving to the
   right? - A. We were about, I do   not know, about a
   quarter of the way down or so.

Q. You were trying to get over towards the right? - A.
   Yes.

Q. I do not want to distress you more than I have to,
   Mr. Murray.  It is difficult for you and it is
   difficult for me to ask you the right question but
   can you just tell me what happened there? - A. Paul
   was knocked, spun round, and knocked over and I bent
   down myself to try and hold on to him and I was
   knocked over myself.  I finished up around the bottom
   by the gate.

Q. You got separated from Paul, did you, so far as you
   can recollect? - A. As far as I know, yes.

Q. May I ask you this;   did Paul wear glasses similar to
   yours? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you remember whether you appealed to spectators
   around you to help him particularly or not? - A. No,
   not really.  I was just generally trying to protect
   him.

Q. You then found yourself I think near the front exit
   gate? - A. Yes.

Q. When you found yourself there was the game still in
   progress, had it stopped, or do you not know? - A. I
   have not idea, sir.

Q. You have got no idea? - A. I have got no idea.

Q. Was it open, can you remember? Presumably you went
   through it at some point? - A. I didn't go through
   it, sir.  I was on the floor.
     ,                                          A. J . MURRAY

Q. So you could not really see it properly except that
   you knew it was there? - A. I knew it was there, yes.

Q. Because you had fallen yourself? - A- Y e s .

Q. In fact the next thing you remember is that somebody
   pulled you out? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You hurt your leg but that was a relatively trivial
   injury? - A. Yes.

Q. I did not ask you but I would just be interested to
   know, when you were coming down the two miles or so
   from where you parked? - A. Yes.

Q. Were there other fans coming in the same direction as
   you? — A. The road was very congested with cars and
   that but there were a lot of fans heading in that
   direction.

Q. Towards the ground? - A. Yes.

Q. Were they Liverpool supporters so far as you could
   tell? - A. I think the majority of them were probably
   Nottingham Forest.

Q. That is because, of course, you came across the Dales
   so to speak and would have been in technically the
   wrong area? - A. Yes.

Q. But you had no problems with regard to your colours
   in any way? - A. No, sir.

Q.    I just want to go back to the mounted Officers whom
     you saw.   Did they give you the impression they were
     merely observing or were they in fact involved in any
     way and, if so, in what way? - A. The one that I was
     nearest to seemed to be trying to bring some kind of
     order to it but .....

Q.    What effect, if any, did that have? -A.   He was   not
     having any effect really. I mean he was    on his   own.

Q. And the crowd was pushing forward against him or not?
   - A. He was sort of moving his horse round, you know,
   how they d o .

Q. To break up the crowd is what you are trying to
   say? - A. Yes.

       MR. MAXWELL:   I have no questions, sir, but I
express my sympathies for that dreadful experience.
                 . . . \ . ' „ V _ . ... ■'.   •’ •••'■;,. -M;   k ■■',     ^   •■„„• ..   ...-.   ,A   ..        ..   - •.        -



OJ
                                                                                                                              91




                                                                                                             A. J. MURRAY


                MR. HALE:                                                 So do I, sir, but I must just ask one or
         two questions.
     B
                                                                     Cross-Examined bv MR. HAL E:

         Q. Hindsight is a marvellous thing, of course,, is it
            not? - A. it is, yes.

         Q. That does not mean to say the original decision taken
            was a wrong one or a bad one.  Hindsight always puts
            a new light on things.  If you had your time again -
            probably it is ridiculous to ask - as you were
            approaching the crowds milling around the turnstiles
            might you have thought twice about going in at all? -
            A. Possibly, yes, having had the experience I have
            had but .....

         Q. Even without the benefit of hindsight you did say
            that at the time you approached you were very
            concerned? - A. I was concerned when we were in the
     D      crowd and not on the approach to the ground.

         Q.   You were one of the later comers, were you                                                      not, at
              about ten to three? - A. Possibly, yes.

         Q. There is other evidence that by that time it had
            already been extremely bad for some time, at least
            for many, many minutes? - A. I have no idea, sir.

         Q. It obviously concerned you fairly quickly that there
            was great pressure and there was great danger? > A.
            Yes.

                                                                    Cross-Examined bv MR. KING :

         Q. When you got through into the concourse area and you
            went to the tunnel, did you go that way because it
            seemed to be the obvious way to go? - A. It was the
            only way that I could see.

                                                                          Further bv THE CORONER:

         Q.    Mr. Murray, you may have noticed the other witness
              was asked to put a cross on an acetate.   I am going
              to ask you to do the same as to where you were if you
              are able to. Go and have a look at the plan.    If you
              cannot locate yourself then just say so? - A. On the
              terraces, sir?

         Q. Yes, on the terraces? - A. Before I was knocked down?




     H
                                             A. J. MURRAY

Q. Yes, before you were knocked down. - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.  C291 and this is Mr.
Murray's position. What I am trying to do is to get one of
each of these witnesses because we hope to get a plan drawn
up to put it all on to one composite plan which will give a
visual impression.

Q. There is one other thing I should have asked you.
   Just before you were knocked down, did you feel a
   surge of people, was it just general pressure or
   what? Can you not remember? - A. It was just general
   pressure, sir.

     THE CORONER:     It is very good and kind of you to come
and   I do appreciate it very much.  I know it is very hard
but I think it is right that those members of families who
wish to come and give evidence should have the opportunity
to do so.   In fact we did write to you and we wrote to all
the bereaved and checked it with them because some did not
want to do that.   I respect that and I appreciate very much
you coming.

     Can I just say one other thing in relation to the
bereaved and the evidence in relation to them? As you
know, we are dealing with this in a generic way which is
obvious but nevertheless where I have found a witness who
can say something generically but also is connected with an
individual I have tended to select that witness because we
then in a sense have the opportunity for the families, if
they wish, to hear what people say about their own
individual cases whilst at the same time getting a general
picture.

   What I was hoping to do was that as we get to Mr.
Murray, or whoever it might be that we are dealing with, is
to alert the families of the possibility that there is a
witness who might say something which is related to their
own individual loved one.  The problem, as you can see
already, is that it works if you can predict it
sufficiently far ahead as to what day a witness will
appear.  We have managed to get Mr. Murray in but we have
certainly lost one other witness today already, in fact two
other witnesses, and so we will still endeavour to do this
perhaps by telephone.  We are not actually telling the
families that they must come but we do not want them to
feel they have missed the opportunity, so to speak, to hear
what somebody might have said.

   Having said that, I do have to say if we do not succeed
then I hope the families accept my deep regret.  I would
not hold up the proceedings because I could argue that if
                                              A . J . MURRAY

you want to hear what is going on you have got to be here.
I am a realist and I understand that that is a proposition
which most people cannot adopt bearing the length of time
this will be going on for. We will do our best and ring
wherever we can to give people warning on the understanding
that (a) we might not get to the witness on the day we say
and (b ) that we might possibly in some cases not even get
to hint before we anticipate it in which case we will have
missed it.   I hope you will forgive me if that happens.   As
I say, I am anxious to do the best I can within the limits
of my ability.

   If we had been properly organised, Mr. Murray, we would
have heard another witness today who may or may not have
been close to you in the pen.  It is very difficult to tell
from his statement.  He identifies a father and son and he
identifies glasses which is why I asked about your boy but
I am afraid we have had such problems that he is not here
and I cannot call him.  If you would wish us to let you
know, if I do decide to call him, so that you can come over
please mention it on the way out to one of my Officers and
we will do our best to inform you but that is not to say
that you have to come.  There is no compulsion.   It is
purely intended that you should not say, ”0h dear, I wish
he had told me".  Is that clear?    I am sorry because I
wish we had him here today and we could have dealt with.   I
have got his statement but not him.

   MR. MANNING:   May I just make a very general
observation? My learned friend, Mr. Maxwell, quite rightly
expressed condolences.  I think it would be right that not
every advocate coming to his feet in these dreadful
circumstances should have to start either by saying, "I
express condolences but I have no questions” or "I express
condolences and I do have some questions” . Can I make to
this witness absolutely clear, and I am sure I speak for
every one of my professional colleagues down the table,
that each one of us expresses our deep condolences upon
your loss and nothing we can do makes any difference? We
have a job to do and it is right it should not be just one
person.  I am very happy if Mr. Maxwell makes that remark
he makes it on behalf of everybody sitting here.

     THE CORONER:    I am sure that is so and it obviously
goes for me as well.

                 LOUISE JANE HINTON (Sworn)

                       Bv THE CORONER:

Q. You are Louise Jane Hinton, that is right, is it not?
   - A. Yes.
                                                             94




                                                 L. J. HINTON


Q. You come from                      A. That is my old
   address.

Q. Tell us what your new one is then? -•A. I am now at
   college in Hertfordshire.

Q. What are you studying? - Ai European business
   studies.

Q. Which college is it because we may need to get in
   touch with you? - A.          Polytechnic.

Q. Is it right that on the 15th April you came to
   Hillsborough with your boyfriend? - A. Yes, that is
   correct.

Q. I do not know whether he still is but he was then
   Andrew Hunt, is that right? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. I am not going to ask whether he still is and so do
   not tell me.  You are not actually a football fan,
   are you, but you went because he wanted to come? - A.
   Yes, that is right.

Q. Whether it was a Semi Final or not does not matter
   because you wanted to be with him that day.  You set
   off from Lincoln Station and so you came by train? -
   A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. I think I am right in saying that you certainly did
   not have a ticket, is that right? - A. That is
   correct, yes.

Q. Did he have one? - A. No ^ n e i t h e r of us had a ticket.

Q.    You came presumably on the off-chance that you would
     get one? - A. Yes, that is correct.    I actually
     didn't know.    I wasn't sure.  I thought that maybe
     you bought tickets there.    I wasn't really
     interested.

Q.    Let me just clarify this; so far as you were
     concerned did you know it was an all-ticket match? -
     A. No.

Q. He did not tell you it was an all-ticket match? - A.
   N o , I am not really that interested and it was not
   something I thought about.
                 i ,        -



                                                                                                                                                        95



                                                                                                                                         L.   J.   d ld T O d




    U. Anyway yoa arrived here in Sheffield an:i yo*i got off
        taa train, tae saain station, the ,aain line' station, is
       ■taat rigat? - A. Yes, that is corract»
B   ....           .

    U. ifere tae re Police Officers around at. taat tiae? .- A.
       Yes, there was, on tae .platforms around tae .station.,'
           ;   ' A - A ■'       ■.■■■■■■•   A   - -v A > 'a   ;..   ■ A ' - . - ^ A . v . - A : ^ : - ; A ; ; - . . i g w ; A-.-..g..\                   v   AAAAA
    Q.. Vhat:time did you:actually get:-off 'tha train,:.can ;yo«                                                                                               - :/ ■
        reiuesnber? - A. It was between 12 and I o'clock, .•
        somewaere around taat time.

    d«. And there were Officers on the- plat for." valco-,liag
        people as they caffie off,, so to speak? - A.. Yes.

    0. Or per.laps welcoming is the wrong word .- they were,
       there?- A. Yes.

    Q-            Oid they    ask wnetaar you.were supporters .or:wnat? Did
                 you wear colours, or what? - A. Ho, we were just
                 ushered into different --- they were checking soaa
                 supporters and they aad to go throur-a different
D                passages to where we were going, and we just went
                 straight through.

    0. They treated you as if you were non-supporters,                                                                                             in
       fact? - A. Yes..

    Q.             nobody enquired about you? - A. ho.

    0.             iiecause you had nothing on to distinguish .you? - A. No...
                                                                                                                                   -


    Q. I think you watched as taey searched soaa of. tiie fans,
       is that right? — A. Yas, taat is right..

    Q.            In fact, taey managed to find - what did taey fiad aa.
                 one of the fans? - A. I think taere was a knife with
                 one of then.

    0. what happened then? - A. we than went outside tae
       station and there ware several buses waiting outside,
       and Policemen were directing us-, on to tae buses, to- take
       us to tae ground.

    Q. Did you say, "I waat to go to trie ground” to taa
       Policemen, because naviag let you tarouga is a aon-
       supporter, way did. they now suddenly .say, “daag on, . et
       on taat bus'*, or soaetaing like taat? - A. I tain*
       Andrew knew hiaself tnat tae buses.would be taking us
       to tae.ground.

     0. So he lias aiaing for the buses? - A. Yes, and the
        Policemen was saying, "All supporters, taa buses are
        aere", and they were generally ....




H
                                                                     96

                                                                               -




      G. So you just go .... - A. Yes.

      0. were taere lots of people getting onto the buses at
B         tnat tiiae? - A».d:
                            o, not really., d

      Q.     Were taey well behaved? - A*. Yes,     ueooie.were lust

    ■■■   ; forls
      Q.     You paid your fare? - A. Yes..

      C.     And I think - ware they drinking alcohol? dot yo u and
            your boyfriend, I aa talking about the others oa the
            bus? - A. No, we saw no alcohol on the bus.

      0.     You say none? - A. ho.

      Q. , Did yoa see any outside? - A. There     wassoaaalcohol-        at
          .the station but not much.

      Q.     Not ciuc/i? - A., ho.

      Q,     Then you case towards the ground,        is that   right, and I
            think it becana fnac.ii sofa crowded, .didn't, it, witn
            traffic and so on? - A. Yes, tne bus actually, stopped
            outside the Leppings Lane end and let.us o f f .there.

      Q. You saw loads of supporters but you didn't know, who on
         earth taey were, particularly as botn nad red and white-'
         colours, is that correct? - A. Yes, that's- correct.

      Q. By the tiae you got to Leppings Lane would it -.save been
         about between 1 and 1.30? - A. It was somewhere around
         then, yes.

      0. A lot of people got off. the bus,•is that correct? - A.
         Yes, I don't think the bus was fail,, out there was
         quite a few of us tnat got off.

      0. das there any Police presence at tne point where you
         got off? - A. There was a Policeman actually on-the. bus
         itself and tnen he told us to get off, you know, wnere
         we did, and to go into tne ground.

      ■0.. Me didn't ask whether you had a ticket? - A. do.

          0. He just said "Off and into tne ground11?. - A.. Yes.

          Q. vJas there any Police direction?  Did anybody assist you
             across the road or anything of that .sort? - 'V..
             PoliceQea were telling, us to keep on the -.ysvea&nts- and
             not walk on tne road.   That is all I heard..




H
                                                                    97


                                                      L. J . ’d l l d T O d




    u. Die you walk down Lappings Lane towards tna ground? -
       A. Yes, we .walked towards Ene other ead of- the ground.
      .We walked up and down there- v;e were walking .up. and
B     .down Leppings Lane towards tne Nottingnao Forsst.end,. \
       and we j u s t .kept walking up and down and talking to
       people, finding out it they nad any tickets at this
       point.

    0 . Yes, is tne expression one uses, “Have you any spares?”
        or something like that? Can you re^e;nbe.r, is tnat wnat
        you said, or how did you convey that you were looking
        for a ticket? - A. I think Andrew just went up.to tne;:;
        and asked than, ”Do you know, if you have got any
        tickets?"

    U.   You didn't do it, it was Andrew? - A . do, I didn't-do.
         it ay self..

    Q. And in fact, did you s e e .people selling tickets? A.                 ':•
       ¥es, there were groups of people crowded.together and I.
       presumed tnat that is wnat tney were doing, but it took
D      a while for us to buy tickets.

    Q. In fact, you actually want to tne otnar end? You
       thought, “we raignt get in the. Nottingnajii end**? - A.
       Yes.

    0. But you. weren't any more successful at that end either?
       - A. No.

    0. So you then came back? - A. we went round tne other
       way, up the other side of the ground.

    0. So you are spending a fair oit of time wandering around
       looking? - A. Yes.

    Q. iiow long would you say before you actual!v danaged' to :
       get your ticket? - A. It was quite a wnile.   de-didn't
       get our ticket until about 2G-to-3 or somethin;; like
       that.

    Q. So tnat is over an hour, isn't it? - A. On, yes..

    0. Did you see a lot of fans durinz tnat ti.ne? - A. Yes, I
       did.

    0. Did you notice whether tney were carrying alconol or
       not? - A. Some of tnea were, /as.

    p. .what fora? did tne alcohol take wnicn tney were
       carrying? - A. There was cans of Deer.

    Q. dow a a n y 'cans - obviously it is an inpossible question
       to answer, but tne general impression taat you got, was




H
   it that people were .carrying one can, two cans, four
   cans, or s.ix cans? - A. nostly.taey may be. just had like
   a can in their hand and were, drinking'-it* I didn't.;,
   really notice.

Q. You didn't notice? - A. Ho.

0 - 0 id -
         .you notice:, any-,behaviour-.which: concerned^ you?: -n A:.:;-1
                                                                        -
    Mo, not at all.. Everybody seeded quite happy

0 . So you weren't too worried? - A. uo, not at. that -p'oint.-

0 .. And tnezi I think yoss had almost lost hope, I think, of
     getting a ticket, is tnat right? - A. Yes, tnat .i-s-;
     correct.   We went to a snap to see if we could buy a
     radio.

Q.. Instead? - A. Yes..

Q. .1 presume just before you bought tne radio you saw
    somebody who appeared to have so;aa tickets? - A. Yes,
    we noticed there was, I think i-t was two men, sailing,
    tickets.

0. Did Andrew approach the^. or did both of you go up? - A...
   Andrew approached theos first and I followed.

U. How close to Leppings Lane entrance was this, can .you
   reaieraber? I don’t suppose you know Sheffield; well, but
   .... - A. I think it was just before - is there a
   bridge or something?

0 . Just near a little bridge? - A. Yes, it was just before
    there.

0. And I think you paid quite a bit of money, didn't you,
   for tnese tickets? - A. I think all together it -was
   something like £20 eacn they wer e -a s Xing.

Q. So tnat is £40 isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. And these were standing tickets for Leppings. Lar.c            end?.
   - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. So naving got them you were pleased, or Andrew was?
   A. Yes.

0. what did you do then?. - A. Then we walked towards tae
   Leppings Lane end over the bridge.

0 . Over the bridge, yes.   You were quite clo
                                            ilose to it tnen
    weren't you? - A. Yes, we couldn't really./ see .such fro.-t
    wnere we were.  l?e didn't notice the crowds until .we
    actually got quite near.
                                                                     99


                                                         l   ..-J.




.Q. I see,, a ad when you got nearer tna. ground, or tne
     entrances, wnat did you notice?           fell ae.unat .you saw?.’
     — A.,, well, as we 'approached the. ground chare was just,
   'masses of -people' .outside and -I, said.- .to .Andrew,., .M0h, •..•
    what's' everybody doing?         tmy are there so many people.?"'
     and as replied,. "Oh, t h e y ‘r a queuing up. for a ticket,
     they ara trying to get into tna ground.            fnat is wnat
   ■ they :-are:-waiting -for**,. so-" t#e just carried     forward.-

Q. You joined tae crowd at the rear? - A. Yes.

0. Did you stand still, saove forward whan there was space
   or did you help a little bit?     Perhaps I augnt not to
   ask whether you.did it.     Did you notice whether people
   around you were standing still, o n l y -moving forward
   waera there was space or what I would call 'helping a
   little bit, namely by pushing a bit? -.A. I didn't
   really notice that anybody was .really doing anything,.at
   that tis-ae*. They were: just standing and .everybody ..was             :;
   shouting, saying, "tie want to get in. iie've got
   tickets, let us in". Then after that it d i d .becorae
   crowded and loads of people-started pushing behind us,,
   and I noticed that there was. a crowd building up benind
   us.

 Q. So initially the people were just snouting, *'w'e want to
    get in, we want to get .in", and they said,.“ye've got
    tickets"? - A.. Yes.

 Q. Then after that you started, getting, pus rued forward fron
    benind? - A. Yes.

 Q. Did you see any Police Officers, particularly on
    horseback? - A. Yes, I saw a Policeuan on horseback in
    front of us and f rora everybody pushing we got quite
    close to the horse, fro-:n the people f roxa tna oack
    pusning us forward.

 0. Yes, and what was that Officer doing? - A. He was
    snouting for everybody to get back, they weren't going .
    to get in.if they were pushing.

 0. How auch difference did that make? - A. It didn't aaka
    any difference at all..

 Q. In fact, I think at that point you and Andrew decided,
    "He'd better get out of here", is tnat - right? - A. Yes ,-
    I nearly fell to the floor and Andrew said,. "On no,
    this is no good, we are going to nave to -et out of :
    here".  We tried to turn round and we coul dn't nova,
    we couldn't get back.

 0 . when that happened were you already through tae
     perimeter gates? - A. Mo.
                                                                  100




  b. Do you reaetnber the layout or the ground at all? - A.,
     dot vary well, but we hadn't gone through any gates ac
     all,. I don't -think*. . We. were still outside*.

  0. You were still outside and it was so dense where you
     were that you couldn t turn round to set. out?:' - No,.-
^^.^.-.^coulrtn't ®ova.

  0. So you continued, is tnat right? - A* Yes.

  Q. wnat happened then? - A. .It got - the crush - -well,-' it.
     wasn't a crush but it was hard to aave - that got worse
     and the next thing I knew tna gate was opened .and
     everybody just --- we just g o t .surged.through. .You had
     no choice but to go forward.

  0. Is this a gate whicn actually leads into the ground?
     Is it a big, .blue gate .that you are .t a l k i n g .abou-t? - A.
     Yes, I' think.it was, yes.

  Q. Can you use the model, do you think?    Go and have a
     look at the modal and just see .....(Ihe witaess used              -
     the aiode.l to illustrate her evidence) - A. Vie were
     stood here.

  0. So you are standing outside the perimeter gates, near
     the river, yes. - A. I think we raust nave co«ie through
     h are, and somehow we got pushed down to this right hand
     side.   He didn't go near the turnstiles.

  Q. So what you are pointing at is entry into the enclosure
     before turnstiles A-G and then you went -towards the
     right, towards the big, blue perimeter gates, is that
     right?  Blue concertina gate? - A. Yes, that is right.,
     we approached here. There wasn't ssany people around at
     that point and there was a couple of Policeman- eitaer
     side of the gate.

  Q. Coine back here because I can hear you better when you
     are that iauch. closer. So you were saying there weren't
     that :aany people when you first got to this blue
     concertina gate? - A. No.

  0.. Carry   on.. - A. He didn't know where to go at this point
      so we   went up to the Policeaan and we asked ni,:s wnere
      to go   and ne said just go inside tna ground ana worry .
      about   tnat wnen you get inside.         ■

  Q. Was this after the gate was opened or before tne gate .
     was opened? — A. That was once we had gene through.the
     first gate and we hadn't gone tnrougn the- secuna*

  b. The big one which. led into the ground? - A. Yes,, we.
     hadn't gone through there.
So you were, in fact, in a position outside that blue
perimeter gate, that blue concertina gate? - A. Yes, I
tiiink that was. open -a t .the. tiae. '.By the tirae sa got ,
there that was open*. There was 'nobody .around.:.-.:

  So whea did you ask the Policeman?            You have confused
 m s ^ or. .I .have .confused'..snyself^; ~ ,A^ye,; ,h-g:d::.^o
;•the first gate,;- the perimeter -gate ,:-vand-: 'there'--tee
            **>-9   w   L            5    0

  approached the concertina gate, which oust have been
  opened, and he was stood, there.

I wonder if it is easier if we look at tna pictures?
Could you put 253 up, please?   Can you. see those, I
call thesn periaeter gates - gates wit a railings? - A.
Yes.

Then beyond that there are some turnstiles and taan
there.is. a van there. .Can, you see .waara the van. is? -
A. Yes.   Firstly we, were, stood outside the peri.net.er "
gates, right to.the right hand side.

flight at the right hand side, yes. - A. And then when
the gates were opened we proceeded to the right and we
kept going through, past the van, and kept goin g . •

Where were you when you asked, the Policeman, "where do
we g o ? ” and he said, “Get in the ground**?. - A. l i e were
past the white van..

So there was sooe Police Officer down there wnora you
were able to speak to? - A. Yes.

when you first were outside those periraeter gates were
they snot, because you said they were opened? - A. I
think they were shut because- there was a Policeaan o n .
horseback, right outside and nobody was moving,
everybody was j u s t 'pushing forward, .so they -inus.t have
been close.. I couldn't really see..

So you say the gates ware snut, there was a Police
Officer and people were pushing forward? - A. Yes.

And then they opened but you didn't see how that
happened? - A. So.

You went along there, as you described and, you entered
through these blue gates? - A. Yes.

having got in, I think in fact you approached a
steward, is that right? - A. Yes, there was a steward
stood to the right.

Of that gate? - A. As you went through, and I think .it
was the stairs that, you go uo, a m he was stood .there
                                                           1 0■ 2


                                                ,L.. J> 'gilitlOu--




     and ne told us to go to the tunnel, and that is waara
     we went.

Q* That is where you went, because you had no idea?- - A.
 .   go,                   y—

Q. Of the ground or anyt,in3 . 1 « 2 - A. ,o.

Q. You didn’t actually look for anytaiag you just asked? -
   A. Yes.

0. You then proceeded to walk down -the tunnel, is that •                    *’
   right? - A. Yes..

Q. And the passage down the tunnel at this.point was
   crowded? - A. No, not as we started to wal< down.                    ..
   There was a few people walking but not many.

Q. At the beginning when you entered, through the
   concertina gate, the one behind the van, where were you
   in the crowd that went through? Have you any idea?
   Were you rignt in the front? iiere you the first? - A.
   When.we were right outside we were, about six. feet or so
   from tne gate and then when we went, to the right trie .
   crowd just seecaed to, it just went off., and we' were
   aore or less standing on our own. There wasn't many
   people around us at all.

0. Do you know what ti&e that would nave bean? Have you
   any idea? - A. Mo, it was before 3 o'clock that is all
   I can say.

Q. So you went down the tunnel, it wasn't too bad? - A.
     &o.

0. when you got to the other end, left or -rignt?.- A. ue           .
   went left because as we. got to the end quite a lot of
   people started to corae behind us and there were people
   beginning to stand on the railings, and wa were pushed
   to the left.

Q. As you exited, as you first got- out,, did you notice
   what was happening on the field?     I don't .vsean in
   detail. - A. After I had been there a few seconds- or so
   I got a glinpse o f .the pitch and I noticed there were,
   socae players on it., ilhetner they'had started or. not I
   don* t know.                          ...

Q. So certainly by the tiae‘you got onto tne terrace tne
   players were either on tne pi'tcn or playing, but you
   can't tell which? - A. No.

0. Having entered Enclosure 4, Pen 4, wnat happened tne re?
  . - A. It then became quite a crus.i. . We. just couldn't
                                                          103


                                                L.,- J. HIWTQN--- ,




«iova at all, couldn't go back, couldn't do anything,
    and I just got pushed to tae left and Andrew went one
    way and I want the -other, and I disappeared and ha .
    disappeared, and that was tae last I saw'.'of hia.,-; .

Q. Until later? - A. Until later, yes.

Q. Did you near,        you « r . on th. terrace, dir. you
   near people shouting? - A. Yes.   Once' we got through
   the tunnel people were shouting,. ‘'Stop pushing froa?
   baniad, wa are getting crushed here,, move- hack", but it
   didn't make any difference, it was just getting worse..

Q. Put tne terrace plan up, would you, the one for
   marking.




                      /That .is a plan
                                                                  104



                                             L.J.   H IN TO N


     That is a plan of the terraces.    Can you see the tunnel there'?
     - A . Yes.
Q. And you came down, and you said you came down the left-hand
   side.  Can you show me - walk up to the plan - show me where
   you were when you heard people shout "Move back"? - A.
   (Witness marks plan)   I was here at first.  That was when I
   first heard the shouting.

Q. That is where you were when you heard the people shouting.
   What number shall we give this plan?  (Marked C 2 9 2 ) (This is
   Louise Jane Hinton's mark where she was when she heard people
   shouting).  By this time I think, this was after you had
   already had a glimpse of the pitch and you had seen the teams .
   were on the field? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you see any bit of the match at all? Can you remember
   seeing any play at all, even just a glimpse?        I am not asking
   you whether you can remember what you saw, but do you
   recollect play? - A. I can only remember players on the pitch.
   I c a n 't remember what else they were d o i n g .

Q. And then from that position up there, what happened to you? -
   A. I just got carried along to the front somehow.  I don't
   know how that happened, but I was just pushed forward.

Q.   Entirely involuntarily as far as you were concerned? - A.            Yes.

Q. You are not very tall, are you? - A. No.

Q.   So you found it abit difficult, did you? - A.Yes.

Q.   And I think it is right to say that there were acouple of men
     nearby to y o u , were not they? - A . Y e s . As I got to near the
     front I was having difficulty in staying up, and they either
     side of me were helping me to keep my head up.        They had hold
     of my neck to keep me ;up.

Q. And they were encouraging you, I think, were not they? - A .
   Yes.

Q. Which is nice, is not it? - A. Yes.

Q.   In fact, one of them managed to make a little bit of room for
     you at one point, did not he? - A. Yes. When I could not get
     any air he managed somehow to get a bit of air so I was able
     to breathe, yes.

Q. I think you to almost up to the perimeter- fence.            Is that
   right? - A. Not quite, but I was close.

Q.    And I think you were closer to the perimeter fence than           you
     were to the perimeter gate.   That is right, is not it?            It was
     slightly diagonal to you? - A. Yes.

Q.    Did you see any Police Officers on the far side of the
     perimeter fence? - A. Yes, I did. I saw them standing up,             and
                                                              1 05


                                           L.J.    H INTO N


     when people were trying to climb over they were telling them -
     to £et back in, and the men around me were shouting to try and
     tell them what was going on inside, but I mean, they could not
     hea r.

Q. And did you hear them make any comment for people to move back
   at all? - A. They were telling people to get back in and move
   back, yes, they were, but you just could not do that.

Q . So two things were happening as far as they were concerned.
    "Hove back” was similar to what the crowd was saying right up
    at the top.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. But what you are saying is by the time you had reached that
   position it was physically impossible for you to move back? -
   A . Yes.

Q. It would have had to be people further behind?         Is that right?
   - A. That is right, yes.

Q. And then things, if anything, got even tighter for a moment or
   two? - A. Y e s .

Q. And I think you then saw something was happening to the
   fencing? What did you see there? - A. Once the Police
   realised what was happening they began to tear it down at the
   front, and they were just pulling it down as quickly as they
   could.

Q. Can you recollect whether this was done before or after the
   match had stopped playing? - A. That was after.

Q. What I am asking you is what you saw or what you remember.
   Are you saying you saw Police Officers attempting to pull the
   fencing down, or fans, or both? - A. Police Officers.

Q. Did you see any fans who were trying to pull at the fencing? -
   A . I c a n 't remember.

Q.   You can't remember.   Definitely in your mind it is clear it
     was Police Officers who were doing it? - A. Yes.

Q.   In the enclosure in which you were? - A.     Yes.

Q.   Opposite you or away from you? - A. They were more or less
     opposite where I w a s .

Q. And did they in fact succeed in the end as far as you
   remember? - A. I don't really know, because....

Q. If you don't know let us forget it.  If you don't know, you
   don't know.  Did you walk out by yourself or were you lifted
   out, or what happened to you? - A. No.  Somehow the next thing
   I knew there was just nobody around me, and then I was helping
   get some men off the floor, and then I was wandering round
   wondering where I w a s .
                                                               106


                                               L.J.   HINTON


Q. I see.  So in fact you helped others, but you were not
   personally pulled out through holes, gates or anything else? -
   A. No.

Q. How did you eventually leave that enclosure? Through the back
   or through the front? - A. Back through the tunnel.

Q. You went back out through the tunnel.        Do I understand that
.W:-v-w^-:.a££er-. everything was over for practical purposes? - A.
    Yes.

          THE CORONER:   I fear you will have to come back
     tomorrow, because I think it is too late to start with cross-
     examination.  Will the cross-examination be brief or not?

          MR. PAYNE:     It is going to be non-existent from me.

          THE CORONER:    Let us start, because it will save this
     poor young lady coming back.    Mr. Manning? Please, d o n ’t
     misunderstand me, but you have not to be under any pressure
     because of the time.   If you need time you need time, that is
     all there is to it.   Feel free, Mr. Manning.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Q. You told us that you were looking for some tickets. Could you
   help me as to whether you were conscious that there were jother
   people also looking for tickets? - A. Yes, I was.  I sawsother
   people looking for tickets, people coming up to us and a^pking
   for th e m.

Q.   Do you know from whilst you were in the queue whether thpre
     were people queuing outside who still did not have any
     tickets? - A. No, I was not aware of that at the time.

Q.   Did you see the Police Land Rover outside the gates? - A. No,
     I did not.

Q. You confirm that the Officer on horseback was trying to
   encourage the crowd not to push, but it seemed to have no
   effect? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. That is    all, thank you very much.

                       Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G :

Q. Very briefly, the first point you make is about 20-to-3 when
   you got the tickets and you were seeing the fans, everybody
   seemed quite happy and jolly and so forth? - A. Well, from
   where we bought the tickets we could not really see near the
   ground.  We did not know what was going on.

Q. But around you that was the atmosphere? - A. Yes.

Q. You did not feel in any fear yourself? - A. No.

Q. When you got to the ground and you say,        "We joined the crowd",
                                                                      107



                                                L .J . H I N T O N


         that was obviously to get into the ground? - A. Yes.                    -
           ✓
    Q. What time would that be roughly, do you think? - A. It was
       about 5 minutes after we bought the tickets.

B   Q. So it would be about quarter-to, something like that? - A.
       Yes .

    Q. Did you know what time kick-off was? - A. Yes, I think I knew
       it was at 3 o 'clock.

    Q.    Did it look an awful lot of people to you to have to get          in
         the ground in that 15 minutes? - A. Yes, it did.

    Q.    Did it seem to you - you were someone who did not really go to
         football matches very often - that   it was going to be quite
         difficult to get all those people in in that 15 minutes? - A.
         It is not really something I thought about at the time.    I
         just thought there was a lot of people there.    I did not*know
         the procedure for getting in.

    Q. Did you get the impression the people were anxious to get in?
       - A. Once I joined the crowd, yes.

    Q. And you heard people shouting,    "We've got tickets.         We want to
       get in", basically? - A. Yes.

    Q. And when you yourself wanted to get out it was quite
       impossible? - A. Yes.

    Q. Had there been anything to prevent you and Andrew originally
       joining the crowd? - A. No.

    Q. No.  I am not criticising you for joining it.  You wanted to
       get in the ground, but there was nothing to prevent you? - A.
       No.

    Q. You say when this concertina gate was opened you had no choice
       but to go through? - A. No.

    Q. That is your expression.  I am interested in this:  you were
       concerned about what was going to happen when you got through
       the gate.  You wanted to know where to go to, obviously? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. So because of that concern you actually went up to a Policeman
       to ask? - A. Yes.

    Q. And what was the information he told you,- that Policeman by
       the concertina gate, when you asked, "Where do we got when we
       get through the gate?"? - A. He said, "I don't know".   He
       said, "Just go in the ground and worry about that once you get
       in there” .

    Q. When you got through you actually asked a steward where to go?
       - A. Yes.



H
                                                             1 08


                                          L J   HI N T O N


Q. And the steward said, "Go through the tunnel”? - A. Yes.         '

Q. When you had got through the tunnel - before you went through
   the tunnel did you realise you were going to go on terracing
   which was all penned off into individual pens? - A . I realised
   it was terracing.   We originally did want seats for myself
   because I am short.

Q. Did you realise the terra     itself was actually divided into
   sections? - A. No, not until I got inside.

Q. I d o n ’t know when you got through the tunnel, and you marked
   on the plan where you were standing, did you look at all to
   your left to see what the crowd was like on the far side of.
   the terracing? - A. I couldn't really see much, but I caij •
   remember thinking there were not many people to the far left,
   not actually in our pen.




                                    /Q. In other words.
                                                             109


                                          L,   J.   HINTON




Q. In,other words, to the people who w e r e n ' t in your pfn >
   there didn't seem to be so many to the far left? - A. No.

Q. Could you see a way of getting to that area? - A. No.
   There was just no way you could move at all.

Q. Did you in fact know how to get there if you had wanted
   to? - A. No.
Q. The picture I get from your position where tharlitfcle X
   was, was that all the time people were joining from
   behind you? - A. Yes.

Q. Making the situation worse and worse? - A. Yes.

Q. The people who were trying to get out and^the police ^
   officers trying to get back in - saying,      Get back m ,
   what were they trying to get out of? ^h a t Awa®, thf    . .
   problem they were trying to get out of? - A. The tact is
   I think at that point t h e r e were actually people on the
   ground who had died and they were trying to explain this
   to the policeman at the time and they were just want to
   get out because you couldn't move.

Q. They couldn't move, the people who wanted to get out? -
   A. No, they were sort of crawling on top of everybody.

Q. How far was the policeman from that scene? -A. He was
   just in front of it. He was just outside the fence,
   standing.
Q. So as far as you could see was looking in to what you
   were describing? - A. Yes.

Q. Apart from the fact he was looking through the fencing,
   was there anything to prevents him looking in? - A. No.

Q. I get the impression it was some time before the police
   realised what was happening and then they started to pull
   down the fencing, is that right? — A. It seemed like t at
   at the time, yes.

               Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Q. Miss Hinton, are you quite sure you didn't see any fans
   tearing down the perimeter fence in pen 4? - A. I can t
   remember, I'm sorry.
              Cross-Examined by MISS ADDELMANN:

Q. You said just now in response to a question asked by my
   learned friend Mr. King, you thought the problem was, you
                                                              110

                                        L.    J.   HINTON


   said, "I think that at   that point there were people on
   th$ ground"? - A. Yes.

Q. "People were just wanting to get out"? - A. Yes-.

Q. You saying, however, that you didn't appreciate at the
   time that that is what   had occurred, it was lateron you
   must have realised that that is in fact what had^
   happened?   Do you agree? - A. I'm sorry, I didn t catch
 ■ that.-."-

Q. You are saying that with hindsight?   You didn't
   appreciate at the time that that is what had occurred
   but, of course, you appreciate now that that is what
   happened? - A. I knew people were on the floor because I
   was standing on some people myself.

Q. That is the only way you knew? - A. Yes.

                  Further by THE CORONER:

Q. The reason why Mrs. McBrien asked the question about the
   fans is because there is some video evidence which shows
   the fans were pulling at fencing.    What I am interested
   in, and" that is why I asked you twice, as far as you
   recollect it was police officers who were pulling at the
   fencing, is that right?    That is right, isn't it? - A.
   Yes.
        THE CORONER:   Anything else?   Well, I didn't think
   you would get away today, but you have.   Thank you very
   much indeed for coming.

        We are not taking any more witnesses today.         We will
   stop now.

        Wednesday when we do our visit, we are going to...

         MR. MANNING:  I was going to ask you, Wednesday
   morning you plan to go to Hillsborough and environs,
   whether you have yet had news of the possession of this
   room?

        THE CORONER:   That is what I am just going to say.
   We are still proceeding with our visit but in fact the
   room will be available to us and in fact I am very
   grateful for that because it gives us the afternoon.
   The morning we will devote to the visit and then the
   afternoon we will devote to witnesses.   I want to leave
   sufficient time for this visit. We could rush it and
   come back in the morning and do an hour's work, but I
   think it would be better if we take our time and if the
   worse come to the worse we will have a slightly longer
   lunch hour.
                                                      Ill




     OK, ladies and gentlemen, why don't you leave us and
we will see you tomorrow morning at the usual time.

             (In the absence of the jury)

     THE CORONER:   There are one or two domestic things
I can deal with.
     The first one is that we have reassessed the use of
the two big rooms behind me, so to speak, the Mandela
Room and I have forgotten the name of the other one* "e
have decided that I can't justify retaining them both, so
what we have now agreed is that we are going to give up
the room which has been used by relatives and legal
representatives for interviews and so on.   We are going
to move the tables and the screens and so on into what
what the room where the press used to go.

     There are two reasons for doing that. First of all
because it suits the Council better.   They would prefer
to have that room and in fact it suits us better because
that second room is wired up for screens like this which
we will be disconnecting and taking down, but it does
mean if we did have to reinstate it we have already got
the wires there, it is just a matter of plugging m .

     That means as far as the press is concerned that y a m
will have to cope up there.   I think there is enough
space and there is plenty of space in the corridors and
on the benches in this building.   I hope you will not
take that unkindly but one has to be realistic with space
which, as I am sure you will know, is a very expensive
and useful commodity.
     On the 6th December, we will not even have the usr
of the Mandela Room, but only for that one day.   Iwill
try and remind you, but on that day I'm afraid everybody
will have to put up with rather less facilities than we
have at the moment.   I could adjourn and not meet but I
think I would much rather press on, and I am sure y°u_
would as well.   You need to know that so you can tell
your clients.

      Wednesday, as I say we still intend to proceed with
our visit.    I want to start here at ten in the usual
way, spend a few minutes saying what we are doing and
where we are going.    What I call the legal coach ~ in
fact I don't think it is quite as many seats as I had
initially been led to believe, but there are still enough
for all you lawyers sitting in the front row who want to
come.    Some of you might not. There will be some space,
I think, for relatives or the general public, if you
like, but not quite as much space as I had initially led
you to believe.   We will do our visit.   I reckon it
will take two, or two and a half hours, something of that
order.   It depends, really, on the jury, how long they
want to spend.   I want to allow them sufficient time to
walk around without being nagged by me.

     Then we will resume here at two o ’clock.  I think
that is the easiest way, to say we will start at two
whatever time we finish our visit.

     Anything else I need to say?

     MR. MAXWELL:   Sir, I wonder if you could assist me.
Sheffield City Council would want to consider how far it
is necessary for them to maintain representation here
before witnesses are called to deal directly with the
certificating function.   My request for assistance, sir,
is prompted by a question you asked of a witness today,
Mr. Wright, and you may recall you asked whether he was
aware of who the Licensing Authority was.

     Sir, the decision of whether or not to maintain
representation will be ours.    If that is a question
which is likely to be followed with other witnesses and
perhaps followed up with further questions, then clearly
this is a matter which may well be of interest to us.
It may have been an opening shot.    It may have been
range finding.   It may have been simply seeing whether
the ammunition was there.    Sir, I know not, but if, sir,
you are intending to ask that sort of question of other
witnesses who are not directly concerned with the
certificating function, I would be grateful if you could
indicate as much and perhaps indicate where the line
would have taken you, sir, if the answer had been
favourable.

     THE CORONER:    In other words, if it had been "Yes” .
Mr. Maxwell I should in fact have asked the next two ^
witnesses the same question.    I think "range finding is
a jolly good   term in the sense that that is what it was
because I am   very very conscious of the fact you are here
and, indeed, you are here and both of you are very
welcome, but   it is clear to me that not only are you
welcome I think it is right that you should be
represented.   However, it is clear to me that before we
actually get down to detail, if you like, on the
licensing aspects we will be spending weeks on the sort
of evidence we are taking at the moment._ that applies
to you as well because you will have noticed we have
hardly mentioned the structure.    It is simply there.
                                                         113




     Over the weekend it had occurred to me it might be
worth'just asking one or two of the supporters whether or
not they were aware of the licensing authority because if
they were not then it may be, and as you say it is your
decision not mine, I would not want to say do not come
because I do not think I could take that responsibility, so
to speak, but it may be you could then feel you could not
be here all the time.

     As things are planned at the moment we will not be
getting to the licensing aspects until almost the end of
the Inquests and to a certain extent it will apply to you
as well.  Forgive me for talking to both of you but you are
in a slightly more difficult situation because issues might
arise in relation to the Club where the door might very
suddenly be opened and somebody might say, "Where is D r .
Eastwood's representative?", so to speak.  It is a very
difficult problem because, of course, it is an expensive
and time-consuming exercise just sitting here to no real
purpose.  Does that help you in any way?

     MR. MAXWELL:      Considerably.

     THE CORONER:    What I intend to do is that with a bit
of luck we will ask a few more questions of supporters and
we will see.   You will then be able to gauge whether in
fact the risk of not being here is worth it.   That was the
intention.   I did have it in mind.  I should really have
done it with this young lady as well but I am afraid that I
forgot.

      Can I ask one other thing of Mr. Hale?    My present
plan, if that is the right word, is that we are edging our
way into the Stadium and we will be hearing no doubt from
one or two other people who were outside.    I was intending
to call Superintendent Marshall at the point in time when
we had taken a fair chunk of evidence in relation to things
outside the ground because I perceived similar reasoning as
with the Council.   You might really say, "I am not that
interested professionally as to what actually happened on
the terraces".   On the other hand, every single witness who
got on to the terraces had crossed the turnstiles.
Whichever way I wish to construct the Inquest the last
witness whom I will call on to the terrace may still say
something which may be relevant and vital, I do not know,
to your client's interests.   The question I want to ask,
and I do not need a reply at the moment, is would you
prefer me to leave Superintendent Marshall in the position
i n which I have got him which is at the rate we are going
about two-and-a-half to three weeks away or do you want me
to put him where I have put at the moment all the other
main players which is in fact right at the end?

     MR. HALE:      I will take instructions on that, sir.
