From:   J M HILLIER FIPM DMA                                              WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
        DIRECTOR OF ADMINISTRATION                                        HEADQUARTERS
                                                                          PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                                          Colmore Circus Queensway
                                                  UNITY                   Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                                          Telephone     021-626 5000
  J M Jones QPM MSc
  Deputy Chief Constable
  Cheshire Constabulary                                     Our Ref:    ADM/DSH/MR
  Castle Esplanade
  Chester                                                   Date:       2 July 1992
  CHI 2PP




  Dear                     ,

  HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

  I forward herewith correspondence received from Malcolm J Gregg & Co Solicitors
  acting on behalf of the next of kin of 6 people who died at the Hillsborough
  Stadium on the 15 April 1989.

  I understand that Mrs Harper has already contacted you regarding receipt of
  these documents and has faxed through the covering letter.  I am now in a
  position to advise you as to the current position.

  The correspondence was forwarded to John Kilbey who has suggested that you
  should be advised of the present position.

  At the suggestion of Mr Kilbey, Mrs Harper has contacted the new Coroner at
  South Yorkshire.   He was very helpful indicating that he too was in receipt of
  documentation which had been forwarded to the city Solicitors.   I have asked
  Mr Kilbey to liaise with the Solicitors and advise them of our possible
  interest.  The Coroner has undertaken to keep us advised of any developments
  although at this stage it is his belief that it is unlikely that the Inquests
  would be re-opened.

  It is interesting to note however, that should a decision be taken that the
  Inquests should be re-opened, the present Coroner would be unable to officiate
  a s :-

  1.       He was in attendance at Hillsborough Football Ground on                    15April 1989.

  2.       Before being appointed to Coroner  he acted as Solicitor                   tothe Football
         Club Doctor at Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry.

  3.     He attended the Inquests representing Doctor Forrester.

  The documentation is being forwarded purely for information at this stage, the
  Coroner has agreed to keep us informed and Mr Kilbey has responded to the
  Solicitors asking them to keep us advised as to develo pm en ts .

  I trust you are keeping well and offer                  you my congratulations on the award of
  the   Q u e e n ’s Police Medal in the recent           Birthday Honours.

 Yours sincerely
     HILLSBOROUGH                         STEERING                COMMITTEE
                          Castle Chambers, Cook Street, Liverpool L2 9SH
                           Tel: 051 255 0628 Fax: 051 236 0047 DX 14100




    Dr Popper,                                                  30th April 1991
    Medico Legal cen t re ,                                     EMS/DW
    Watery Street,
    SHEFFIELD   S3 7ET '




    lear Dr Popper,

    I noticed in the Press at the weekend that you will shortly be retiring from your
    Office as Sheffield Coroner.

    I would like to take the opportunity both on my own behalf on behalf of the rest
    of the Steering Committee and our clients thanking you for your kindness in the
    past and to wish you every happiness and success in the future.

    It has been a very long two years since the Hillsborough tragedy particularly
    as far as the families are concerned.

    The care and sensitivity and inparticular the arrangements made for the families
    at the individual* Inquests was very much appreciated both by them and by us.

    As far as the lawyers are concerned your unfailing courtesy and consideration
    to the advocates and ready response to various problems that we, as Solicitors,
    have had to burden you with have been appreciated by us all.

      doubt whether any other Coroner has been faced with such a task before and whatever
m    ou decide to do in the future we thank you for making a difficult time easier
    and send our very good wishes.

    Yours sincerely.




    MISS E M STEEL
INSTRUCTIONS TO COUNSEL TO ADVISE

         MICHAEL POWERS




                                    i f   <■
 Counsel is asked to consider and advise on various legal and
 procedural matters which it is thought are likely to arise out of the
 inquests into the death of the 95 supporters who attended at the
 Hillsborough Stadium on 15th April 1989.

 I will first of all outline as briefly as possible the back ground
 and circumstances of the incident together with some of the points
 for     against which have or are likely to arise out of the evidences


 Hillsborough stadium has been in being for over 100 years. In 1979
 it received a safety certificate under the Safety in Sportground
 Act 1975 issued by the South Yorkshire County Council who were
 disbanded in 1986 when on 1/4/86 Sheffield City Council took over the
 responsibility for this. There were regular inspections by working
 parties or advisory groups but on the relevant date no new certificate
 had been issued despite the fact that the council had been drafting
 one for some time and that some reservations about the existing one
 had been expressed. Nor had the existing certificate been amended
 despite the fact the substantial changes had been made to the Leppings
 Lane terracing over the years since the certificate was issued. In
 fact I think that in many respects the certificate could not be
 complied with by the club because of these changes and that these
 changes were known to the licencing authorities.

 Prior to 1981 the perimeter track fencing was put up to deter pitch
 invasions and this was done to comply with I think International
 football standard requirments.

if;.Until 1981 the Lepping Lane terracing was entirely open expanse
  capable of accomodating thousands of spectators.

  In 1981 a crushing incident occuned despite the open terrace.
  Subsequently for various reasons including I think for segregation
  control and for the avoidance of similar incidents radial fences were
  erected with gates at the back. This enabled the terrace to be divided
  into segments and for only part to be vised at small fixtures and the
  whole at larger fixtures.

   From the evidence at Lord Justice Taylors enquiry (LJT) there was
  some dispute between the various authorities as to whether these gates
  should be manned by the Police during matches. The fire service
  understood that they would whilst the police did not think that the
  wording of ths minutes ("under police control")meantthat. In any event
  on the day these gates were in a locked open position with no police
  in attendance nor for that matter any steward (thought to be
  risky). The idea was that the terrace should be treated as a whole
  with the fans finding there own level by spreading out along the
  terracing by using these gates or by finding other means of entrance
  to the side elevations which did exist but which were either not
  signed or only very poorly signed.

   It seems that every one accepts that the central pens are the most
   popular and that from the layout of the ground the likelihood would
   be that the majority of the fans would head down a tunnel which leads
   from the relevant turnstyles (A-G) and Gate C as to which see below.

   The adequacy of the number of turnstyles for the number expected
   depended on a relatively smooth flow of spectators arriving over a
   period of time and indeed in 1988 the semi final between the same
                                      Page   1
clubs and under virtually identical arrangements had gone off as far
as those in authority knew smoothly and without any rea    pro

The FA had chosen this ground fo semi finals on three consecutive
years and as far as I know no complaint regarding the structure,
signing*policing or other matters had been raised.

An operational order had been drawn up by the police in *^89 which for
all intents and purposes followed the operational order of 19BB. it
made reference in its Intent section to achieving law and order a
the safety of the fans both within and without the 8r°und- ^ a r t
that most of the order dealt with specific duties of hundreds >of
police officers at various stages of the match both within and ^ o
the ground. Most of these duties were directed to public ord         .
and the issue of safety was not addressed in words. The order although
running to about 100 pages or so did not include sections setting out
contigentf plans in the event of unforseen events occuring and in
 particular there was no contigency plan as to what to do
 a late influx of supporter*in whatever state they might be. Mate
 briefings also took place.

On the day in question it would appear that large numbers of fans
 arrived latter than expected. A severe crush occurred outside ithe
 turnstyle area and Supt Marshall having decided that there wa
 to life requested that large gates normally only used as exit gates D
 opened. After repeated requests this was done and a large n ux o
 fans entered the stadium. Supt Marshall did not request a delay in
 kick off (he thought that in the circumstances it would be
 ineffective). Other officers acting independently did ask tor tnis
Ibut'iiatdh'control took the view that it was too late tO.do so*, J}.* N
 should perhaps mention that a policy decision had been taken that tne
 match would not be postponed unless there were extranous reasons such
 as fog on the motorways ie delays not due to fans fault.

 Fans having entered the stadium via the exit gates without checks and
 therefore probably included numerous ticketless f a n s , entered the
 ground through the central tunnel which was not controlled or
 stewarded and overfilled the central pens which were alrea y u
 not overfull. This led to crushing and as a result fans requested the
 gates on the perimeter fencing which incidentally were very narrow o
 be opened. The delay in opening these gates is hotly disputed but
 there is not much doubt that initially the gates were o p e n e d and again
 shut before it was recognised by the officers on the track tha a
 crush situation had occurred.

 The reaction at the control box appears to have been that a
 pitch invasion was taking place and steps were taken to dea w
 situation on this basis and it was not until about the time that the
 match was stopped that ambulances etc were summoned about.

  There was considerable pandemonium and it took time for some
  organisation to be broughcto the scene. Again there is some dispute
  but Ch. Supt Nesbit who arrived from elsewhere at about 15.1^ seems to       ^
  have been successful in organising a coordinated rescue attemp .C.

  In 1988 a similar fixture had bee.iplayed . There were no reports of
  injuries though evidence has now been given that the terracing was
  uncomfortably full on that occasion too. There has also been evidence
  that fans were elevated frrwthe terracing to the stands above during
  that match and indeed on other occassions too. No police o
                                      Page   2
beefi designated to man the rear of the radial fences but there seems
       sotae evidence that at one point the central tunnel access .
had been barfed by officers and fans diverted to other areas by
£ group of police officers but unfortunatly this does not seem to
httfe been mentioned in the debriefing.

The above is a very very sketchy outline of the events but it will be
evident from this that the conduct of at least the following parties
may be called in question:

f;The tlub ( W SjLslltl
jThe Engineers
■sThft Local authority
STh# Police (whatever that might mean)                                , ,
 The Match commander Ch. Supt Duckenfield
|the control toom commander Supt Murray
 The Ground Commander Supt Greenwood                         ,*
"The pitch perimeter gate officers (two gates one officer each;
 The Outside commander at Lepping Lane (Supt Marshall)
 The fans or Some part of them

 I am of course aware that an inquest is a fact finding exercise and
 not a fault finding one and that there are no parties.     , f t,
 Nevertheless if one is to consider a possible verdict of unlawfully
.killed even if no one is to be named then it is necessary to consider
 the evidence to see whether the ingredients of the offence have been
 made out against one or more parties without aggregation of course,


       Without claiming to be exhaustive the arguments vhich^hate^beert
                       various parties except =
                               to be relied on to jtisfelf
 of   unlawfully killed, would include:
-I, that the planning was defective in that there was inadequate
 reference to safety in the operational order and that this was
' obvious.
   2* That there were no contigency plans to deal with inter alia the
f late arrival of fans, the filtering out of ticketless and or drunken
   fans* the packing of the terraces in particular as the gates at the
.h rear of the radial fences were not visible when the pens were tul
]| fthd that these defects and others were obvious to all.

--'3* That the actual policing on the day outside was unsatisfactory
: in that fan s were allowed into a restricted area in too large numbers
  Vhich led to crushing and danger. That the remedial actions to try and
   remedy this situation by closing perimeter gates and placing police
  horse cordons etc was not only too late but ineffective because
% H    it should have been done further back ie away from the turnstyle
4 area,
< (b) that the pleas to people to stop pushing etc would not help
 ibecause it was addressed to people who had no control over their
; movements and could not respondt

 : (c) that none or insufficient or ineffective filtering systems had
 'been put in place to weed out ticketless fans and people inebriated
  if any.
                                       Page   3
 4« "That closing off Leppings Lane compounded the problem because it
 made it easier for people to come down in large numbers and thus
 increase the congestion.

 5. T h a t it was known that crowds tended to come late and were
 getting later for football matches and that they should not have been
 caught by surprise.

 6. T-hat it was entirely to be expected that the crowd would have
 consumed alcolol and that nothing excessive or unusual occurred.

 7. That attempts to communicate with the crowd w^r«t inadequate
 and that messages were not heard

 8. That the match should have been postponed and that this information
 if properly announced over loudspeakers and tannoy would have allayed
 the natural anxiety of the crowd about getting in and reduce the
 crushing and danger.

 9. T-hat there was a lack of communication between ground control and
 those outside in both directions and in particular that those outside
 failed to communicate effectively the excess numbers still there
 whilst those on the inside failed to alert those outside of the
 numbers inside so that they could make a better assessment of the
 situation.

   10.T.hat the outer perimeter gates should have been used as crowd
   control barrier as was apparently done in the previous year and that
i ,to, close the gates on the crowd merely inflam .ed the situation
             « f r   ' ■


 11.That there was a failure in policing in that not every one was
 searched and that people who could have been arrested were not taken
 into custody.

 12. T-hat under no circumstances should the main exit gates have been
 opened to let people in because this would allow a large mass of
 people in,a proportion of whom would not have tickets,and therefore
 this would lead to overcrowding. In addition many of these people
 would have perhaps been the worse for wear and that unruly behaviour
 which had been exhibited outside would now be transferred to the
 inside.

 13.That the opening of concertina gate C allowed a large influx at a
 far highofspeed than normal and that the ground dispersal ability would
 be exceeded.

  14. Even if it was essential that the croud should be let in then
  arrangements should have beenmade to seek to divert them from the
  tunnel and access to the central pens and that there was plenty of
  tine to action this as there was about a 4 minute interval between
  the first request to open the gate and action.

  15. That in fact arrangements for a police serial were put in place at
  another gate (Gate A) before it was opened as that gate led to
  the seated area and that this exhibits/a desire to avoid overcrowding
  in that area.

  16. That even before the gates were open it was obvious that the
  central pens were full or overcrowded and that to allow hundreds or
  even thousands in just before kick off was obviously undesirable and
                                     Page   4
dangerous.
17. That even after it became obvious that something was wrong within
the central pens the problem was not recognised and when recognised
misdiagnosed and the incorrect remedy applied which led to e ay an
therefore loss of life.

18. That no heed was taken of pleas for help both from within the
terrace and without and that this was at least in part due to the
terms of the operational order which made it clear that the integr y.
of pitch and track had to be maintained and that the pitch gates a
to be closed except for medical emergency

19. That the training of the force was such as to respond to law and
order situations rather than safety aspects and that this was
confirmed and reinforced by the briefings and operational order.

20. That the agreed emergency message which would have alerted all to
undertake stated activities was never broadcast and that indee no
effective use of the loudspeaker equipment was made or only used too
late.

21. That once the incident was recognised no effective leadership was
given by senior officers

(W) that the rescue attempt at the front was uncordinated and largely
 left to individual initiative until too late

(b) that although it was obvious to various police officers that ««
 approach to clear the terrace had to be made from the back that a
     lioM’btgartlsed or coordinated by those in command and perhapatioc
 even realised.

 22. That to allow Ch. Supt Duckenfield to control the match was
 irresponsible as this was only days after taking over command o       e
 division and this was his first large match.

 23. That the testing layout and arrangements of barriers was
 inadequate and not in conformity with the green guide or the
 safety certificate and that the collapse of one of the barriers n pen
 three contributed to a massive loss of life (8 deaths in pen 4 over
 in pen 3 wher.ethe barrier broke).

 24. ThOlthe licensing authority had permitted the removal of a barrier
 some years prior to the incident but that this increased the loa on
 the others and,although obvious^ad not been noticed.

 25. That indolence of the licensing authority and their failure
 over the years to appreciate the obvious defects and problems an
 their failure to amend the safety certificate* even though they
 aware of the need,and also their responsibility as to safety as well
 as their failure to apply their mind to contigency plans^contribute
 to the disaster

  26. That the lack of provision for stewards or for that matter
  police officers on the terrace whsre10000 people might be was
  obviously dangerous.

  25. That the poor signing and the confusing layout of the Leppings
  Lane terracing increased the problems outside and also led to the
                                     Page   5
large mass of people heading into the central tunnel.

B.   In answer to some'/these points,the following has been said or
is anticipated will be said in evidence*.

1. The order was virtually a carbon copy of the previous          ™ e
had taken an, objection to It nor had anyone raised any ”« « « ” with
any onmlslons.lt was threfore not obvious at the time,t   g
hind sight and also if carefully analysed,obvious defects could be
demonstrated.

2. There were no written contingency plans but the                ^ary^o
did not purport to be an exhaustive instruction It         unnece     y^
specify safety considerations as these would                    itiative
play. That police officers were expected to use their own i
and take decisions depending on contingencies on the g tt£'^1fv:>Dolice
incase the contingencies were catered for by the *a 8            h and
officers on the ground. It was also impossible o p                -    the
every contingency that could or might arise, he ar a g
 packing and policing and stewarding of the terr^ ^ f r^ J vb^ " ticUiariy
successful method which had worked without any difficul y,.p
 in the year before. That although the rear gates would not have been
 visible to people at a distance, the c r o w d within . ™    »
 detect movement through them and they would therefor be effective.

 3. That policing at a sporting occassion depended on consent. That it
 was impractical to seek to hold supporters at a            s anc® nfjfHtion
 because it would merely transfer the problem 'lsfhere.In addition,^
 enormous man power resource would be needed. Tha                P      realised
             ithe turnstyle area had been made as Boon a *
 that a problem was or had o c c u r r e d , that closing L        P     .     a
 but that at the time it was done for safety reasons and to produce a
 holding area. That the pattern of arrival of the crowd was
  different from the previous year and that no intell                   crowd
  received to suggest this. That the behaviour and mood of the crowd
  changed after 2.30* and that it was not possible to reason with them,
  that although a proportion could not respond there was a
  sufficiciently large minority who could have done so but ch°
  People pushing etc into the crowd compounding the Prob1®"*            ,     d
  although lateness could be expected, the scale was
  that the vol of people in drink (not drunk) was proportionally higher
  and also numerically greater because of the crowd s                ®     without
   loudspeaker appeals were made both from the front
  success and that therefore announcing a postponement would
  made any difference.

  ( In passing this raises a very interesting point. It is j e s t e d
  that the crowd who was being addressed was unable to effectively
  respond and not push because it was too heavily c o m p a c t o g e t h e r
  On the other hand it is said that if the kick off had been P°sfcP°"e°
  the natural anxiety of the crowd which generated an urgency to get^i
  would have been abated resulting in a reduction i n t h e Pus^ n?
  congestion" and thus avoiding the need to open exit gates. It seem
  to me that if this is correct then it cannot also be argued that the
  crowd were incapable of response ).

  Whilst it is true that the crowd were not held back at a distance
  there was no reason why people had to join the back o t e crow
  push forward as the congestion was clearly visible an
  plenty or room in Leppings Lane itself which was
                                     Page   6
free. Comparison video of 1988 and 1989 show a distinct difference in
the build up of the crowds on the two occassions.

4. It was  agreed that it would have been u s e f u l to have had son,e
knowledge  of the numbers within the stadium at different timesand
similarly inretrospect it would have been better to have sent a
messenger to the control room with   verbal i n f o r m a par           ..
times when radio communications were poor or non existan             g
was taken that the control room because of video equipment w
had a view of the situation outside.

 5. Apart from communication difficulties with the crowd and the
 assessment that there would have been a poor response t ere
 the strategic decision not to postpone kick off simply
 number^people were late. The decision to postpone kick o£t             .
 numerous implications including the effect on the peop e
 stadium.

 6. That it is a practical impossibility to search every one and with a
 large crowd to exclude everyone who in other circumstances      8
 have been possible to weed out. Arrests are very cos y n ma
 and would lead to even greater depletion of resources. One can only d
 what is in fact possible.

  7. That the opening of the large exit gates was not an action taken
  lightly as it negated the match policy of excluding     c e
  and other undesirables but that when it          evident that for
                                             b e c a m e


  whatever reason it was impossible to resolve the s i u a o     ^     .
  control methods from the middle /further back and that l ^ e s
  Stake,then it was the only solution . Mr.            who authorised t ^
                                                 M a r s h a l l ,


Pl6fciott,igi-eed that sometime after 2.30pm the police lost control oi ' t r
  the situatloii^hough h^jiolds at least a minority of t e crow
  responsible.

   That there was a risk attached to opening the Gates but
  that crowd safety outside demanded it. He did not consider
  where the people would go to once inside (he knew there was
  concourse area within the turnstyle area). He also sai t at    s
  concern was the safety of the people outside,he did not ave
  reponsibility for the people on the inside and that he would have
  expected match control or ground commander to have taken any
  appropriate action.

  All the evidence has not yet been taken but it is quite likely that
  evidence will be given if not already done so dealing with various
  other matters set out in A 1-25 above.

  C. The behaviour of the fans is obviously a major matter and has to be
  considered from the point of view of whether some one or more o
  fans could be considered to have acted or ommitted to act n sue a
  way as to give rise to the possibility of the ingredients o
  recklessness being made out or if that is not the case w et er     e
  behaviour of the^JM some way affects diminishes o r eliminates the
  possibility of a finding of recklessness against the other interested
   parties. It seems to me that there are three ways of looking at the
  behaviour of the fans.

   (Note no one has suggested that all the fans were drunk misbehaving or
   otherwise in some way undesirable. On the contrary,it seems to me
   that most parties were prepared to concede that the majority were
                                      Page   7
ordinary decent people who were caught up in the sit           , .
there was a minority which was both substantial and influential w
precipitated the crisis by their selfish fisre8fr(i of °thers,thei
determination to enter at any cost and their lack of willing
cooperate with authority).

a) That the task of the police became impossible in the last 15-20
minutes before scheduleJkick off, partly because such a large         ”
fans decided to come late or latish to the match.     s       t h -Io
resourses both of police and club (ie not enough turnstyles). Ihis
generated an understandable anxiety amiworry that the peop e v
get into the ground in time for kick off. In other words that the
conduct of each individual fan did not amount to reckless behavi u .

b^ That there was a sufficient number of people who either because of
disinhibition due to alcohol or for some other r e a s o n were heedless of
the welfare of their fellow fans and were determined to enter the
ground and.by extension,the terracing at whatever cost.       a       inroe
notwithstanding that it must have been obvious that there was a larg
crowd already at the turnstyles and the present of police horses etc
and loudspeaker annoucements etc they were determined        o 8e      ..
that not only did they not hold back but, without regard for the
welfare of others they pressed forward creating a dangerous s u®             >
or in other words that they acted recklessly in relation o o e •
is not suggested in this paragraph that these individuals were ac          g
together as a group but that each individual acting on his own acte
recklessly. Assuming that this were to be correct for a moment^it
 hard to believe that in say a crowd of 4000,the reckless pushing
     O M person could have created the pressure patterns wnic       e
      Opening bf the gates. It is not so hard to understand that          Ji'V
 cum ulative effect of these individually motivated and generated
 pushes could have had the described effect. Assuming for a moment that
 the jury were to take the view that the evidence supports th*s
 hypothesis and that they also took the view that causation o          e
 tragedy could be brought back to the events outside the turnsty e
 areas would the rule against aggregation prevent the jury rom
 considering    . unlawfully killed verdicts in respect of bot un nown
 and obviously unnamed fans> provided that in the direction to         em
 had been made clear that they would have to be satisfied that the
  ingredients of recklessness i.e obvious and serious risk of injury an
  either indifference or deliberate taking of the risk was established
  against each and every several individual and that they woul no          e
  allowed simply to take the cum ulative effect into account. T e reason
  why I ask this is that it^not that uncommon where a d e a r "^rder has
  occurred but the culprit has not been discovered)for unlawfully          e
  verdicts to be returned be the perpetrators one or more persons.

 c ) There has been some evidence (not much but in a way that is to be
 expected) that there were a number of fans in attendance who, know ng
 that they did not have tickets,were going to take concerted action
 to get into the ground without paying. The strongest evidence we hear
 was from someone in a Pub who happened to overhear three fans tal ng.
 The substance of the conversation being that one of the three was
 explaining to the others that he       had a group of other fans who he
 was meeting up with that they would create sufficient disturbance
 outside the ground so that a gate would have to be opened and t a
  they would then get in. He apparently claimed that this had been
  done before and that there were no particular problems. There is a so
  evidence from fans who entered through the big gates overhearing
  comments to the effect that we would get in without tickets and also
                                      Page   8
the evidence of at least one of the gatekeepers of many years
experience that there was a group of ticketless fans outside his gate
(Gate A) who were att empting to force an entry. He was able to tell
that they were ticketless because they were waving money at him.

Apart from the fact that it might be difficult to make the jump from
say the conversation in the pub mentioned above and execution of the
plan there is the added problem of the fact that there were so many
people outside the turnstyles that day. Even if there was such a
conspiracy it may not have needed to be implemented. I assume that in
a conspiracy it might be possible to aggregate the activities of
Individuals as they are acting together. I would be interested to
hear whether you think that,given that the evidence is as stated
above, whether this would be an example of Cunni%ham recklessness
rather than Caldwell or Lawrence. I would also value your view on
whether, given that the evidence is as above^it would be appropriate to
give a Cunningham direction to the jury in respect of this.

Assuming for a moment that for evidential causation or aggregation
reasons it is not possible to consider a verdict of unlawfully killed
against one or more of the fans then their presence must nevertheless
have played a part in the disaster as it is difficult to imagine any
deaths occuring if fans had not been present.




                                    Page   9
      I will now turn to the heart of the matter but e ore
      want to make it quite clear that, it is not part of my function 0
      achieve one verdict as opposed to another. I am conscious o     e
      that on the one hand there is a body of opinion which is keen for    e
      jury to return a verdict of unlawfully killed whilst of course ere
      are others who would prefer another verdict. I am also conscous o
      the fact that notwithstanding that no party may be named in the
      inquisition and that it is no longer the case that anyone is
      immediately in peril as a result of such a verdict,nevertheless it is
      a very serious matter to record such a verdict in a high pro e
       inquest such as this. Further more,because the numerous        v    ,
       individuals and companies involved (even if we exclude the fans; an
       because of the rule against naming an individual in the inqu s   on
       such a verdict will have a blunderbuss effect notwithstanding ex
       parte Gray. It is for this reason that I am most anxious to try o
       ensure that the jury are properly directed. This will have the
       additional advantage that theiy verdict whatever it may wil carry
       perhaps that much more weight.


         1. It seem to me that( except as mentioned above in respect possibly
        of what is known as the conspiracy theory) a finding of unlawful y
        killed would have to be based on manslaughter by neglect or^ put
         another way^lawful act manslaughter and that consequently we star o
         with the law as propounded in
                                  R v Caldwell 1981 1 All ER p 961
                                  R v Lawrence 1981 1 All ER p 974
                                  R v Seymour 1983 2 All ER p 1958
                                  R v H.M. Coroner ex parte Gray case book on
                                           coroners page 97 1986
                                  Kong Cheuk Kwan v The Queen Privy Council
      vv                          case 1985                              ,    ;5
,.n   fr. • - •                                              ! ;
         In addition one has to consider the Lacuna referred to by Smith and
         Hogan in their sixth edition as well as the application of mista e
         as described on page 63 and page 85 et sec

        I would value your opinion as to existence of the lacuna or whether
        it is not merely another way of saying that the facts have to e
        be taken as the defendent (interested party) believes them to be.

        I would like to draw your attention in the Lawrence case to p 978
        at "c" where L. Hailsham describe the use of the word reckless-
         He states that it evidences a state of mind stopping short o
        deliberateintention and going beyond mere inadvertence which he there
        equates with theword "carelessness” . He also on the same page at     /g
        states
         "Since the days of Noah the effect?, of alcohol have been known to _
        produce a state of mind described as recklessness and not to in i t
        it and for that matter to remove inhibitions in the field of intention
        and not to destroy intention"

        At p 981 "j" Lord Diplock says " One does not speak of a person acting
        "recklessly" even though he has given no thought at all to the
        consequences of his act unless the act is one that presents a real
        risk of harmful consequences which anyone acting with reasona e
        prudence would recognise and give heed to.

        At page 982 "g" the direction is set out beginning with "In my view"
        and ending Mto take itM . Two further para follow in one of which he
                                           Page 10
s t a t e s t h a t in deciding whether, t he r i s k cre at ed by t he manner   nf
was both obvious and seriou s and t h a t the jury should apply the standard ot
the or dinary prudent m ot o ris t as rep res ent ed by themselves, in tne next
paragraph he makes i t c l e a r t h a t before drawing th e l n^ e n c e .™!
person being considered i s in one of t h e s t a t e s of mind de sc rib ,    y
have t o take the t o t a l i t y of th e evidence including any explanations
which may d is p la c e the in f er en ce .
Presumably t h i s could include mistakes of f a c t , e . g . i t might be claimed
t h a t the o f f i c e r s on the t r a c k believed i n i t i a l l y t h a t people were not
d i s t r e s s e d or t h a t they did not hear c r i e s of help o r , i f they did near
them, i n t e r p r e t e d them i n c o r r e c t l y in th e l i g h t of previous experie
or t r a i n i n g .
 Another example might be t he match c o n t r o l l e r . I f when he became
 of the crowds ou t si d e he may have taken th e decision t h a t they wou|'^ ®
 get in . Assuming t h i s i s an e r r o r , t h i s could have a r i s e n e i t h e r
 of poor advice or lack of experience. S im il a rl y , i f one con siders                 p           »
 he may have formed the impression t h a t th e overcrowding was not dangerous
 or again, possibly wrongly, he may have thought t h a t the sc a l i n g o
 pi tch fences was the beginning of a p it ch invasion r a t h e r than an o er p
 Presumably i f t h e Jury b e li ev e t he evidence in r e l a t i o n t o those matters
 then they would have to determine t he question of r e ck l es s n es s on              e
 ba s i s t h a t the f a c t s were as he believed them t o be.

  This brings me t o the second p o i n t , t h a t the Lawrence d i r e c t i o n as i t
   stands in the t e x t on p982 does not r e f e r to the exclusion of inadvertance
   unless possi bl y one were to read i t down t o th e end of "j P,                          or rea
   it     su bj e ct t o what L.Hailsham said about the meaning of Recklessness.
   In Kong Cheuk Kwan t h e r e i s no re fe r e n c e to inadvertance or c a r e l e s s n e s s
   (see L Hail sham above) w h i l s t in ex p a r t e Gray, which seems the l a t e s t
l e a s e and*One s p e c i f i c a l l y dea li ng with coronal matters* Lord
   Watkins, but only in the d i v i s i o n a l c o u r t , rephrases th e d i r e c t i o n
   "without having given any thought to the p o s s i b i l i t y of t h e r e being any
   such r i s k " by s t a t i n g " t h a t act in g recklessly th e p o li ce o f f i c e r having
   regard to his duty was i n d i f f e r e n t to t h a t r i s k " and by adding express y

        " I t should be emphasised however t h a t a f a i l u r e t o ap p re ci at e
        t h a t t h e r e was such a r i s k would not of i t s e l f be s u f f i c i e n t
        to amount t o r e c k l e s s n e s s " .

  This seems t o me to put a r a t h e r d i f f e r e n t emphasis on the d e f i n i t i o n
  and your view on t h i s would be app re ci at ed .
  My understanding of the cases i s t h a t the Batemen t e s t has been abolished
  and t h a t e s t a b l i s h i n g gross negligence i s not enough. This also seems
  to be t h e view of Prof Zanders as re p or te d in th e Times some time ago
  when commenting on the a c q u i t t a l s in the Zeebruggen prosecutions he says.

  "But in t h r e e cases in the e a r l y 1980's the House of Lords ruled t h a t
  proof of gross negligence was not enough. The prosecution must also
  show t h a t the defendants were r e c k l e s s in regard to an obvious and
  serious r i s k " .
  This again puts i t s l i g h t l y d i f f e r e n t l y but i s in l i n e with ex p a r t e
  Gray I t h i n k .
   I f t h a t i s so, am I r i g h t in th in ki ng t h a t in order to make out the
   offence of lawful act manslaughter, one has to be
  satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that there is a duty of care, breac
  of that duty, and damage. Once that has been e s t a b l i s h e d one then
  applies the test of whether the act or otnmisfton so established tails
  within the two limbs of the Lawrence test but making it clear that             ~
  mere inadvertance or carelessness ( is this not the same as neg g             •/
  & is not sufficient. In addition are the jury to be directed that in
   determining the state of mind of the party they have to take into
   account any explanations which he has to offer to determine w a            n
   fact his state of mind was. I.e he may have been negligent but was ne
   reckless,taking everything into account including the activities o
   other .

   I now move onto the next point which again arises out of Kong Cheuk
   Kwan ( I realise this is a Privy Council decision and thus only ot
   persuasive authority)* Having quoted Lord Diplock from his speec
   in Lawrence, Lord Roskill goes on to say:

   "Their Lordship*emphasis* that in this passage Lord Diplock was
   speaking of an obvious and serious risk of causing physical
   created by the defendant. He was not there concerned to deal with
   cases where the conduct complained of was of a defendent react on
   to such a risk created by another person .

    and again just before the end he says:

      "Their Lordships did not find it necessary to hear counsel for Kong on
      the issue and it would not be right for them to offer any detai e
      comments upon the facts beyond observing that the summing up does no
j|M|Seem to have distinguished between an obvious risk created by those
ft|” fha*igatiti£ each hydrofoil by their own navigation and th^reUtfOfle® by    f
      those on board one hydrofoil to any obvious risk created by the
      navigation of the other".

    Applying these passages to the present problem:

     The officer on the field may not have been aware either of the crush
    outside the turnstyles nor the decision to open the gates (Radio was
    on "talk through" so he might have heard the messages though
    reception was apparently terrible and in any case the messages woul
    not necessarily have impinged on his mind as they were not directe to
    him) nor would he have been aware of any action or inaction in
    relation to the tunnel. He was then confronted with a pen which was
    full but which received in a short time a substantial extra number o
    people. Does the passage quoted mean that in such circumstances t e
    test of recklessness does not apply or applies in some modified way
    and if in what way?

    In most major   disasters eg Zeebruggen, Kegworth, Clapham, Marchioness,
    as well as in   RTAs involving say reckless driving,the victims and the
    survivors are   helpless and entirely in the hands of for example the
    traidriver or   the pilot etc.

     What distinguishes Hillsborough from these examples is that there is
    an interface between,shall we say for simplicity,the police and the
    fans. It is quite clear from say the evidence of Mr. Marshall that at
    about 2.30 pm he knew he had a substantial no of people there but e t
    that they could be coped with. By 2.45. or so the position had so
    changed with regard to the fans}both with regard to their location,
    attitude;response and behaviour generally, that not only had it led
    to loss of control for a period but also created such a dangerous
                                       Page 12
 situation that unprecedenfedaction had to be taken to open the Gates,
 notwithstanding that this was against normal practice and also had the
 potential of creating further problems inside. Needless to say another
 point of view is that the situation within the turnstyle area had
 been allowed to develop because of poor policing both in planning and
 and in execution and that the behaviour ett of the crowd,whilst perhaps
 not helping.,was not the cardinal problem.

 In the end this is a question of fact which the jury will have to
 decide on. I suppose it depends on where one starts but if one were
 to take the view that the initial fault lay in not recognising the
 situation at 2.30 or in having a defective operational plan is it open
 so to speak to shelter behind a loss of control and poor behaviour of
 the fans.

 A further example is connected with the tunnel which was not sealed
 off when the Gates were opened. It has been suggested that the
 commander had plenty of time to make the necessary arrangement for
 this to be done as a period of 4 minutes had passed from the first
 request to open the gates to implementation. However this assumes that
 the decision to open the gates was taken at the first request. What if
 any are the implications in the fact that the request( for
 Hillsborough) was unprecedented; the fact that the commander had
 responsibility for other parts of the stadium not just Leppings Lane,
 and that this was his first major match since taking commnand.

  There is another matter that troubles me about the Lawrence direction
  in connection with the Hillsborough disaster . It must be evident that
g not every action which carries an obvious and serious risk of injury
  and'Which1'is taken deliberately could be classified as raeklesfii?For
  example i£ t a surgeon were to carry out a major operation which had
  say 30%-50% risk of failure and death even when properly carried out,
  If the patient dies and one were looking simply at the Lawrence
  direction it could be argued that the criteria of the definition had
  been met and the surgeon was liable to be charged. It is true that if
  one were to apply the ex parte Gray test(ie was there negligence and
  only if the answer were yes to apply the Lawrence direction then the
  result would make more sense but the danger then is that one is
  creeping back to the Bateman test. Counsel's view on this would be
  appreciated.

 I have already mentioned my understanding re aggregation and have
 raise two problems with regard to it in relation to the fans.

 A further difficulty that presents itself to me is not the question of
 aggregation inter parties but aggregation intra party. In other words
 to what extent if at all is it correct and permissible to add together
 perhaps relatively minor breaches of the same party. Presumably where
 the activity or ommision forms part and parcel of one continuous
 activity the whole of it can and must be looked at as one. Your view
 on this would be appreciated and in particulaifyf you agree that this
 is the correct way of looking at where one should draw the line.

 I will now turn to the question of corporate manslaughter. I
 understand that the directing mind and will of the corporation has to
 fulfil the appropriate criteria and that it is likely that it is not
 possible to aggregate the acts and ommisions of top company employees
 or directors so as to establish corporate guilt.

 One of the parties who appears before me is counsel for the Chief
                                    Page 13
Constable of S.Yorkshire. As I have mentioned to you already on the
phone I am puzzled as to whether in law the Chief Constable could
take personal criminal responsibility for the act and ommisions of
officers serving under him in the South Yorkshire Police. I believe
the Police Act makes provision for the Chief Constable to take
Vicarious liablity for the civil liablity of officers analogously to
an employer with his employees but I am not aware that either that
Act or any other provision would make him criminally responsible. I
presume that if he were to have such a liability it would be not in a
personal capacity but as a corporation sole but I am not aware that
that is in fact his status.

If we now look at the South Yorkshire Police force, what is its legal
status, and in particular does it have an identity which could be
fixed with criminal responsibility . I find this difficult to believe
as the force is made up of individual officers all of whom hold a
commisLon as constable which is the basis of their power and authority;
though for practical purposes they are structured into a hierafchical
structure.

The only othei^ body that I can think of is the Polic* Authority which
is of course a$focal authority committee. If that is the ultimate
authority then one would have to show that they were fixed with the
necessary degree of recklessness - a very difficult task as Chief
Constables are very anxious to ensure that they have operational
freedom from their authority.

I wonder if you have any thoughts on the   above points relating to the
police.

These Instructions to advi*>e are sent to you with the consent aftd in
the name of Rotheras.

It is regretted that they are lengthy but as you will have already
noticed I prefer to set out my understanding and argue out some of the
points. Although this no doubt means that it takes longer for you to
read I hope that its effect is to actually save you some time in
considering the matters.

You may feel that it would be easier in the first instance to adviSe
in conference and then to restrict your written advice to core matters
and this may prove to be both quicker simpler and cheaper. If you
feel that a conference would help I could come down for late Friday
afternoon or if that were not convenient sometime on Saturday.
Unfortunately on other days we tend not to finish till 4 o'clock or
later though I suppose if it were essential I could try to arrange
an early finish at say 2.pm on some other day.

There is an element of urgency as I need your advice well before I
approach the summing up which no doubt will be preceded by legal
submissions by the interested parties’legal representatives.




                                    Page   14
One of the o f f i c e r s on the gate whose conduct in a major way has been
c a l l e d i n t o qu es tion, i s going t o be c e r t i f i e d by a doctor as u n f i t
to appear. (He has not been back to work apparently since the i n c i d e n t ) .

I t seems t o me t h a t I can only use R.37 i f I form the view t h a t the
statement i s not l i k e l y to be d i spu ted . Having formed t h a t view I
could then use i t , even i f i t i s disputed under R.37(2) but am I r i g h t
in thi nk in g t h a t i f , a f t e r co n s i d e ra t i o n of the statement I form the
view t h a t i t i s l i a b l e to be d i spu ted , I cannot introduce i t at a l l ,
and presumably t h e r e i s no other method of introducing his evidence
in a documentary form.

There i s another procedural p o i n t . As you are probably aware, we have
q u i t e a l o t of photographic and video evidence, a l o t of which has
been e x h i b i t e d . I i n i t i a l l y was of the view t h a t I would not l e t the
Jury take the e x h i b i t s , in p a r t i c u l a r the video, i n t o t h e i r r e t i r i n g
room when they consider t h e i r evidence, but I am now t h in k in g of
changing my mind, having seen the case of R v Emmerson, a Court of
Appeal judgement re ported on 5 December 1990 in the Times and which
seems t o make q u i t e c l e a r t h a t the Jury are e n t i t l e d to take taped
evidence i n t o the Jury Room.

Can you see any strong reason why I should not allow my Jury to have
b e n e f i t of the e x h i b i t s (I do not intend to l e t them have copies of
the t r a n s c r i p t s as I think t h a t would be t o t a l l y unmanageable).

F i n a l l y , I apologise f o r the q u a l i t y of the         p r e s e n ta t i o n of t h i s
document, which i s e n t i r e l y due t o the very               heavy pr essure on time.
I would have p r ef er r ed to have improved i t ,                 both in p r e s e n t a t i o n and
s t y l i s t i c a l l y , but i t i s not po ss i b l e t o do   so at the moment.




                                                   Page 15
POINTS OF ISSUE WHICH MAY NEED ADDRESSING
WHEN INQUEST IS OVER
(QUERY ANNOUNCEMENT)


1.    . Evacuation methodology (blue doors, gates at back, panic,
      / (Helen Muir)).


2.f    F i r e Service involvement in above.


3.     Research in t o crowd behaviour at major events where evacuation
       i s backward when vi sio n i s forward.


4.     Police involvement in management of games, p a r t i c u l a r l y within
       ground.


5.     Safety c e r t i f i c a t e , p a r t i c u l a r l y Leppings Lane t u r n s t i l e area -
       counting, ascertainment of numbers, method of control e t c .


6.     Transfer of Safety in Sports Ground Act r e s p o n s i b i l i t y to
       dedicated s a f e t y / i n s p e c t o r a t e .


7.     I n t e r - r e l a t i o n s h i p between public en q u i r i es and inqu es ts in
       major d i s a s t e r s .




                      Qj




                   ( £)
      • %
? ■



                                                    ADVICE


        1.          I    am    asked      to     advise            on    two    matters         of       evidence,
                    namely the extent to which (if any) the transcript of
                    Taylor      L J 's enquiry            may       be    used       in      evidence          in   the
                    Inquest presently being                        conducted         into the deaths of
                    football         fans      at    Hillsborough,              and       the    rule         against
                    self-incrimination.


        The Transcript


                    In a coroner's               inquest evidence may be admitted only
                    in the following ways:


                    A         Oral     evidence           on       oath:       S . 11(2)        Coroners            Act
                               1988;
                    B         Documentary            evidence             falling         within         rule        37
                               Coroners Rules 1984.


        3.         The    question          then      is       simply          whether        the    transcript
                    falls within 2[b].


        4.         The        coroner       is      not    obliged             by     rule      37       to     admit
                    documentary           evidence             -    even       if   there       is   no        person
                    within Rule 20(2) who objects to it.                                     Furthermore,           the
                    coroner      is given            an    over-riding              discretion            to    admit
                    evidence         in documentary                 form where            the maker            of   the
                    document         is     unable        to       give    oral        evidence          within           a
                    reasonable period.                    The instant case is certainly not
                    one       where       the       coroner             would       wi s h    to     admit          the
                    transcript in the face of the objection of one of the
                    parties.


        5.         In my opinion               the   transcript                should not           be    admitted
                    in evidence in whole or in part to the jury.


                    How else then may the transcript be used?                                        The answer


                                                           1
    '   %
♦



             is    in cross        examination.               Here       I    will outline         2
             courses of action:


             Course 1
             Simple cross-examination                  of     the        witness as        to     the
             former statement made by him on the subject to the                                   LJT
             enquiry       must    be permissible.                 The procedure          in Ss.4
             and     5 of    the    Criminal          Procedure         Act    1865      should    be
             followed (see later).                   The previous statement does not
             have to have been on oath or                         in his hand          (writing )-
             but it does have to have been reduced into writing.


             Provided the requirements of the sections are met, the
             cross-examiner will be bound by the witness's                                  answer
             unless the statement is then put in by being read out
             to contra-dict the witness.                      Indeed it cannot be said
             that     the    statement          does     contra-dict            the      witness's
             evidence unless it is put in.


        9.   Course    2
             I    could     see    no   objection           to     the following          line     of
             questions       which      goes     around          the   above    situation and
             which probably places the witness under some greater
             pressure to accept what it is recorded he said on the
             earlier occasion:


    (J^LO.   "Is it    correct that you gave evidence on                              this matter
             before        the    e n q ui ry    held       by     Lord       Justice       Taylor
             on....?"
             - Yes


              "Look    at   this     document.           It      is    a transcript         of    the
             evidence you gave on that occasion.                              Please read from
              ....    to    .....       Do      you    accept          that    as   an    accurate
             record of what you said on that occasion?"


              - Yes.


                                                 2
    ' *
»



                     [If necessary now a warning about self-incrimination]
                     "Would       you      read        out       the    answer         you       gave     to     the
                     question


                     - Yes


                     "Is that your evidence before this enquiry as to what
                     happened?"


                          Yes.


          11.        By    such    a    device         the       evidence       is    admitted           on    oath.
                     Whether       or     not     this           changes    the        character          of     the
                     evidence or not              is immaterial             to the purposes of the
                     inquest,       but    in my view it does change the character
                     as    this evidence           is both given on oath                         and with        the
                     warning against self-incrimination.


          12.        So what       if     the   witness           on    looking        at    the       transcript
                     denies that it represents what he said at Taylor L . J ls
                ->   enquiry?           A denial that the transcript is an accurate
                     account may give rise to a suspicion that the witness
                     (now)        see s    hi s        recorded           answer        as       being         self-
                     incriminatory.               On    the other          hand       there       may be        some
                     minor       inaccuracy.             The       latter        may       be    clarified        by
                     questions without the body of the evidence being given
                     (or read)          by the witness until                    it    is     in a form with
                     which he is content.


          13.        If    the    transcript           is        denied    in    substance,              then    the
                     issue becomes one of credibility.                               At this stage,             once
                     the witness has been given the                             "warning"          required by
                     ss    4 and       5 of     the Criminal              Procedure Act                1865,     the
                     cross-examiner               may            then     read       ou t       th e    previous
                     statement,         thereby challenging the witness to admit or
                     deny it.




                                                             3
The    previous          inconsistent             statement           then       goes     in
evidence only on the issue of the credibility of the
witness.          The      jury   need       to    be    aware        that      in    these
circumstances,             the previous statement is not evidence
of its contents,             but only that he said it.                          That will
end    the matter          - unless          for some reason               the witness
falls within the 5 exceptions to the rule that there
may    be     c a l l ed     no   evidence          on     contra-diction                 on
collateral matters.


This    is    quite        a difficult            area    of    evidence         and,     to
assist,       I    include        a    photocopy          of     a        few   relevant
paragraphs          from      the          1990    edi ti on         of    Phipson        on
Evidence.         In summary I advise that the transcript of
the LJT enquiry should                     (and indeed can)               only be used
in the examination of witnesses.                           Neither it nor any
part of it should go before the jury unless:


A           all the parties and the coroner agree that that
        part of the document is not in issue and may go
        before the jury; or


B        the witness admits that he made the statement on
        the previous occasion (in which case there is no
        need      for the actual              statement to go before the
        jury any more than any other oral                                 statement of
        the witness - it will have been read out as part
        of his oral evidence on oath); or


C           the witness       denies         that he made the statement-
        in which case (subject to the provisions of Ss 4
        and       5 of      the   Criminal         Procedure          Act       1865)    the
        statement may be read out to the jury (by way of
        contrad ic ti on              to    the    witness)           and       the     jury
        should be told (in the summing up at leas t) that
        the       statement       is       not    evidence       of       its    content-
        merely          of    the          fact    that        the    witness           said
        something else on the earlier occasion.
      Self-Incrimination


      16.         I do not believe            that       the   learned    coroner needs        any
                  further guidance on this matter.                    The relevant rule is
                  Rule 22 of The Coroners' Rules 1984.                      Some guidance is
                  also    to    be    obtained       in    paragraph      19.42    of    the   3rd.
                  Edition       of   Thurston's          Coronership.       I have       reviewed
                  the relevant law and the statement of the law set out
                  in Coronership            from the citation of the judgement of
                  Lord Denning MR in Rio Tinto Zinc and the observations
                  generally in that paragraph is trite law.


      17.         I feel therefore that I may answer the questions                             (i),
                  (ii), and (i i i ) in my instructions respectively no, no
                  and    yes.        Questions    (i v ) and      (v)     I hope    already      to
                  have dealt with in detail.


      18.         I shall no doubt be speaking with Dr. Stefan Popper on
                  the     t e l e p h one     shortly          when   I    shall        have   th e
                  opportunity to speak about the contents and import of
                  this advice.




% •




                                                                           Michael J. Powers


      5 December 1990
      1 Paper Buildings
      Temple
      EC4Y 7EP



                                                     5
                                                                                 T   he    E   x a m in a t io n o f   W   it n e s s e s          12-24
s o f E v id e n c e

                                                         ,   t*c c r o s s - e x a m i n e d on his reasons for refusing to be interview ed after
rton J. ruled that his denialsi
iat th e re fo r e there w as n o ;                           ■ .j   A'■i
                                                        ^Thc extent to which ev id en ce m ay b e called to contradict a w itness on
allow therefore that the ma
                                                           tr^rs of c r e d i t is d iscu ssed,p o s t, § 12-33. For the rules on th e calling o f
 th e q u estio n s. L aw to n J. stat
                                                        cuilcna- to re-establish the credit o f a w itness, s e e p o s t , § 12-38. For the
)f cro ss-exam in ation as to i
                                                        right of a co-defendant, but not o f the p ro secu tion , to cross-exam in e on
e b e . f l ^ p > n o a t h , the matter
:e to his likely standing a f te p                      an e x clud ed confession, se e p o s t , § 2 7 -2 2 .
                                                           In Ire la n d it seem s that q uestion s under this head are only adm issible if
ich is trying him or listening i
                                                        tlicv ilirec u x im peach credit; thus, in a libel action w here the d e fen ce
 b e ask ed to draw in fe r e n c e s'^ ^
                                                        .illegal th a t t h e l i b e l was published, not b y the d efen d a n t, but b y a third
eth e r a p o lice officer masqueracfifi
                                                        (k-isoii. c a lle d at the trial as a w itness for the plaintifl, this person w as not
jtin g , w en t there “as a sj
                                                        .tik m a i to h e cross-exam ined as to his use o f oth er w ord s against the
 f a d m issible to discredit them35;
                                                        plaintiff. e n t i r e l y different from those in the libel47': in another libel c a se,
ip e lle d to answer w hether he -
                                                        O lin c n J. disallowed a question put in cross-exam in ation to a m edical
set h im to p en alties34; nor questio
                                                        witness c a lle d b y the plaintiff, as to w heth er the w itness had not b een
h e cou rt o n their con d uct or test
                                                        w m m o n e d at petty sessions for an alleged assault and threatening la n ­
dant b e ask ed in cross-ex
                                                        guage44 a n d questions as to the professional ideas entertain ed by o n e
liscreditable d e fe n c e , e.g. infa
                                                        doctor a b o u t another, as w ell as th o se im puting that the w itness’s d ia g n o ­
ning A c t , for he is en titled to r d |
                                                        sis lias b e e n challenged in o th e r cases, have also b een d isallow ed 45; nor
f w h a t are the particular terms?
                                                         was a c o n s t a b l e allow ed to be cross-exam ined as to w hat passed b e tw e e n
b e e n b ro k en , for this also is fojif
                                                         Imnscli a n d h is superintendent in reference to a criminal charge.
s b e to ld what others have said
ltradicts th e m 38; nor is it allowable^
cing a ssu m p tions contrary t o f a c |, |
i, w h j j e t h e issue w a s w h e th e f g ^ ^ p ^                            (e) P revio u s Inconsistent Statem en ts111
3.                   a llow ed to b e
d ad vertised th e g o o d s in questiottl
n t.39 S o , w h e re A sued B for daina_
held m o st irregular and im properfop                   Ini C r i m i n a l P r o c e d u r e A c t 1865, s s . 4             and     S4®
 w h e th e r h e w as insured.40 W^e£§j|j                                                                                                                     1 2 -2 4
                                                             Under section 4 ,49
:ross-exam ination w as to injure he
icitor, it w as d isa llo w ed .41 A                           "11 a witness, upon cross-exam ination as to a form er statem ent m ad e
d . e v e n by the ju d g e , for th e PurP ^ &                In him relative to the subject-m atter o f the in dictm ent or p roceed -
t will usually b e w ron g for a defenda||r                    ’’ip. and inconsistent with his present testim ony, d o e s not distinctly
                                                               admit th a t he has m ade such statem ent, p roof m ay b e given that he

R. 31b, 320.
                                                               I li tr e arc proposals   to change the law: see R eport of the W orking G roup on the Rights
                                                         "• Silen ce ( 1 48 9 ) .
D oue. 590, 592.                                           „ M“w r v Massev, 31 Ir.L .T .J. 184, per O 'B rien J.
ter Bramwell and Am phlett J J .; R- v - **°
                                                           , l)ah v- Cork Herald, ibid.
s J.; though such questions are often pu
                                                           „ H v- Hetwessv. 31 Ir.L .T.J. 165.
                                                           ,.H      Herlihy. 32 lr.L .T .J. 38.
                                                           „      /’<«(. Appendix for the provisions of the Civil Evidence Act 1968.
■e. Apri! 24. 1895,p e r Cave J ., ex/ tf l\1Q. , ,           ■he-se sections (1) re-enact ss.23 and 24 of the Com mon Law Procedure A ct 1854; (2)
idsborough, M o n & Co. (1893] 2 Ch. 38 v ^
                                                         Iff 1 10 totb civil and criminal cases (see s.l). For civil proceedings, see. too, ss.3 and 7 of
                                                             ( lv>l Evidence Act 1968 post, A ppendix.'T he 1865 Act is som etim es referred to as
;c . a ).                                                •^nman's Act.
 c f G rinham v. Davies « [1919]
                          |      2 K .B. 249^1
                                                         / J - i,rgelv declaratory of the common law. see Devlin J. in K. \. Hart (1958)
4B L.T. 776.                              -q er                PP R. 47, 50 and Crowlev v. Page (1837) 7 C. & P. 789.
C .A .j: R . v. Stubbs [1982] 1 W .L .R -

 {254]
            12-24                        C h . 12— R u l e s    of   E vid e n c e
                                                                                                                                                     T*h e E x a m i .n

                   did in fact m ake it; but b efo re such p ro o f can be given, the circum
                   stances o f the supposed statem en t, sufficient to designate the panic                                  lot be said that the d e p o sitk
                                                                                                                        BnJess it is put in .54
                   ular occasion, must be m en tio n ed to the w itness and he
                                                                                     must                             r t :-
                   asked w hether or not he has m ade such sta te m e n t,”
                                                                                                                       Evidential significance ofstatenit
                  h e operation o f this se ctio n is not co n fin e d to statem ents previously
            |n a 3 e 'on oath or in a d e p o sitio n .50T h e general application of the prov,                         In criminal p ro c e e d in g s the in
            Slbn w as further em p hasised Iri R. v. O ' N e i l l / 1 M. and O. were tried                           earlier statem ent cannot be tre
                                                                                                                    'Contents.55
            to g e th e r , M. having p lead ed guilty to the first o f the tw o counts in th-
            in dictm ent, to which O . had p lead ed not guilty, M. gave evidence on his                            ;» In civil p ro ceed in g s, by virtue of
            o w n behalf and in cross-exam ination w as asked w heth er O. had commit                                admissible under sectio n s 4 and 5 ,
            ted with him the offen ce alleg ed in cou n t o n e . U p o n M. denying () \                                                o f * h ic h direct ora
                                                                                                                    admissible.56
            in v o lv e m e n t M .’s verbal statem ent to the p o lice in which he said the
            o p p o site was put to him under section 4. T h e Court o f A ppeal held that
            such a course was proper as w as the exercise o f the ju d g e’s discretion in
            a llo w in g it.                                                                                                      (f)   General Observations
                U n d e r section 5,

                  “A witness may be cross-ex am in ed as to previous statements made                                  J h e re contradictory statem ents a


••
                  by him in writing or red u ced in to writing relative to the subject-                               prove them .57 W here a w itness f
                  m a tter o f the in dictm ent o r p ro ceed in g , w ithout such writing being
                  sh ow n to him 52; but if it is intend ed to contradict such witness by the                        f c ^ an
                                                                                                                           a faffidavit
                                                                                                                               f d CMS'S'e  m 'V"by
                                                                                                                                        in reply  h athe
                                                                                                                                                      n“
                  writing, his attention m ust, before such contradictory proof can be                                ^ j e c t e d on the ground that th,
                  g iv e n , be called to th o se parts o f the writing which are to be used for                       examination to discredit the w
                  the purpose o f so contradicting him ; provided always that it shall he
                                                                                                                   F J v ei ° rfi,ed l'n a n 0 t h e r ^ u r t
                  co m p eten t for the ju d g e, at any tim e during the trial, to require the
                                                                                                                   I f f l a y b e m t e r p o s e d o u t o f t u r n ’so
                  production o f the writing for his in sp ection , and he may thereupon
                  m ak e such use o f it for the purposes o f the trial as he may think fit."
                                                                                                                    fea m           ,Tgh- h° WeVer' a W n c
                     term s o f th e p ro v iso d o n o t en a b le a Jjudge
                                                                        . . P . .
                                                                                 t o treat . a witness’s
                                                                      c o n t e n t s . 3 In somecascsit
                                                                                                                    radicts them 59 Jn k, .   F    Ons
       ' j s w is e for the judge to p erm it o n ly parts o f such a sta tem en t to be shown                      * r,.              bankruptcy the r
       f t o t h e J u r y /33                                                                                                                        --
 12-25        A lth o u g h a witness m ay be cross-exam in ed as to what he said, for                            j.y .tfife y (l866)4F &
          e x a m p le , before the m agistrate (and the d ep osition m ay be put in his                          ftfiEionsbetween 3 u/>                      v. Wright i
          hand for that purpose ) w ithout reading it as a part o f the evidence of the
          cross-exam in ing party, the cro ss-exam in er will be bound by the witness s                          g * 9>. [1893] 2 Ch 381        i n!e; N o r<h A
          an sw er unless the d ep osition is put in (i.e. read out) to contradict him. It                       ik tv . Beckett i w     ’ 386- See also
                                                                                                                  f - Williams 8 Cr A p p R 4 ! ^ (L ° rd D en mar,



••
                                                                                                                  * Burnell v. British t
               50 R . v. Hart, ante.                                                                                 :„Act 1938. N ote            f C om m issio'
               5‘ [1969] C n m .L .R . 260.                                                                        ,      of evidence as (ofh         the 3968 ^
                                                                                                                   r s-4 " h o is not“ aUerf  A b i l i t y of th e ,
               52 How ever, the cross-examiner must have the docum ent available: R v A iul"""
            (1929) 21 C r.A p p .R . 178, and see R. v. Yousry (1914) 11 C r.A p p .R . 13. For the posmo"11       | I ^ . l 4 S e95aSaWtneSS-
                                                                                                                   Vuntng v. M addick L R 7 n u
            com m on law, see The Queen's Case (1820) 2 Br. and B. 287, referred to in R v. Andeni*^
                                                                                                                     e action of the jur|0 ’■ - ^          in R. v.
            ante, at p. 183. The witness cannot dem and to see the writing before answering. ■ ‘
                                                                                                                 y * *itness inco nsk tf      readln8 to 'h e jury c
            A ustralian Territory Ltd. v. Goldsborough, M ort & Co. [1893]2C h. 381, 3 5 8 - 3 8 6 ..'vW**       ffegateriajjy from lbe (1" nh her evidence, s
            v. Sergeant, 1 F. & F. 322.                                                                      ,
               53 R . v. Birch (1924) 18 C r.A p p .R . 26; R. v. Colder. R. v. Jones, R. v. Porritt
                                                                                               P o r n ity w     R t i s submitted that u n f 05” 10!1- but neitile
            W .L .R . 1169.                                                                                           by the witness as a r 6SS 3 ,n 50 ^ar as
                                                                                                                   * be followed now       orrect record o f whai
               533 R . v. Beattie (3989) 89 C r.A p p .R . 302, 306 (C .A .).
                                                                                                                    Aus,raii° n Territory Co v C n U a
                                                                                                                                        s '-o. \ . Goldsborough
                                                           [256]
                                                                                                                                                            1257]
                          T h e E x a m in a t io n    of   W   it n e sse s



 can n ot be said that the deposition d oes contradict the w itn ess’s e v id e n c e
 u nless it is put in .54

 E v id e n tia l significance o f statements p u t in under sections 4 a n d 5

   In criminal proceed in gs the inconsistency g o es to credibility and the                              12-26
 earlier sta tem en t cannot be treated as evidence o f the truth 01 its
 con ten ts.
   In civil p ro ceed in g s, by virtue of section 3(1) o f the 1968 A c t sta te m e n ts
 adm issible under sections 4 and 5 of the 1865 A c t will be e v id e n c e o f any
 fact therein o f which direct oral evidence by the m aker w o u ld be
 a d m issib le.56


               (f) G en era l O bservation s on Inconsistent Statem ents



    W h ere contradictory statem ents are proved, w itnesses m ay be called to                            12-27
 disprove t h e m .57 W h ere a w itness had m ade a statem ent to th e d e f e n ­
 dant’s solicitor inconsistent with an affidavit filed by him on b eh a lf o f the

•M  ^intiff, an affidavit in reply by the solicitor setting out such sta tem en t
      rejected on the ground that the evidence w as only adm issible on
 cross-exam ination to discredit the w itness.58 W h ere the writing is lost,
 d estroyed or filed in another court, secondary ev id en ce will be adm issible
 and may be in terp osed out of turn; so, also, p ro o f may be given that it is in
 the hands o f the o p p o n en t, w ho has had notice to p roduce it but has
 refused. A lth o u g h , h ow ever, a witness, w heth er a party or n o t, m ay be
 cross-exam ined as to previous inconsistent statem ents m ade by him self,
 he may not be to ld what third persons have said or sworn and a sk ed if he
 contradicts th e m .59 In bankruptcy the rule is that if the bankrupt called as


       « ft. v. R iley (1866) 4 F. & F. 964; R. v . Wright (1866) 4 F. & F. 967. As to the significance
   of variations betw een a witness's statement and his evidence at the trial, see C ockburn C. J .
   in R> v. Wainwright* 13 Cox 17i, 173.
       55 R v. O ’Neill, ante; R . v. Birch, ante; North Australian Territory Co. v. G oldsborough.
   M o n & C o. [1893] 2 Ch. 381. 386. See also cases cited § 12-53 (authorities on s.3); and
    Wright v. Beckett, 1 M. & Rob. 414 (Lord Denman); Ewer v. A m brose, 3 B . & Co. 746. but
    cf. R. v, Williams, 8 C r.A p p .R . 133.
       56 See Burnell v. British Transport Commission [1956] 1 O .B . 18/, a decision on the
    Evidence Act 1938. Note that s.7 of the 1968 Act contains provisions relating to the
    admissibility of evidence as to the credibility of the m aker of a statem ent adm itted b> virtue
            or s.4 who is not called as a witness.
  ^ ■ f t v. Whelan. 14 Cox 595.
          H em m ing v. M addick, L.R. 7 Ch. 395. in R. v. Garner (1889) 61 L.T. 699 the C .C .R .
    upheld the action of the judge in reading to the jury during his summing up the deposi tion of
-.r 2 defence witness inconsistent with her evidence, she having admitted that h e r evidence
  V differed materially from the deposition but neither side nor the judge having put it in
 . evidence. It is subm itted that, unless and in so far as the deposition had already been read to
     and agreed by the witness as a correct record of what she had previously said, this decision
     would not be followed now.
        59 North Australian Territory Co. v. Goldsborough. M art & Co., ante, at p. 385.

                                                 [2 5 7 ]
        12-27                    C h . 12— R u l e s o f E v i d e n c e


        a witness rives evidence inconsistent with the statements he made in t o
        p u t T o r private examination, the party callmg the bankn.pt may p„,

        “ f o " i s i o n ^ ' t e u s e of inconsistent statements to drscredit a
        party’s o w n w itness, s e e , p o s t, §§ 1 2 -4 9 et seq.


        R e-exam ination; exam ination by ju d ge and jury

                                          (a)       R e-exam in ation



12-28      The right to re-exam.ne ex ,s«


         Act 193862 and the position under the Civil E v id e n c e A c t 1968 may
         f h l f r e b ^ assumed to be the sam e.
         m aking a form er inconsistent statemen^                              -   >              ,   ^ e ss



         not m en tio n ed it in his sworn inform ation, he was                                       M


          charge            p                       that the act had not caused her any pain,


          had done the same to her on former occaaons.                             :E ven -n :tia d m .* ,^

          Thereo" r         e   m    i   t      a       l   *     M    a      «    e     r    s       —




           ^     T      ^   X   ^   ^    r ^        ^       o n      l m      s e i f :        he


                « R e a Debtor 11944] Ch. 344^                             f 9Q & p m
                   The Queen s Case, 2 B . & is. - i n - -v _        t \V L R 340
                <£ Cartwright v. W. Richardson & Co. Lta. [ 1 .. . ] • • •          o94
                I £ l                                                                  previous”consistent state­

            ments. see generally B 12-55 et seq.
              “ R. v. Chambers. 3 Cox 92.                                  C«rg.7 / | 1913] 2 K.B. 271 (rebuttal of
               “ Blewett v . Tregonntng. .■>A . & b .   , DUt O n             5    1
            irrelevant evidence not allowed).                                 Roberts. 2 Stark. 455.
               67 Prince v. Sam o (18-’8} / A d. & El. 6 - •
               68 /?. v. Fletcher. 1 Lew .C.C. 111.
                                                             1258]
I
i'                          T h e E x a m in a t io n o f W itn esses                       12-29

     re-exam ination; and the o p p on en t m ay then cross-exam ine thereon. In
     re-exam in ation , leading q uestions m ay not be a sk ed .w
        R e-exam in ation d o e s not enable a party in effect to cross-exam in e his
     o w n w’itness. W h ere in re-exam ination counsel is perm itted to invite a
     w itness to refresh his m em ory from a d ocu m e n t, he sh ould g o on e f fe c ­
     tively to cross-exam ine his witness as to which of tw o versions given is
     likely to be more reliable.’0


                             (b) E xam ination b y Ju dge and Jury


        A judge may put all such q uestions to a witness as the interests of                 12-29
     justice require71; and these q uestions may b e b ased , not on ly on matters
     arising in the case, but on his ow n local or scientific k n o w le d g e .72 It is not
     sufficient for him to rely on a d ocu m e n t, the con ten ts and source o f which
     are u nk n ow n to the parties, and m erely ask explanation o f so m e o f the
     statem ents in the d o c u m e n t.73 A lthou gh he is entitled to use his dis­
     cretion, it is undesirable that h e should interrupt exam in ation in ch ief by
     q uestions which am ount to cross-exam ination,74 n or sh ould be put
     q uestions which suggest that h e, the jud ge, is satisfied that the prisoner is
        '!ty.75 N or by his intervention should the judge deprive the d efendant

     «   me opportunity o f d ev elo p in g his d efen ce under the guidance o f his
        co u n se l.76 T he Court-of A p p e a l will not interfere directly on the ground
     that the judge has b een guilty o f discourtesy, even grave discourtesy, to
     co u n se l,77 but will d o so if the conduct o f the jud ge am oun ts to “an
     invitation to the jury to disregard what was being said and active, positive
     interference with counsel in pursuit o f his task.”78 In a later c a s e ,79 the


        w Ireland v. Taylor [1949] 1 K B . 300. 313.
        10 R. v. Harman (1984) 148 J.P. 289 (C.A .).
        71 R. v. H opper [1915] 2 K.B. 431; R. v. Rem nant, Rus. & Ry. 136; R. v. Watson, 6 C. & P.
     653; R. v. Jameson. The Times, Julv 24, 1896; R. v. Cain (1936) 25 C r.A p p .R . 204; R. v.
     Clewer (1953) 37 C r.A p p .R . 204; R. v. Hamilton [1969] C rim .L .R . 486 (C .A .); R. v.
     Hickman, ibid. 1502 This statem ent of the law appearing in the eleventh edition of Phipson
     at § 1561 was approved by the Court of Appea! in R. v. Fotheringham [1975] C rim .L .R . 710;
     119 S.J. 613. in which the judge's direction that a co-defendant giving evidence for the
     prosecution who said he could not remem ber what happened next be shown a statem ent
     which he had made to the police 2 2 days after an offence of rape, was upheld.
        72 R. v. A ntrim [1895] 2 Ir.R . 603; cf. Shorn v. Robinson, 63 J.P. 295.
        73 R. v. Architects' Registration Tribunal [1945] 2 All E .R . 131.
        74 R. v. Cain, 25 C r.A p p.R . 204, 205: R. v. Gilson. 29 C r.A p p .R . 174. 181; R. v.
     Bateman, 31 C r.A p p .R . 106; R. v. Williams [1965] Crim .L.R . 609; Jones v. N .C .B . [1957] 2
     ( ^ 5 5 . R. V . Clewer (1953) 37 C r.A pp.R . 37; R. v. Perks [1973] C rim .L .R . 388; R. v.


•    in to n i n g and Others [1974] C rim .L .R . 714.
                v. Rebbett (1931) 23 C r.A p p .R . 112.
        * R. v. G unning [1980] Crim .L .R . 592.
        77 R. v. Ptophopoulos [1968] C rim .L .R . 52; R v. Leggett and Others [1970] 1 Q .B . 67.
        78 R- v. Leggett, ante; R. v. Clewer. ante. R v. Wilson [1979] R .T .R . 57 (C .A .).
           R. v. Hulusi; R. v. Purvis (1973) 58 C r.A p p .R . 378. For anoth er exam ple, see R. v.
     Browning and Others, The Times, September 14, 1976 in which the Court o f Appeal held
     that the judge did not depart from his proper province. See also R . v. Matthews and
     Matthews (1984) 78 C r.A pp .R . 23 (C .A .).

                                                  259]
         12-29                          C h . 12— R u l e s o f E v i d e n c e                                                        T h e E x a m in ,


         C ourt o f A pp eal quashed a conviction w here the ju d g e ’s interventions                   allow ed w h en the party tendei
         w e r e such as to invite the jury to disbelieve ev id e n c e for the defen ce so              surprise.™
         strongly that the effect could not b e cured by telling the jury that they
                                                                                                         C   r im in a l   P   r o c e e d in g s   91
         w e r e jud ges of fact. T he jury m ay, to a limited ex te n t, ask q u estion s.80 In
         practice the jury should be asked to form ulate their q uestions and the                           A sim ilar rule obtains in crii
         ju d g e should question the witness.                                                          d e fen ce , gives ev id en ce o f fresh i
            M agistrates in d om estic proceedings must if necessary exam ine or                        foresee. T h u s, in an old case*2 on
         cross-exam in e a witness (or cause that to be d o n e ), if a party is unable                 the prisoner had bought the prop
         e ffec tiv ely to do s o / 1                                                                   allow ed to d en y the p rison er’s sta;
                                                                                                        not to add that he had “s e e n the
                                                                                                        confirmatory o f the original charg
         Evidence in rebuttal; evidence on matters o f credit                                           that by Tindal C.J. in R. v. F rost
                                                                                                                “T h er e is no doubt that the
                                            (a) E v id e n c e in R eb u tta l                                  b egin s its case like a plaintifi
                                                                                                               support their case by calling f
                                                                                                               certain ev id e n c e that contrai
         C   iv il   P r o c e e d in g s                                                                      d en ce they have given. T h e y r



••
                                                                                                               begins; but if any m atter a
 12-30       E v id e n c e in reply, w'hether oral o r by affidavit, m ust, as a general rule,
                                                                                                               ingenuity can fo re see , o n the
         b e strictly confined to rebutting the d e fen d a n t’s case, and must not
                                                                                                               prisoner in a criminal c a se, i
         m e r e ly confirm that o f the plaintiff.82 Thus, w here the latter had closed
                                                                                                               m atter which so arose ex im p r
         his case without calling a d efen dan t w h o did not a p pear, the plaintiff was
                                                                                                               ev id e n c e o n the part o f the C
         n o t allow ed to call him in reply.83 S o , in an action on a bill, where
         in d o r sem en t to the plaintiff w'as in issue, his case resting on m ere proof of            T he court held that as in that cas
         the indorser's handwriting, and the d efen dan t, d en ying k n ow le d ge o f the            rebuttal was on ly marginally relev
         transaction, o r authority to sign, had ten dered ev id e n c e that the plaintiff           judge’s exercise o f his discretion t<
         w a s to o poor to give valu e, p roof by the plaintiff to rebut this was                    Sion o f the C row n which is clearly i
         e x c lu d e d as being m erely confirm atory.84 M o r eo v e r, w here the issues on        as part o f the p rosecu tion ’s case a
         the claim and counterclaim are identical, e v id e n c e in rebuttal cannot be               evidence for the defence: R . v. L e
         ca lle d , as it must necessarily be confirm atory.85 With the ju d g e ’s leave,            court had in m ind that there are
         rebu ttin g evidence m ay be called by the plaintiff in an sw er to evidence of              possession o f the C row n b e c o m e s (
         the defen dan t in support o f an issue, the p ro o f o f which lay upon him.*               tance o n ce the d efen ce has b een n
         T h e discretion may still be exercised in the p la in tiffs favour where the                whether it w as reasonable for the C
         n a tu re o f the defen ce b eca m e apparent during cross-exam ination of his               as part o f its case on the grounds th,
         o w n w itnesses.87 The judge, h ow e v er , has a discretion to admit further               or doubtfully re le van t.”95 A s to hov
         e v id e n c e either for his ow n satisfaction or w here the in terests of justice
         require it,® and confirmatory evid en ce in rebuttal will generally DC
                                                                                                         » f     " v fu rlo n g , supra; Rogers v. Me



••
                                                                                                         ,, to& by v. Dickinson, 4 C h.D . 24; R u d d ■
                                                                                                         ^ For rebuttal in m agistrates’ courts, see
             8,1R v. Lillyman [1896] 2 Q.B. 167, 177.                                                 I h h V ' SnmPson (1826) 2 C. & P. 418. F<
             81 Magistrates' Courts Act 1980, s.73.                                                   & p i t ° l PhlPson- viz-: R v. Priestley (191
             82 Gilbert v. Comedy Co.. 16 C h.D . 594; Trimlestown v. K em m is. 9 C. & F. 749. 781   &R          DV' heacley ( J 9 1 5 ) 5 D .L J . 332;
             83 B arker v. Furlong [1891] 2 Ch. 172.                                                                 v - B r‘ggs (1839) 2 M. & R. 195
             w Jacobs v. Tarleton, ante.
             85 Green v. Sevin, 13 Ch.D. 589.
                Williams v Davies, 1 Cr. & M. 464; Wright v. W ilcox, 9 C.B. 650; Penn v Jack, L-R
          E q . 314.
             87
                Shaw
                lpn u r v v. uBeck,
                               ccr^, o Exch.
                                     8 u a u i . 392.
                                                 ->7±..                                                 * n        ^ 50 C r-A pp.R . 198.
             88 D o e v. Bower, 16 Q .B . 805; B udd v. Davison, 29 W .R . 192.                               • v. L evy and Tail, ante, at p. 202.

                                                         [2 6 0 ]                                                                                        [2 (
                             T h e E x a m in a t io n o f W it n e s se s
                                                                                               12-32


   allow ed w h en th e party tendering it has b een m isled 1* or taken by
               Qi)
   surprise.

   C r i m i n a l P r o c e e d i n g s 9'
                                                                                                               12-31
      A similar rule obtains in criminal cases w h e n e v er the accused , in
   d e fe n c e , gives evidence o f fresh matter which the prosecution cou ld no
   fore see . T h u s, in an old ca s e * on a charge o f theft, the d efen ce b ein g tha
   [he prisoner had bought the property from A , A , called as a w itness, wa
   allow ed to d en y the prisoner’s statement for this was strictly rebu ting u
   not to add that he had "seen the prisoner steal it’ for this w as merely
   confirm atory o f the original charge. The classic form ulation o f the rule is
    that by Tindal C.J. in R. v. Frost (1839)93:
           “T h er e is no d oub t that the general rule is that w here the Crown
           begins its case like a plaintiff in a civil suit, they can n ot afterwards
           support their case by calling fresh w itnesses b eca u se they are m et by
           certain evidence that contradicts it. T h e y stand or fall by             e: e
           d en ce they h a v e g iv e n . T h ey must close their case before the d efen ce
           begins; but if any matter arises ex im p ro viso , which n o hum an
 ^ ^ f c n g e n u i t y can fo r e se e , on the part of a defen dan t m a civil suit, or a
 ^ ^ p r i s o n e r in a criminal case, there se e m s to b e n o reason w hy the
            matter which so arose ex im p ro viso m ay not b e answered by contrary
            evidence on the part o f the Crown.
                                                                                                                1 2 -3 2
        T h e court held that as in that case the ev id e n c e sought to be adduced in
      rebuttal w a s only marginally relevant they w ould not interfere with, the
      judge’s exercise o f his discretion to admit it. A ll evid en ce m th e p o sses­
      sion o f the Crown w hich is clearly relevant to the lss“ eshmus2 i tfedddUafCte r
      as part o f the p rosecu tion ’s case and cannot properly b e admitted after
      evidence for th 'e d efen ce: R. v. Levy omf T a i t It is subm itted that the
      court had in m ind that there are m any cases w here evidence m the
       possession o f the C row n b ecom es of m uch greater relevance and im por­
       tance on ce the d efen ce has b een revealed. T h e test w ould appear to be
       whether it w as reason able for the Crown not to have called that evid en ce
       as part o f its case on the grounds that it was only “marginally, minimally
       or doubtfully relevant .”95 A s to how the rule applies w hen the jud ge calls


         * Barker v. Furlong, supra; Rogers v, Manley, 42 L.T.
m ^ ^ B i g s b v v. Dickinson, 4 C h.D . 24; Budd v. Davtson, ante; ^          W / « « , 9 C B.
W ^ F o r rebuttal in magistrates' courts, see Magistrates Courts Rules 1981 r. 13( ).
               v. Stimpson (1826) 2 C. & P. 418. Further illustrations a r =set ou^     5 16H    the
        U t h e d .o f Phipson, viz.: R. v. Priestley (1910) 3 C r.A pp . .        4 Vm w o rr/i0 8 3 8 )2 M
        & P. 299: R. v Wheatley (1915) 5 D .L J . 332; per contra see B n g g sv .A yn sw o rth (1838) M.
        & R. 168: R. v. Briggs (1839) 2 M. & R 199.              _                               M cMahon
          ” 9 C. & P. 129.159, adopted in R. v. Harris (192/) 20 C r.A p p .R . 8 6        , . ■         ^
        (1933)24C r.A p p .R . 9 5,9 7;/?. v. L id d le (1928)21 C r- A P P R - 3 . 13- a"  • 5g4^ nd R v
        Cr.App.R. 168,172. The rule was applied in R. v. Cieghorn 11967) „ Q . -
        Joseph (1971) 56 C r.A p p .R . 60.
          *        SOrV A n n R
 12-32                      C h . 12— R u l e s o f E v i d e n c e


a w itness, se e infra. Lord G o d d a r d , co m m en tin g 9*’ on the rule laid d o w n
by Tindal C .J., said that it is probably in w ider lan guage than w ou ld b e
used at th e present day.
      “In C ripp err9; t h e court said in terms that they did not p rop ose to
      adopt th e la n g u a g e o f that jud ge and they con sid ered that th e rule
      laid dow n in th e se term s might in so m e cases place an unfair burden
      on counsel fo r th e p rosecution and that it was a q u estion for the
      judge . . . to d e ter m in e in his discretion w heth er the ev id e n c e , not
      having b een t e n d e r e d in ch ie f ought to b e given as abetting
      e v id e n c e .”*

T h e Court o f A p p e a l in R. v. M illik en 99 described Lord G o d d a r d ’s
ob servation s as a v alu ab le p r o n o u n ce m e n t upon this so m e tim e s u n n ec es­
sarily thorny t o p ic . 1 In M illik e n 2 the trial j u d g e ’s ruling to allow an
application to call e v id e n c e in rebuttal was upheld. W inn L.J. said3:
      “W h ere the e v id e n c e sou ght to b e introduced in rebuttal is itself
      e v id e n c e p rob ative o f the guilt o f the d efen dan t and w h e n it is
      reasonably f o r e s e e a b le by th e p rosecution that s o m e gap in the p roof
      o f guilt n eed s to b e filled by e v id e n c e called by th e p rosecu tion , then
      generally sp eak in g t h e court is likely to rule against the closin g o f any
      such gap by rebuttal e v id e n c e 4; but . . . th e e v id e n c e here w as not
      e v id e n c e in any s e n s e p rob ative o f th e guilt o f the d efen d a n t, since it
      really con sisted o f n o m o re than denials o f the accusation s o f co n sp i­
      racy and c o n c o c tio n o f the charge m ad e by the d efen d an t in his ow n
      ev id e n c e . . . th e e v i d e n c e w as to disprove the truth o f th e d efe n c e
      which itself c o n siste d o f an affirm ative attack upon th e credibility
      and h o n e sty o f the p o lic e o ffic e r .’"
S e m b le that this d ecision d o e s not offen d against the rule prohibiting
contradiction on collateral m atters (§ 1 2 -3 3 ) b eca u se the m atters alleged
a m o u n te d to bias. O t h e r w is e th e d e f e n c e sh ould not have b een allow ed
to p ro v e them .
    T h e C ourt o f A p p e a l h as again con sid ered th e expression “ex im p r o ­
v is o ” and has reiterated that th e p rop er test is w h e th er the prosecution
cou ld reasonably have f o r e s e e n that the particular p iece o f ev id e n c e was
n ecessary to prove th e ca s e ; it is a m atter for the discretion o f the trial
jud ge w h e th er that test is sa tisfied .5 T h e p rosecution are ex p e c te d to react
reason ably t o pre-trial w arn in gs o f m atters likely to be raised, but not to


  * In R. v. Owen {1952] 2 Q -B . 362, 366.
  97 (1911) 5 C r.A p p .R . 255.
      Per L ord G odd ard in R. v. O w en, ante 36 C r.A p p .R . 16, 19.
  * ( 1 9 6 9 ) 53 C r.A p p .R . 330.
   1 Ibid. A t p. 334.
   J A nie.
   < Ante,-ax p. 333.
   4 See also Winn J . in R. v. R ice [I963J 1 Q .B . 857, 867, 8 6 8 . ante, § 11-29.
   5 R v. Scott (1984) 148 J.P. 731; R. v. Harrington (1984) 6 C r.A p p .R .(S .) 182.

                                            [2 6 2 ]
                             T h e E x a m in a t io n o f W itn esses               12-33

take notice o f “fanciful and unreal” statem ents, ev e n , as in o n e case, in
the form o f a letter from the defen dan t to the D .P .P . before trial .6
  W h ere p roceedings are not upon indictment the general principles set
out in the authorities will, o f cou rse, apply. In trials upon indictm ent, the
calling o f evid en ce in rebuttal o f alibis is now governed by the Criminal
Justice A c t 1967, s . 11 (se e § 1 1-14 , ante}.
   T h e d efendant is less often entitled to give rebutting evid en ce since,
k now in g the w itness’s statem ents or d ep ositions, h e can give it in defen ce
A s in civil cases, h o w e v er , the judge m ay, w hen the interests o f justice
require it. admit ev id e n c e in rebuttal although it was available in chief. In
a case in which the R eco rd er called a w itness after the prosecution closed
its ca se, it was held that h e was w ron g to refuse the defence an adjou rn ­
 m ent to enable rebuttal evid en ce to b e called .s
    W h ere a rebuttal o f relevant evid en ce has b een improperly refused in a
 civil case, a n ew trial may be gran ted .9 S em b le that in a summary trial o f a
 criminal case this w ould give th e prosecution th e right to appeal by case
 stated. R ebuttal o f irrelevant ev id e n c e will not b e a llo w e d .10
    For the principle that the p rosecution should call the evidence on which
 it intends to rely b efore the close o f its case and o m ission to call technical
l ^ i d e n c e , se e §§ 11-22, 11-28 to 11-29.


            (b) N o C on tradiction on C ollateral M atters; Five E x cep tio n s11


 (i)       T h e P r in c ip l e
    A party m ay n o t, in general, im peach the credit o f his op p on en t s                    12-33
 w itness b y calling w itnesses to contradict him as to matters o f credit or
 other collateral m atters, and his answers thereon will be co n clu siv e.12
 This rule is not absolute. T h e test w heth er a m atter is collateral or not is
 this: “if the answer o f a w itness is a m atter w hich you w ould be a llow ed on
 your ow'n part to p rove in e v id e n c e— if it had such a connection with the
 issues, that vou w'ould be a llow ed to give it in evid en ce— then it is a matter
 on w hich you may contradict h im .”13 T hus, w here an Irish w itness, who
 gave his evidence through an interpreter, denied on cross-examination
 that h e had sp o k e n English to two persons in court, it was held that his
 answer could not b e contradicted by calling those p erso n s.14 O n a petition


       R. v. Hutchinson (1985) 129 S J . 700.
       6
       R. v. Crippen [1911] 1 K.B. 149: R. v. Smith, 11 C r.A p p .R . 230.
       7
     8 R. v. Coleman, The Times. N ovem ber 21, 1987 (C .A .).
     ’ Maclaren v. Davis, 6 T .L .R 372.
    " R. v. Cargill [1913] 2 K.B. 271.
       Some writers list “previous inconsistent statem ents as a further exception. However
  both sections 4 and 5 of the 1865 Act refer to the “form er statement made by him [i.e. the
  witness] relative to the subject m atter of the indictment or proceeding.” See ante, § 12-24.
    12 Harris v. Tippett (1811) 2 Camp. 637. See, too. Palmer v. Trower (1852) 8 Exch. 247.
    u Per Pollock C.B. in An. -Gen v. Hitchcock (1847) 1 Exch. 91, 99.
    14 R. v. Burke, 8 Cox 44.

                                                 [2 6 3 ]
          12-33
                                    C h . 12         R ules o f E v id e n c e



          such an . , h        y reaSOn ° f an act ° f prior uscr 3 w a n e s , w ho proved
               an act having stated on cross-exam ination that there were also o fh P
          was not allow ed to be contradicted, such other acts b e L g S ^ ^



       P           =         =               £             S               S              =              S                 1
                            pr° StltUte’ S,nce the form er fact w en t to sh ow bias >6
      S e x u a lO f f  T    merCly collatera] !7 Similarly, it w as held before the
      Sexual O ffen ces A m e n d m e n t A ct 197618 that the d e n h k n f « r.
      «■ a case o f rape as to her e o „ „ e c ,,o „ wi, W „ o . h e h a l T "*
      can n ot be contradicted"                                        t? an !he Pn s ° n e r
      can n ot be contradicted" (although evidence w u l d b e c a l l e d t o X w ° h *
      &he is a prostitute since this went to c o n se n t.2" or se m b le that she          r




               -               ------- , v „ l u l v l ^   wiiudUlCiea,*'
          N n r na n o            l _          .




    » s      F z report dc,rim“ ,“' '»
    r„es     S i 7
             •           ^    Whai he Sh0“'d haVC d» ™        >" *■>” ,£
        ess, L ook dt this paper: do you still ad here to vour answer?’-*

    SinceTh“    r al leave
    sin ce the trial,    l e T r>,,tomcross-exam
                                      a ' ,er        " * w* itness
                                                 ine the     ’ m erel!'
                                                                   th e rehas
                                                                           on co m e lo iieht
                                                                              m av       •
    on ap peal, even though, had it been know n w itn esses cou ld not
    b een called at the trial to prove it In m anv « T                              ° l haVe
    will be o ^ e r e d , as the b e S way to                                      ™ « *
       f   ®,cu tles which the question o f w h e th er a m atter is relevant or
 m er ely ^ l a t e r a l m ay cause is illustrated by tf. v . B u s l } ™ £ p o l Z


     16c e H. aSger>macher s Patents [1898] 2 Ch. 280
     17s e e § 12-34. infra.
     ” Thom as v. David, 7 C & P 350


connection may affect paternity. (2) where s h ’ rf.8*                 r} ] 1 ,n affiliation cases when such
the d e fe n d a n t./?. \ . RHey{\$H7) 3 8 0 B D 481^               P p ' ,0Uo voJuntar>’ intercourse with
Leeds Assizes (Veale J ):           v          f , ^ 5 7 Cr                                  1 W .L.R. 1303.
S     18-60.                                 ‘ ( l y / 3 ; 5 7 C r A PP R 466 a n d a u t h o n t 1e s c , t e d p o .w.

C .C .R . 3 ^     ’P   ^ : ^ a’bankS l m 9 ] C n m L R - 450^ * V- H olm es {, 8?1 j L .R J
      ^ v. Krausz. ante.
      Tolm an v. Johnstone. 2 F. & F. 66.
  ~ E lton V. Larkins. J C. & P. 385, 3 9 0

as to the adm“s^biHK of jwlice r e p o m ^ e ^ v*‘l 6° * h '               1194412 A “ E R 299:
  ^ R v. H a m i l t o n ^                                                  ^ Cox 419.
   _ Piotrowska v. Piotrowski f 19^8] 1 W L R 7 9 7                             1489.
  • 0 9 8 2 ) 74 C r.A p p.R . 79. If. R I , M a r ^ m « 83 C r.A p p .R . 16?.
f   ■

                                         T h e E x a m in a t io n o f W it n e s s e s                   12-34

          officers w ere cross-exam ined in that case with a v ie w to establishing that
          they had fabricated remarks attributed to the defen dan t and had threa­
          tened a p otential witness to stop him giving evid e n c e. T h ey d en ied the
          allegations. W h en the defence sought to call the w itness, the prosecution
          objected to his giving evidence about the p olice visit. T he judge ruled that
        - the ev id e n c e w en t io crcdit only and ex clu d ed it. The court o f A p p eal
          held that this ruling w as wrong. The Court said that the evidence went to
          an issue to be tried, namely whether the police officers w ere prepared to
          g o to im proper lengths to secure a conviction.

          (ii)    E   x c e p t io n s


          (1) B ias o r p a rtia lity

               Facts sh o w in g that the witness is biased or partial in relation to the                         12-34
           parties or the cau se may be elicited on cross-exam ination: or, if d en ied ,
           in dependently proved-*; e.g. that a fem ale w itness is the kept mistress of
           the party calling h e r ,29 or that the witness had suborned false w itnesses
           against the o p p o site party,30 or has had quarrels with, or expressed
    ^ ^ t o s t i l i t y tow ards, h im .31 So, the fact that the w itness has accepted a bribe
    w M k e s t i f y m ay, if d en ied , be proved.32 though a previous admission by the
           witness that he had b een offered a bribe c a n n o t,33 and a denial by the
           accused’s daughters that they had b een “s c h o o le d ” by their m oth er to
          give evid en ce against him upon a charge o f incest will render admissible
           evidence to the contrary.34
             In R. v. M e n d y 3* the facts were as follows. D urin g the course o f the trial
         o f the appellant on a charge o f assault a man in the public gallery was seen
         by a constable in court to be taking notes while a prosecution w itness was
         giving ev id e n c e ab ou t the assault. T he man then left the court and the
         sam e constable and a court official saw him sp eak ing to the ap pellan t’s
         husband, apparently describing the w itness’s e v id e n c e to him. W?hen the
         husband gave ev id e n c e he denied that the incident with the man had
         occurred. T h e p rosecu tion were allowed to call the constable and the
         court official in rebuttal. The Court of A p p e a l upheld that decision. The
         husband, the e v id e n c e suggested, was prepared to learn what a p rosecu ­
         tion witness had said so that he could the m ore convincingly describe how


         , , Mol „ „       H uchcock, 1 Exch. 91: Dunn v. Aslett (1838) 2 M. & R. 122: R. v Shaw
         UgSa) 16 Cox 503
               {Thomas v. D avid, ante.
             W The Queen's Case. 2 Brod. & Bing. 311-315: A tt.-G en. v. Hitchcock, ante.

         (BraWn'j )          ’^    ^     ^               ^           f i 9?0) C r i m L R   583(Bnstoi Ass!zes)
              Att.-Gen. v. H itchcock, ante
           33 Ibid.

         that th V          0 9 3 6 ) 26 C r. App. R. 17. The wording of the judgment appears to implv
         ^     ne contradictory evidence will be received as evidence o f the truth of the facts stated in
           35
                (1976) 64 C r.A p p .R

                                                          [265]
              12-34
                                            C h . 12                 R u l es o f E v id e n c e




             zr ™
             the appellant was not responsible for the acw i.lf a                                                     u

                               t ode f e a' ,          h         e        < « « * » « p™s;                  S        :    :       d sh ™ r „ f


             c o n t r a d , ^ ™ ^ ' ! 1^                                                                           cali e ,,d e „ c e to

             £ £ £ ? ,ha' bc                     15

           (2 )       P reviou s con viction


* 35      «»“                 *££          h e t : t m in * ! *
          a n d 1f h e e„ he I dc„,cs „ r d o e s n o ^ "
                                                                                                 —       - T                         - s ,
                                                                                                                                  offOT« ;
         cross-examining party m av prove such m                                                 I orreJ u^          to answ er, the
         circumstances under which it took place 19ThC ^                                                    • t0gether with the

                                                £ 01he™iSe                                   irr: i^ ^ ; Cto°tnhemS ubee» ele'
         Ac . 197, „ hl c hi            ^              ^              .        o             n       o          ,         Offenders
          sp en t       convictions ( s . 4 ( l ) ) unless the                               rehabll,tated p e r s o n ” about
        cannot be d one in ?he case                    e x c em bv refe"°Urt 1SKSatisfied that “justice
        4 (1 ) d oes not apply to                                        " T thereto (s -7 (3 » - S e c t i o n
        subject o f a P r a c t i c e D i r e c ^ n t L u e d bv / h ^ i         Which are the
       3 0 ,1 9 7 5 . The Practice D i r e ^ o n Z ^ l I ^               C hjef Just^ on June
       m ade to a spent conviction if it can reaTn w * n o r e f e r e n c e s h o u id b e
       that no reference should be m ade in o n " 3 *                    a vo,ded and provides
        w ithout the authority o f the judge “w hich" ?                                          r‘ l° 3 Spent COnv'iction ,
        unless the interests o f ju stic e so reauire” ^                                              Should not b e g iv e n ’
       rehabilitated for the purposes o f the A r t '                                                 A person b eco m e s '
       js then spent) w h e n V h T ^
       length o f which d epends on the seriousne                                          f ^           e ^ab***tation, the
     rehabijiiaiion p e n 'd s are "                                                   e                        ,                             '
     men, f„r m            and ,mprisonnwnt                                                                     * imprison-               ;
     from rehabilitation.                                                                   n 30 m °n th s are excluded                    V.

   (3)       E vid en ce o f reputation f o r untruthfulness                                                                                  !


  bears such a general r e ^ u t ^ i o V f o T u n t r u t M " ! ^ T                                 adversarv's witness
  ^ P ^ j e n e riillv) .ha, he fe unw orlhv ^ d i ?                                                 u ff te '^               7     1°'

       ;* Ibid. a! p. 6.
       ^ As to whom, see Chap. ],s.
         Crifninai Procedure Act                «. ^       u l

 S       S        K                        '»*> i
     *. „ee Ri \ Bf e rfiS^l ] O B. 797. m
        H a rd y. Smfield ( i m i j 49 I    1   n P 6Q* u                  .       •
 rouns"
  ° 'S' ^ ,n* "                                                                                prmClfby
                                                                     - H - l i k e K to he approved  llethe
                                                                                                         hldappeilaie
                                                                                                             d° ™ bv                              j
        a . v. Brown. L R I C C R ->n. c.
 Commissioner o f Metropolitan p '{k                                       e                         63 ^       « * Toohey v.
                          T h e E x a m in a t io n o f W it n e s s e s             12-37


    practice the question is shortened thus: “From your k n o w le d g e o f the
    w itness w'ould you b elieve him on his o a t h ? ” In R. v. R ich ard son and
    L o n g m a n ,* 2 Ed m un d D avies L.J. sum m arised the position:

              “ L A w itness may be asked w h e th er he has k n o w le d g e o f the
           im pu gned w itness’s general reputation for veracity and whether
           (from such k now ledge) he w ould b eliev e the im pu gned witness's
           sw orn testim ony.
              2.      T h e w itness called to im peach the credibility of an o th er witness
           m ay also express his individual op inion (b ased upon his personal
           k n o w le d g e ) as to w hether the latter is to be b elieved upon his oath,
           and is not con fined to giving an op inion b ased m erely on general
           re p u tation .”41

       T h e im peaching w itness, cannot, in direct ex a m in a tio n , give particular
    instances o f the other's falsehood or d ish on esty, since no man is supposed
    to c o m e prepared to defend all the acts o f his life. Bu t. u pon cross-
    exam ination he m ay be asked as to his m ea n s o f k n o w le d ge o f the other
    w itness, his feelings o f hostility towards him , or w h e th er , in spite o f bad
    character in other respects, the im p each ed w itness has not preserved his
    reputation for truth; and the answers to these q uestions can n ot be c o n ­
    tradicted.44 T h e im peaching witness should c o m e from the locality o f the
    other, and not be a stranger sent exp ressly to learn the latter’s
    reputation.45

    (4) M ed ica l evid en ce affecting reliability o f w itn e ss’s evid en ce4*'

       In a proper case, if a witness is suffering from a m ental disability it may
    be perm issible to call psychiatric evid en ce to show that the witness is
    incapable o f giving reliable e v id e n c e, but such e v id e n c e can n ot be called
    when the purpose is not to establish scientific fact but to establish or
    challenge credibility and thereby take ov er the function o f the jury. In
    T o oh ey v. C o m m issio n e r o f M etrop olita n P o lic e ,4 the H o u s e o f Lords
    held that “medical evidence is admissible to sh ow that a w itness suffers
    from so m e disease or defect or abnorm ality o f mind that affects the
    reliability o f his evidence. Such evidence is not con fin ed to general
    opinion o f the unreliability o f the w itness, but m ay give all the matters
    necessary to show not onlv the foun dation o f and reason for the diagnosis


%                                   ___________________________________

      42 (1968) 52 C r.A p p .R . 317.
      ” A t p. 323.
         R. v. Gunewardenc [1951] 2 K B . 600: ft. v. Richardson and Longm an, ante.
         Mawson v. Hearismk, 4 Esp. 103.
         See Pattenden, “ Conflicting A pproaches to Psychiatric Evidence in Criminal Trials:
     England, C anada and Australia" [ 1986] C rim .L .R . 92.
       4 Ante.
12-37                      C h . 12 — R u l e s   of   E v id e n c e


 bat a lso the extent to w hich the credibility o f the w itn e ss is a f fe c t e d .”48 In
 R . v. Eades*9 N ie ld J. allowed the p ro se cu tio n to call in rebuttal a
 consultant psychiatrist to prove that the d efen d a n t's accoun t of h o w he
 had re covered his m em o ry after an accident w as not consistent with
current m ed ical k n ow led ge.
    D iffe re n t circum stances prevailed in L o w e r y v. i? .50 T h e Privy C ouncil
there h eld that ev id e n c e o f a psychiatrist had b e e n p rop erly adm itted.
T h e psychiatrist had ex a m in e d both d efe n d a n ts, K. an d L. B o th b lam ed
th e o th e r fo r killing a girl and suggesting th e killing. T h e psychiatrist was
ca lled by K . and said that L. was the m ore aggressive and d om in an t o f the
tw o . T h e B oard said that in the special circ u m stan c es o f the case the
e v id e n c e w as relevant and necessary for K . ’s c a s e which in volved n egativ­
ing what L. had said .51
    H o w e v e r L o w e r y sh ou ld be seen as a d ecisio n b a sed on its o w n nar­
row ly d e fin e d facts. T h e Court o f A p p eal said in R , v. Turner'2 that
L o w e r y w as not “authority for the prop osition that in all cases p sy ch o l­
ogists and psychiatrists can be called to p rove the probability o f the-
ac c u s e d ’s v e r a c ity .”5' In that case the court u p h eld a ruling that p sychia­
tric e v id e n c e w a s not admissible in the fo llo w in g circum stances. T h e
d efen d a n t w as charged with murder and his d e f e n c e w as p rov o ca tio n . H e
sought to call a psychiatrist to say that he w a s not suffering fro m a m ental
illness but that his nature w as such that he cou ld have b e e n p ro vok ed in
th e circum stances o f the case. The court saw that issues b oth o f p ro v o ca ­
tion and credibility were for the jury to d ecide and they d id not n eed the
ev id e n c e o f a psychiatrist to h elp them d ecid e if the d e f e n d a n t was telling
th e truth.
    In R. v. M c K e n n e y a n d O th ers54 M ay J. ruled that th e d e f e n c e could not
call a p sych ologist to sh o w that the principal p ro se c u tio n w itn ess was a
p sych opath and that lying is a characteristic a sso c ia ted w ith p sychopathy.
T h e learn ed jud ge held that if the witness was m en tally cap a b le o f giving
reliable e v id e n c e it was for th e jury to decide w h e th e r in fact h e w as doing
so.

(5) C r im in a l Ju stice A c t 1 98 8 , Sch edu le 2

  W h e r e a state m e n t is a d m itted in evidence in criminal p roceedings
und er se ctio n s 23 or 24 o f the 1988 A c t , Ma




  * T o this extent therefo re. R v. Gunc-wardene ante, is overruled.
  49 [1972j C rim .L .R . 99 (N ottingham Assizes).
  50 (1974) A.C. 85. 58 C r.A p p .R . 35, cited ante. §S 17-27 to 17-29.
  M Ibid. (1974) A .C . 85 at p. 103.
  5: [1975] O .B . 834. 60 C r.A p p .R . 80.
  5:1 Ibid. (1975) O .B . 834 at p. 842.
  M (1980) 72 C r.A p p .R . 78.                                   \
       Fo r s.23, see, ante, § 10-27 and for s.24. s e e .post, § 23-12.

                                            [268]
                        The E   x a m in a t io n o f   W   it n e sse s          12-38

   “ (a) any ev id e n c e which, if the person m aking the statem ent had
         b een called as a witness, would have been admissible as relevant
         to his credibility as a witness shall be admissible for that purpose
          in those proceedings;
     {b ) evrdence m ay, with the leave of the court, be given o f any matter
          w h ich , if that person had been called as a witness, cou ld have
          b een put to him in cross-examination as relevant to his credibil­
          ity as a w itness bui of which evidence could not have b een
             ad du ced by the cross-examining party; and
         (c) ev id e n c e ten d in g to prove that that person, w h e th er b efore or
             after m aking the statement, made (w hether orally or not) som e
             o th er state m e n t which is inconsistent with it shall be admissible
             for the p urpose o f showing that he has contradicted him self.



                               (c) Re-establishing Credit



    W here a w itn e ss’s general reputation for veracity has b een attacked,                 12—38
 his character m ay b e sustained either, as we have seen , by cross-exam in-
f k the im peach in g w itn esses as to their m eans o f k n ow led ge, grounds of
 qTinion, hostile feelin gs towards the other and the like; or by in d e p e n ­
 dent general e v id e n c e that the im peached witness is worthy o f credit. It
 seem s doubtful h o w far independent evidence of the latter d escription is
 admissible w here m erely particular discrediting facts have b een elicited in
 cross-exam ination or proved against a witness. Such ev id e n c e h as, in­
 d eed , b een received in reply to proof both o f subornation5^ and of
 previous con viction o f crim e5*’; but in a later case, w here the character o f a
 witness had b een im p each ed on cross-examination, general ev id e n c e of
 this kind, ten d ered in rebuttal, was rejected.57 In any case, m er e con trad ­
 iction am o n g w itn e sses will not let in such e v id e n c e ,58 nor will p roof of
 previous inconsistent statem ents let in. in general, contrary p ro o f of
 previous con sistent o n e s , although the inconsistent statem ents th e m ­
 selves may b e d isp r o v ed .59 (For statements rebutting allegations o f recent
 fabrication, see p o s t , § 12-60).




V                               ,                                    ;
   55 Anneslev v. Anglesea, 17 How.St.Tr. 1348. see also D u r h a m v. Beaumont, 1 Camp.
 207.
   5,1 R. v. Clarke, 2 Stark 241.
   51    Doev. Harris, 7 C. & P. 330, per Coiendgc J.; see also R. v. W o o d [1951] 2 All E.R.
 112 .
    * D u r h a m v. Beaumont, ante.
   59
    ’ R. v. Whelan, 14 Cox 595.

                                             [269]
           12-38                             C h . 12 — R u l e s o f E v i d e n c e


             A n im p each in g witness m ay. in his turn, be attacked either in cross-                                       |
           exam in ation or bv in depend en t gen eral e v id e n c e that he is unw orthy of
           credit, but n o further recrimination than this se em s allow ab le.61




                                            (d) The C ivil E v id e n c e A c t 1968




           W   it n e s s 's   P   r e v io u s   St a   tem ent   ,   if   Pro   ved   ,   to   be   E   v id e n c e   of

           F a c ts St a t e d


1 2 -3 9         “3.— (1) W h ere in any civil proceed in g s—
                  (a) a p reviou s inconsistent or contradictory statem ent m ad e by a
                      person called as a w itness in those proceedings is proved by
                      virtue o f sections 3 , 4 or 5 o f the Criminal Procedure A c t 1865; or

                  that statem ent shall by virtue of this subsection be admissible as
                  ev id e n c e o f any fact stated therein o f which direct oral e v id e n c e by
                  him w ou ld be admissible. . . . ”b'



           A d m is s i b i l i t y o f E v i d e n c e a s t o C r e d i b i l i t y        of   Maker,         e t c . of
           St a t e m e n t A d m i t t e d u n d e r S e c t i o n 2 o r 4

1 2 -4 0         “7.— (1) Subject to rules o f court, w here in any civil p roceed in gs a
                  state m e n t m ade by a person w h o is not called as a w itness in those
                  p ro ce ed in g s is given in ev id e n c e by virtue o f section 2 o f this A c t

                   (a) any ev id e n c e which, if that person had b een so called, w ould be
                       adm issible for the p urpose o f destroyin g or supporting his cred­
                       ibility as a witness shall be admissible for that purpose in those
                        proceed in gs; and
                   (b ) ev id e n c e tending to p rove that, w heth er before or after he m ade
                        that statem ent, that p erson m ade (w h ether orally or in a d o c u ­
                        m en t or otherw ise) an o th er statem ent inconsistent therewith
                        shall be admissible for the purpose o f show ing that that person
                         has contradicted himself:
                       “P rov id ed that nothing in this subsection shall en ab le ev id e n c e to


              H! R. \ W krtan. ante.
              •     Note s H .' Ku ! tb t provisions of which r e l a t e to the {actors to be considered in estim at­
            ing the w elsh:. li anv. to be attached to a statem ent admissible by virtue of s.3 (5 !.

                                                               [270 ]
Re: Hillsborough Inquest




Dr. Stephan Popper
Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield
S3 7ET

&

Messrs. Rothera, Solicitors
1. Provisional outline of questions which may need to be addressed at
   the Inquests as well as some thoughts on the questions which may be
   dealt with at the judicial inquiry with some indication where
   overlap may occur.

2.   Inclusion of a heading does not indicate the extent or depth of the
     investigation nor does inclusion of a heading indicate that that
     subject matter will in fact be explored or dealt with.

3. Terms of Reference:                   Lord Justice Taylor

     To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
     Hillsborough on 15th April and to make recommendations about the
     needs of crowd control and safety at sports grounds.

4. The coroner (and jury) shall diligently inquiry touching the                                       death
   and a true vedict give according to the evidence.

     Rule 36 of the Coroner's Rules provides that an inquest shall be
     directed soly to ascertain the following ....
     who the deceased was
     how, when and where the deceased came by his death
     registration particulars

     No opinion on any other matter to be expressed;                                  but see Rule 43.
     Coroner's Rules.


 Who.

1.   Id e n tific a tio n
      a . O p en in g o f i n q u e s t s
      b . S u p p le m e n ta r y in f o r m a t io n   r e g a r d in g nam es a d d r e s s e t c

2.   ? Background o f            deceased
      a . H isto r y                    NB p a r t i a l l y     part o f     "How"
       b.    T ravel                                        "
       c.    tim e o f a r r i v a l                        "
       d.    tic k e ts                                     "

 When

3.   H illsb o r o u g h    ground

4.   H o sp ita l

5. A m b u l a n c e ?

6.    D eath c e r t i f i c a t i o n

     a . b y whom
     b . w here
     c . when
 Where

7. Hillsborough

8. Hospital

9. Ambulance
   a . Crews
   b. correlation with hospital records

10. At Hillsborough

      a. were last seen
         alive
         Evidence from possibly
         i.    Video
         ii. Photographs
         iii. Friends
         iv. Others at the ground ?
         v.   Stretcher bearers

      b.    where found dead
            i.   In pen ? which
            ii. relationship to gate
            iii. relationship to broken barrier
            iv. In corridor

      c. movement of body around
         ground during resuccitation attemps
         or on death


 How

11. Medical cause of death

12. Position of deceased

       a.   upright
       b.   horizontal
       c.   buried
       d.   trampled
       e.   squashed

13. Positioning of barriers

14. Break of barrier
    a. timing
    b. relationship to surges
    c. relationship in time to
       gate opening
    d. effect on stability

15.        Construction and state of barriers

16.        Construction and state of fencing

17.        Construction and state of walls

18.Means of escape         from pens
19. Licencing of ground
    testing and siting
    of barriers etc.

20. Crowd density
    a. On terraces
        i. Prior to opening of gate
        ii. After opening of gate
    b . In tunnel
        i. Prior to opening of gate
        ii. After opening of gate
    c. Outer courtyard between turnstyle and tunnel
        i. Prior to opening of gate
        ii. After opening of gate
    d. Lepping Lane outside turnstyles A-G and Gate C
        i. Prior to opening of gate
        ii. After opening of gate

21.    Physics (explanation of mass movement)
       effect of
      c. Tunnel /slope
      d. directional effect of
         barriers
      c. Why more deaths in one pen than the other
      d. Effect of surges if any

22. Surges if any
    a. timings
      i.     relation to   break of barrier
      ii.    relation to   kick off
      iii. relation to     opening outer gate
      iv.    relation to   perception of problem

      b. how many

      c. number of fans involved

23. Capacity of tunnel

24. Gate control

?     ( turnsstyles
       danger of collapse
       crowd control
       error)

25. Stewarding
   a. Outside turnstyles
   b. outer area (between turnstyles and tunnel
   b. at and in tunnel
   c. pens
   d. directional notices

26. Recognition of problem by

      a.   Police
      b.   Stewards/club
      c.   Fans
      d.   Players
      e.   Referee
      f.   Paramedics
27. Crowd behaviour

       a. Numbers and behaviour
          i.    outside
          ii. within outer courtyard
          iii. within tunnel
          iv. on terraces
       b. effect of unauthorised entry
       c. effect of alcohol
       d. Noise
       e. conduct generally
          i. good
          ii. poor

The following matters are more for the inquiry rather than the
inquest and have only been recorded to indicate possible overlap
as well as matters which having occured to me may be raised at
at the inquest.

 Why

28. Size of crowd

29. Crowd behaviour                                    (27)
    a. Numbers and behaviour
       i . outside
       ii. within outer courtyard
       iii. within tunnel
       iv. on terraces
    b. effect of unauthorised entry
    c. effect of alcohol
    d. Noise
    e. conduct generally
       i. good
       ii. poor
    f. arrests
       i. before match
       ii. after match



30. Policing

  a. planning
  b. Effectiveness
     i. external crowd control
     ii. internal crowd control
  c. deployment
  d. communication
     i. inter force
     ii. between outside and inside of ground
     iii. between force and club
     iv. between force and teams/referee

31. Other preparation
       a.   FA (selection of ground)
       b.   Club.
       c.   provision of stewards
       d.   ticket allocation
       e.   prevention of fraud (unauthorised entry)
       f.   compliance with legislation
            i. ground safety
            ii. structures
            iii. alcohol
3 2 . P o s i t i o n i n g o f b a r r ie r s                   (1 3 )

33. Break of barrier                                             (14)
    a . timing
    b. relationship to surges
    c. relationship in time to
        gate opening
    d. effect on stability

34. Construction               and state of barriers             (15)

35. Construction               and state of fencing              (16)

36. Construction               and state of walls                (17)

37.     Means of escape              from pens                   (18)

38. Licencing of ground                                          (19)
      testing and siting
      of barriers etc.

39. Crowd density                                                (20)
      a. On terraces
          i. Prior to opening of gate
          ii. After opening of gate
      b . In tunnel
          i. Prior to opening of gate
          ii. After opening of gate
      c. Outer courtyard between turnstyle and tunnel
          i. Prior to opening of gate
          ii. After opening of gate
      d. Lepping Lane outside turnstyles A-G and Gate C
          i. Prior to opening of gate
          ii. After opening of gate

40.    Physics (explanation of mass movement)      (21)
       effect of
      c. Tunnel /slope
      d. directional effect of
         barriers
      c. Why more deaths in one pen than the other
      d. Effect of surges if any

41. Surges if any                                               (22)
      a. timings
        i.    relation             to   break of barrier
        ii.   relation             to   kick off
        iii. relation              to   opening outer gate
        iv.   relation             to   perception of problem

      b . how many

      c. number of fans involved

42. Capacity of tunnel                                           (23)
43. Gate control

?    ( turnsstyles
      danger of collapse
      crowd control
      error)

44. Stewarding
   a. Outside turnstyles
   b. outer area (between turnstyles and tunnel
   b. at and in tunnel
   c . pens
   d. directional notices

45. Recognition of problem by

    a.   Police
    b.   Stewards/club
    c.   Fans
    d.   Players
    e.   Referee
    f.   Paramedics


46. History of football behaviour
    a. Previous disasters
       i. Hillsborough
       ii. Elsewhere
    b. crowd control problems
    c. erection of fences

47. Allocation of ends

48. Reasons for delays at arrival
    a.   Police action earlier in day
    b.   roadworks
    c.   refreshment en route
    d.   acquisition of tickets enroute

49. Stadium location

50. Stadium design

51. First aid resources

52. Emergency service access


What (for the future)

53. Stadium locations

54. Stadium contruction and design

55. Maximum crowd sizes

56. Indentification of attenders
57. Crowd control
    i. Distant to stadium
    ii.Proximal to turnstiles
    iii. Within grounds but outside
         stadium proper
    iv. Internal crowd directional
         controls
    v . Stewarding


58. Crowd behaviour reform

59. Education

60. Considerations re:

    a.   barriers Numbers and locations
    b.   fencing hight, strength gates opening mechanisms
    c.   turnstyles and entry procedures
    d.   other means of crowd control within stadia
    e.   designation of specific safety officer to monitor crowds
         safety angle only

61. Emergency procedures

62. First aid provisions

63. Licencing of grounds
    i.   responsibility for
    ii. duties
    iii. powers

64. Command structure at major events

65. Improved survellance included timed videos

66. Control of alcohol

67. Responsibility for security and financing

68. Fundamental alterations eg
    i.   No spectators (TV coverage only)
    ii. Restrictions on visiting fans
    iii. Card schemes

 Whom (to blame).

66. No one

 67. FA.

 68. Club

 69. Police

 70. Licensing Authorities

 71. Fans

 72. Combination.
         INSTRUCTION TO COUNSEL - DR. MICHAEL POWERS




                     TO ADVISE




BADABT
                                                       Q O l




         INSTRUCTION TO COUNSEL - DR. MICHAEL POWERS




                     TO ADVISE




BADABT
INSTRUCTION TO COUNSEL

Dr.   Popper would like to thank Dr.     Powers for his

assistance on Monday,    19th November, when we discussed

briefly Mr.    Isaac's submission to have his client

^Superintendent Duckenfield) excused from attending and

giving evidence at the Inquest.

(Please note that the rest of this instruction is written

in the 1st person and refers to Dr. Popper.)

As Counsel will know, on Friday, 23rd November,     I, in fact,

turned that application down.     Mr.   Isaac's application was

based upon Rule 22,Section 14 Civil Evidence Act 1968 and

case law.fetot for the purpose of these instructions/         I

think I need only refer to the Westinghouse Electric

Corporation Uranium Contract litigation MDL Docket

No.235(No.2)   (3 All England Report 1977, page 717 onward).

In fact there were two hearings, one in the Court of Appeal

and the other in the House of Lords.     The House of Lords

Dec is ion ^reported in All England Report 1977 page 2 34 >2

I do not think it is necessary for me to set out all

quotations which were drawn to my attention, nor to recount

all the circumstances except to say that Rio Tinto Zinc

(RTZ) were resisting an application for the production of

documents in a case in Virginia on the grounds that

production of these documents would expos^.hem to an

increased risk of prosecution by the Commission for breach

of Article 85 because of the existence of a Cartel.       I

think on the whole the position can be summed up relatively




BADABN
                            -   2   -




easily by just a few quotations.        At page 437 House of

Lords decision)

     "(ii) The RTZ Companies were entitled to claim the

    privilege from the production of documents given by

     Section 14 (1) of the 1968 Act notwithstanding the

     Commission had knowledge of the Cartel and had not

     taken any action in respect of it for if the documents

    were produced under the letters .gogatory the RTZ

     Companies would be exposed to a greater risk of

     proceedings being brought against them by the

     Commission for recovery of a fine than they were at

     present since production of the documents might

     authenticate and support the existing information in

     the hands of the Commission and afford conclusive proof

     of a breach by the RTZ Companies of the prohibition

     against Cartels and might cause the Commission to

     decide to take action against the RTZ Companies".

Later on on page 445, Lord Wilberforce says at paragraph

(C )5 :—

     "I base that conclusion ..........       on the proposition

      that a tendency to expose to a penalty would be

      increased if the documents in question were to be

      validated and connected with the RTZ Companies by

      sworn evidence as opposed to being as they are now

      pieces of paper found in a file".




BADABN
                                -   3 -



 Mr. Isaacs then went on to say:-

         Sir, it won't have escaped you the difference between

     albeit the evidence that was given before Lord Justice

     Taylor was all taken down.       It was not evidence that

     was given on oath but, of course, the evidence before

     you would be given on oath".

 He then drew my attention to the part of the speech of Lord
 Diplock, page 465.

     "I do not think that your Lordships are entitled to

     dismiss as fanciful the risk that if the documents

    relating to the Cartel were produced at the trial of

    the Virginia proceedings and came as they then would

    into the public domain, the resulting publicity in this

    sensitive political field might result in pressure on

    the commission to take against the RTZ Companies

    speedier and severer action than they might otherwise

    have do ne ".

What Mr Isaacs, of course, was asking in his submission was

not that I should apply a rule against self-incrimination

(which I would in any event do and which I think he fully

accepted I would do) but for me to go one step further and

not call his client at all which is what, in fact, I

rejected.

However, in the course of his submission and perhaps in the

hopes that I might accede to what he was saying, he made




BADABN
 following suggestion

     'I finally say this and I know I have been on my feet

     for quite some time and I do not want to weary you

     further - that if it be felt necessary by you and both

    you and I know, sir, that there are no PACE statements

    or interviews by Mr. Duckenfield that the Jury must

    hear something about what Mr. Duckenfield said about

    the day, then, sir, upon instructions - and it is only

    on this basis that I put this - I have no complaint

    with what Mr. Duckenfield said to the Taylor enquiry

    going before the Jury.      I say that because that is all

    above the line as opposed to anything new below the

    line".

The reference to above and below the line is explained

earlier by Mr. Isaacs as follows

    "To use an expression that was mentioned to me some

    time ago and which I happily adopt.     The line was drawn

    and everything that has come above that line has meant

    that the Director has taken the view that there is

    insufficient evidence to prosecute.     My concern, so

    far as Mr Duckenfield is concerned is that there should

    be nothing below that line which might lead the

    Director to reconsider his decision".

For the sake of completeness,    I think I should add that




BADABN
Counsel for a large number of the bereaved families in the

end said that on the balance that he was of the view that

Mr. Isaacs proposal was the lesser of two evils, he would

be content to have the transcript admitted and M r .

Duckenfield not called.        As you already know, although this

in a sense meant that virtually everybody was in agreement,

I did not in fact accede to the request.

On the 30th October, before the Inquests were resumed I

held what I would call a Business Meeting with most of

the firms who are now appearing before me.        The object of

this meeting was to sort out procedural problems and try

and make the running of the Inquests a little bit

smoother.

In the course    of that meeting there were several

references to the transcripts and I set out below some of

the points.     I said:-

    "With regard to Lord Justice Taylor's report, if I can

    deal with that next, I do not intend to admit that

    report as part of the evidence at the Inquests.        The

    only way one could do that would be to read it totally

    and I don't think that would serve any useful purpose.

    Secondly,    I perceive it is going to cause more problems

    than it is worth if I did that, so I don't intend to

    admit it.     Similarly,    I do not intend to use the trans­

    scripts of the evidence of Lord Justice Taylor's




BADABN
   enquiry.   I am fully aware that you will have access to

   the transcripts, as indeed I have, and I would not be

   at all surprised if you looked through them with a view

   to seeing what people have said.    I would expect you to

   do that and I don't mind that provided your questioning

   is relevant to the Inquests.    What I would not permit

   is if, for instance, a witness were to exercise his

   right not to answer incriminating questions,   I would

   not permit you to put to that witness quotations from

   the transcripts so that, in fact, he could then

   exercise his rights not to answer question but in fact

   you had put what he had said.    I am going to use common

   sense, I don't want to muzzle you, I don't want to

   prevent you asking all proper legitimate questions in

   order that at the end of the day as far as possible you

   will feel you have had a fair chance so to speak but

   equally I intend to be fair to the witnesses as far as

    I am able to be so.   Although I don't intend to allow

   Lord Justice Taylor's report to be introduced as

   evidence, it is going to be very difficult not to refer

   to it from time to time.    Common sense will dictate

   where we draw the line.    I think it is also right that

   there may be the odd occasion where we will have breach

   what I have just said that we will have to use some of

    the transcripts but I think it will be a rarety."




BADABN
                                 -   7   -




Later on Mr. King, who represents about 4 3 of the bereaved

families said this to me:-

      "Sir, if I could just clarify the transcript evidence,

      you would have no objection as I understand it within

      the rules you have laid down as to privilege, the

      transcript being used in cross-examination of a witness

      as putting it to him if it be the case a previous

      inconsistent statement."

      My reply:   "yes, within certain limits"

      Mr. King:   "yes, of course".

      The Coroner:   "The difficulty is that the public enquiry

      was done on, if you like, slightly different premises

      from my powers, if you like, and those are the way I

      intend to run these Inquests and my main objective is

      to try and make sure we do things fairly which I am

      sure you would want also".

Mr King, of course, agreed with that.

Mr.    Isaacs who represents Mr.         Duckenfield spoke to me

with a comment on the transcripts.           He said:-

      Sir, may I ask you to clarify two points.          The first

      relates to the Taylor Report because as I understand

      what you said at the outset, the Taylor Report was not

      to be used at all save in-so-far as my Learned Friends

      and myself and other colleagues might actually agree

      certain facts that may or may not prove something that




BADABN
     can be done.     Assuming that that cannot be done, how

     far do you believe you will allow the use of the Taylor

     Report at all?    As I say, as I understand the answer,

     it was not going to be used but then I noticed when my

     Learned Friend Mr.    King was addressing you briefly,

     the impression I certainly got was that you were going

     to allow transcripts to be used for cross-examination

     purposes which was certainly not something I understood

     at the outset and would be something which - and I

     leave this to another time,   I would make submissions
    against.

    That is the first point.     The second is t h i s .......... "

This second point refers to video evidence.

I then dealt with the point of the Taylor Report and the

transcripts:-

    "The other point which you raised regarding Lord

    Justice Taylor's Report and the transcript.       I must

    confess I do find this quite a difficult problem.

    What I was trying to say is this.      It will be foolish

    of me to assume that you don't have the transcripts and

    that none of you are going to look at them because I am

    sure you are all going to do that, particularly as you

    no doubt have guessed, some of the witnesses are
               l(6* j*  tt-K* 1
                              ’
    inevitable^     We have got to call them because they are

    key players, shall we say, in this matter.       In that




BADABN
   sense it is unavoidable, as I see it, that people will

   use the transcripts to prepare their cross-examination.

   What I am not very keen on doing is (a) I certainly

   will not allow the transcript to put things to people

   so that one puts them in the position when they say

   they will not answer that question.     If I have put it

   to them that it is an incriminating question, then they

   have exercised their privilege not to answer, then I

   will not allow whoever it is to pursue them on that

   point by quoting to them from the transcript because I

   would consider that to be oppressive.

   However, it may well be that in certain other cases

   matters which are not really controversial, or even if

   they are controversial,     which had been dealt with

   sensibly and properly, it might be easier to put to the

   witness something that he said which he could then

   agree with or otherwise as the case may be.     I want to

   be flexible in this and I may have to modify my stance

   as we go along because it is only right for me to tell

   you that I have never ever conducted an Inquest of this

    size or complexity and I have to learn, like most of

   us probably have to, as to how to do it correctly.

    In that sense I have to reserve the right that I too

   may have to modify what I do.

    Have I helped you in any w a y ? "




BADABN
                                   -   10   -




 Mr. Isaacs

     "Certainly, you have sir".

 He than went on to say-

         As I understand it, that was the sort of example you

     were giving just a moment or two ago.        What I think my

     Learned Friend, Mr.        King, was saying was this.    That

     if a witness    'X' says    'X, Y and Z' and Mr King has a

     copy of the transcript which actually says       'A, B and

     C ', that Mr.   King should be permitted to say to that

    witness,     'wait a moment, you are saying 'X, Y and Z'

    but eighteen months ago you said 'A, B and C'.           What is

    the position here?     That is something we are used to in

    the normal civil process but not in my submission

    something which is necessarily at home in an inquest

    such as is being conducted."

The Coroner

    "My feeling on that point is simply this.        That what

    we are trying to establish is the truth as far as we

    are able.     it will depend entirely upon what the 'A, B

    and C' and 'X, Y and Z' are'".

The Investigating Officer in his report to the D.P.P.

dated 30th March 1990 dealt with a lot of things.        Inter

alia, he made the following points with regard to the

statements of witnesses obtained in a non-CJA form.          Itwas

his view that the recollections and statements collected




BADABN
this way were an efficient method of collecting for a

criminal investigation.    There several reasons for these

and I pick out the ones which I think were relevant:-

(a) They were not protected by the Criminal Justice Act.

(b) They may have been subject to review and editing by

    other people.

He then goes on to say:-

    "A related issue centres on the evidence taken from

    individuals at the Public Enquiry".       (These transcripts

    are referred to frequently throughout this report.)

    As far as witnesses are concerned, their accounts as

    recorded in transcripts have not been converted into

    statements.     It is also worth noting that the method

    adopted to obtain the evidence at the oral hearings

    through examination in chief, cross examination and

    re-examination was not subject to the rigours of the

    rules of evidence...

    The latter point is particularly relevant in respect of

    those who could be considered culpable.      At no time in

    supplying a recollection did any person indicate that

    he/she had been formally warned with a caution against

    self-incrimination.     Furthermore,   in giving evidence at

    the oral hearings no person was put on oath, nor was

    anyone warned about making statements which could




BADABN
   amount to self-incrimination, although it is

   appreciated that certain organisations did receive

   warnings in the form of Salmon letters.      This

   difficulty was possibly further compounded in the

   opinion of the Investigating Officer by legal

   representation at the hearings being afforded solely

   for the South Yorkshire Police and not to individual

   police officers or their representative bodies.      With

   all due respect to Queen's Counsel representing the

   South Yorkshire Police, there was clear potential for

   conflict of interests.

   Whilst there was no suggestion that in the absence of

   the administering of an oath, there was prevarication

   at the oral hearings/    nevertheless,    the admissibility

   of much of the evidence on which this report and

   supporting sections is based is to say the least

   questionable.   Indeed it is the opinion of the Investi­

   gating Officer that if a case is made out to undertake

   a prosecution based on the evidence so far adduced,

   much of it will have to be converted in some way in

   order for it to become admissible.       Without that being

    achieved - for example, an individual under caution

    refusing to answer questions or giving a different

    account - it is unlikely that the prosecution could

    succeed beyond committal."




BADABN
The comments th!a.t proceed to raise other difficulties with

regard to publicity and so on.

As you will recollect from our telephone conversations,

the offer so to speak by Mr Isaacs in relation to the

transcripts made me think about the matter further in

perhaps greater detail.       I came to the following

conclusion:-

That although the RTZ case was very interesting and

relevan t there was a difference between the documents which

were in the possession of RTZ, the contents of which had

merely iiave been disclosed to the Commission by, say,

'Friends of the Earth' and the transcript of the evidence

on Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry which had been made:-

    (i)      In public

    (ii)    By Mr Duckenfield or other person involved,

            personally and in public, and

    (iii)   Possibly could A r g u e d was already in the public

            domain.

    i.e.    it is already freely available and had, in fact,

    been made by the party himself whilst in the RTZ case

the arguments rested on the         fact that NO admissions had

been made by    RTZ at all.

It therefore    can be argued that the concession made by Mr

Isaac is not    a real one and furthermore that all of us

probably fell into the trap of considering the Inquest in
                                „   i*




BADABN
an adversarial aspect which, of course,   is not the case.

On the other hand, I think one has to consider the

following points

(a) Is it necessary/right that these transcripts should be

    before a Jury bearing in mind that they may well

    contain statements which in the normal course of events

   would be considered incriminatory?     This situation, of

    course, always arises when a Police Officer reads or

    plays a PACE statement.   The person concerned may well

   make incriminating comments and no objection to this is

    taken but for the reasons outlined by the Investigatid2»

    Officer and set out above, these latter statements

    (i.e. PACE statements) have been taken with the

    protection of the appropriate cautions.    If an

    individual having been duly warned exercises his right

    to say something which may, in fact, incriminate him,

    then so-be-it.   The point about the statements made by

    the individuals of LJT's enquiry was that they did not

    receive such warning at any time as far as one can

    tell.

(b) I am also very conscious that despite the distinction

    which I have drawn between the RTZ situation and the

    individuals, it is possible to take the view that

    because of the evidential deficiencies of the

    transcript of LJT's enquiry referred to by the

                              !   -




BADABN
       Investigating Officer that by obtaining or putting the

       statements to the witnesses in the Coroners Court on

       oath and with suitable warning, the replies would fall

       within the comments quoted above, i.e.

           "might authenticate and support the existing
                                               (J*~
           m f o r m a t i o n in the hands of .a-1Commission and afford

           the conclusive proof of a breach            " and that

           they "came as they then would into the public

          domain"   (what I have in mind here is that they

          would come into public domain in a different format

          or with a different status).         "the resulting

          publicity in this sensitive political field might

          result in    pressure on the Commission to take

           .......... speedier   or severer action".

You will see from the comments which were made at the

Business Meeting that I have been conscious of what I

consider to be a possible risk of self-incrimination if

matters which were admitted at LJT'S hearings were

re-admitted possibly at the Inquests.          Obviously if a

person is prepared to speak after suitable caution, that's

entirely up to him, or her.        What I am concerned about is

that I should get the legal position right with regard to

the use to which the transcripts of LJT's hearing could be

put.




BADABN
 I am aware from my conversation with you that you have felt

 that probably the transcripts could be used as part of the

 cross-examination and you also felt that it was quite

 likely that some of the people would,   in fact, wish to

 adopt them or to allow them to go in.    Alternatively, that

 they could be proved by a shorthand-writer or someone who

 heard them.   I agree with the latter point that that would

be possible but this still leaves me with the RTZ

difficulty or to use Mr.     Isaac's illustration, the

re-introduction of evidence which at one point is above the

line but which because of the different format, etc.,

becomes below the line.

Perhaps I should give you two more quotes on the various

judgments at page 721, paragraph (H), the Master of the

Rolls says:-

     once it appears that the witness is at risk then great

    latitude should be given to him in judging for himself

    of the effect of any particular question";

and page 725, paragraph :-

    "The Court should be slow to deprive that party of his

    privilege against self-incrimination which the Common

    Law allow for some three centuries and Section 14 of

    the Civil Evidence Act 1968 accord to him. In the

    absence of bad faith to say that there is no risk of

    proceedings may in all but the plainest cases involve a




BADABN
       Court claiming for itself a degree of prescient

       foresight to which it would not be wise to pretend for h

       its forecasts were wrong and if proceedings and

       penalties were to follow, damage may be done by an

       erroneous decision of the Court which it would not be

       easy thereafter to undo or redress".

In a nutshell,    I want to put before my Jury all appropriate

evidence which may enable them to reach a true and just

verdict.     At the same time, I feel it is my duty to ensure

that witnesses are not inadvertently prejudiced by an error

of law with regard to the admissibility or otherwise of

these transcripts.     Or to put it another way to balance the

need to have the facts put before the Jury with the

rights of the subject against self-incrimination.        This

matter, of course, basically only applies to those

witnesses who are at risk of self-incrimination.

So in a nutshells-

(i)      Are the transcripts in the same class as the RTZ

         documents?   If yes, presumably non-use.

(ii)     if there is a distinction between the transcripts and

         the RTZ documents, does the principle of the RTZ

         decision nevertheless apply.

(iii) Would the introduction of the transcripts which are

         in a weak evidential form elevate them into a

         different format and therefore increase the risk of




BADABN
       prosecution - another way of saying, would they be

       self-incriminatory.

(iv)   If the transcripts were introduced and read by some

       person who heard them would there be any point, as

       presumably they would not be evidence of the truth

       against the maker?    Would such introduction then not

       be merely highly prejudicial, and would it not be

       almost impossible to explain the distinction to the

       Jury?

(v)    Is there, in fact, a difference between a properly

       taken PACE statement which can be read out and the

       transcripts?



I would be grateful if I could hear from you with your

views on this as soon as possible.

Your help is greatly appreciated.

These instructions are sent to you direct with the consent

of Rothera, Solicitors.




BADABN
                         H I L L S B O R O U G H          S T E E R I N G        C O M M I T T E E


                                         c/o CastCe Chambers, Coo^Street, LivcrpooCL2 9SfH
                                           ‘Tet: 051 2550628 Ja^. 051 236 0047 ‘D X 14100



                                                                             Our Ref:        FEK.JW.INQUEST

           Dr. S.L. Pepper,                                                 Your ^
           H.M. Coroner,
           Medico-Legal Centre,                                             reply T O -
           Watery Street                                                           TO-
           Sheffield                                                        MISS KEMNftH'           HALL
           S3 7ET.




                 March 1991
f

           Dear Dr. Popper,

        Re: Resumed Ingnrets - Individual Ouerire


                        t f ^ w i S ^          i s - of                                           1—
        1.       Christopher F/faarrfa

        I note your decision and have advised the Edwards Family accordingly.
        2.— James Gary flspinall

       Noted.

       ^ ^_James Gary flspinall
''V.
       Noted.          I look forward to hearing from you Mith regard to the ticket.
              Adam Edward Spearritt-


       L     r     ;     r   ^   t   e     3   i   ^                 «•                      -   ■ * « * *
       5^     Phillip John Stfy»lp


       Slng^'to^tte7                                      relevant parts of Mr Boyle's statement

       contacts with Phillip and timings where ^ 1 ^ ^ “^                                          in
       6. Paul Brian Murray

       I note your decision and have advised the Family accordingly.

       7/8 Sarah & Victoria Hidks

       Noted.
    <£L

L-,Jo




j-fgPLJL) U   (^3CV
I have advised Mr Anderson accordingly.

7. Colin Mark Ashcroft
I am grateful for your     passing on Mrs   Ashcroft's concern to the West
Midlands Police.

3. Nicholas Peter Jaynes

I have advised Mrs Jaynes accordingly.

I am most grateful to you for the time and trouble    you   have   taken   in
connection with these individual family queries.

Yours sincerely,




F.R. Kennah.
                      c/o CastCe Chambers, Cool(_Street, LiverpooCL2 9S!H
                        <TeC: 051 255 0628 Jo*: 051 236 0047 D X 14100



                                                                 Our Ref:   FRK.JW.

Or. S.L. Etopper,                                               Xour tef:
H.M. Coroner,

S S i^ 5 wl.C0ntrB'                                             eeply to=
Sheffield                                                       MISS KO»«H. TOM) HALL
s# 7ET.


6th March 1991


Dear Dr. Popper,

Re: Paul Carlisle, Michael David Kellv. Pator M^rwmell

        VOU for your letter of 19th February 1991, the ocntents of              whioh   ^


I believe    that   you   intend calling p.c.            Maughan towards the end nf ».
S T S     the<case?tiCn * *     ** * * ' ^        “     perhaps * » °°“ ld « » * * »

Yours sincerely,




F.R. Kennah.
                                                                                        FR14 (5.3.91)
                                                                                                        H C 401
                                                                                                         (8.90)




ffljg S ffiffig K S                            West Midlands Police

TO                    Dr S.L. POPPER, H.M. Coroner                          REF
STN/DEPT

FROM                  Detective Superintendent BEECHEY                      REF
STN/DEPT                                                                    TEL/EXTN

                      MISS KENNAHS LETTER OF 3RD    JA N T T A P Y   1441
SUBJECT               INDIVIDUAL QUERIES                                    DATE       5th March, 1991



                      In respect of the above and your memo of 13th February 1991, concerning queries
                      regarding James Gary ASPINALL, Paul MURRAY, Nicholas Peter JOYNES and Colin
                      Mark ASHCROFT, the following enquiries have been made.

                      JAMES GARY ASPINALL

                      Checks have been made of all the photographic and video material and no further
                      visual evidence relating to the time between 1527 hours and 1545 hours in
                      regards to James could be found.

                      PAUL MURRAY

                      You have already indicated that Police Sergeant FOX will be called to give
                      evidence. The only photographs that Police Sergeant FOX is shown on is PR5/32
                      and video MAP9 both of which show Paul MURRAY being carried across the pitch.

                      NICHOLAS PETER JOYNES

                      The young Doctor mentioned has never been identified,   Mr THOMAS is being
                      called to give evidence at the Inquest.

                      COLIN MARK ASHCROFT

                      Mr and Mrs ASHCROFT have been contacted and have informed us that their Social
                      Worker is going to help them regarding their request but thank you for the
                      offer of assistance.




                      ■ST# 0SSQ2XSX--------------
                      Detective Superintendent
                      c/o Cos tCe Chambers, Coo^Street, LivcrpooC L2 9 S ^
                        TeC: 051 255 0628       051 236 004 7 <DX 14100




                                                                 Our Reference : FEK/LH


Dr S L Popper          .-
H M Coroner- for South Yorkshire
Medico Legal Centre
Watery- Street
Sheffield
S3 7ET




3rd January 1991




Dear Sir,

RE: RESUMED INQUESTS — INDIVIDUAL QUEPTES

We write further to o u r letter of the 19th December 1990 to provide you
with a summary of outstanding queries which have been raised by families
in connection with deceased individuals.

In a number of instances, family members are seeking amendments or additions
to the West Midlands Police1 Summaries.      We are enclosing copies of the
relevant' documentation but for your ease of reference will summarise
the amendments/additions and queries below:—                                 /
                                                                                    9, J.
Amendments/Additions to West Midlands Police Summaries
1-   Christopher- Edwards                                   ■"

     The Summary indicates that a number of named officers attempted to revive
"5. Christopher.        The Edwards family would like more information as to what
     Christopher's condition was when the various Officers attended him and
     also what* time- these attendences took- place.- The family would, like the .
     S u m m a r y amending to- reflect- these details and we enclose a copy of the
     specific question of the Edwards1 for your consideration.          It m a y be
     that'the-various Officer's statments may provide the information the
     Edwards' desire-                                                     ...

2.   James Gary Aspinall                                                     <
     The Aspinall family are concerned about what happened in 'the time b e t w e e n -
     James being identified on the pitch,, ie. 15.27, and being certified dead
     at 15.45.   Is there1 any other visual evidence which may account for the
     missing 18 minutes and can the summary be amended to reflect to this.        A
     copy o f Mrs Aspinall's letter of the 15/11/90 is enclose^ for your
     information.                     •
  J o n a th a n Owens

 The Owens family would like the Summary amending to reflect that Jonathan
 together with his friends, Peter Birckett and Michael Robertson, were in
 a snooker hall between 11.15 and 13.15 on the day of the tragedy.    This
 information was contained in a statement given to the West Midlands Pol'c*
 by Mr Robertson.                                                  Vt1

 The Owens family also dispute P.C. Parkes' account when Jonathan joined
 crowd outside Leppings Lane at 2.40pm.  Video evidence timed somewhere
 between 14.45 and 14.50 showed Jonathan and his friends standing in
 Leppings Lane and making no attempt to join the crowd.  Can this
 discrepancy be clarified ? You will note that in our letter of the
 19th December 1990 we requested that P.C. Parkes be called to give evident-
 and it was with this issue in mind that we made this request.  A copy
 of Mr and Mrs Owens'letter dated the 15/10/90 enclosed for your information.

 Adam Edward Spearritt                                    ^

 Adam's father, Edward has been attempting for some time to discover whuat
 happened to Adam before he was sigrited in front of the Spion Kop at 15.25
 The Summary (paragraph 5) gives the impression that P.C. Harratt saw Adam'
 pass between Pens 4 and 3 at around 15.05 and therefore leaving some 20
 minutes unaccounted for.  However, the release of P.C. Harratt's statement
 statement show that in fact the sighting took place between 15.22 and lsV^Q

 Mr^Sp^arr-it± would like the Summary amending to reflect these timings.
    wouid alsoXirke to know if other sightings were made of Adam prior to
 P.C. H a r r a t t ^ other than the unconfirmed ones at 15.08 and 15<>09.

,.£ha:fiip John Steele

The Summary indicates that Mr John Liam Boyle gave assistance to Phillis.
  e Steele family would like if possible to know what time this assistance!
was given and the Summary added to accordingly.    It maybe that the answer
 o their question is contained in Mr Boyle *,s statement and we would       *
respectfully ask that you consider releasing a copy to ourselves. 'He e n c l tv,„
a copy of Mrs Steele's letter of 12/11/90 in this regard for your
information.

Paul Brian Murray                        ....----------

The Summary is unclear as to when' Sergeant David Foxjsame into contact
with Paul, merely placing the t\me ^fter..-.sQjne_t-ime--*af'ter 15.05. Photograph
Reference 5/32 timed at 15.32 shows Paul. b.eing'-Carried on a temporary
stretcher by, among others, Sergeant Fox.     The Murray's are anxious to
fill in the missing 25 minutes or so and perhaps you would kindly consider
releasing Sergeant Fox's statement.

We enclose a copy of Mr and Mrs Murray's undated letter which outlines
their concerns and should be obliged if it would be possible for you to
kindly consider the further questions contained therein.

Sarah Louise Hicks

The Hicks family are anxious to establish whether Sarah received attention
between 14.50, when she was seen by Paul McCaffrey and 15.21 when she
was helped through the perimeter fence by P.C. Marshall.  We should be
obliged if you would kindly consider releasing a copy of P.C. Marshall's
statement which may deal with this aspect.  A copy of Mr Hicks'letter oi­
ls/ 11/90 is enclosed for your information.
     Victoria Jane Hicks

     You may recall that in our letter of the 19th December 1990 we requested
     that you kindly consider calling P.C. McGuinness- and Mr Paul Taylorr" '
     We enclose for your consideration a copy of a letter dated 13/11/SO
     which provides further details of Mr Taylor's account of his contacts
     with Victoria.  Mr Taylor-'s account of cuddling Victoria conflicts vtth
     McGuinness' account of removing her from a pile of bodies on the
     terracing and the Hicks family would like this clarifying if possible.




Further outstanding Queries

1.   John Alfred Anderson
     The Anderson family are anxious to have clarified at the Inquest that
     their son's consumption of a quantity of alcohol prior to the game
     did not contribute in any way to his death. We enclose a  copy of
     Mr Anderson's undated letter to ourselves in this regard for your
     consideration.

     Colin Mark Ashcroft
     The Ashcroft family are not content with the position of Colin on the
     terraces as identified and would like if possible to view the video
     footage again.  A copy of their letter dated 12/11/90 is enclosed.

     Nicholas Peter Joynes
     The Summary indicated that Nicholas was attended upon by a young doctor
     from Liverpool.  This doctor has not been identified up to the compietic
     of the Summary.  Mrs Joynes would very much like to meet this individuaZ
     and wishes to know if he/she has been identified.  A copy of Mrs Joyr.es
     letter of 12/11/90 is enclosed.

We are obliged to you for your assistance in regard to the above mentioned
queries and ask that you kindly contact our Miss Frances Kennah if yoiijrsqui
any further information.                                               ^

      faithfully




HILLSBOROUGH STEERING COMMITTEE
                                                                                   DECEASED REFERENCE NUMBER: 22.


                                            WEST                  MIDLANDS                  POLI CE

                                  A         report                     into        the     d e a t h .of:

   NAME:                                                                  EDWARDS Christopher

   AGE: 29 years                                                          DATE OF BIRTH:      11 May 1959

   ADDRESS:



   OCCUPATION:                                                                                                        *   -


    STATUS:

& NEXT OF KIN:                                                            Sheila Mavis EDWARDS

   RELATIONSHIP:                                                          Mother

   DATE OF BIRTH:

   OCCUPATION:

   ADDRESS:



   GENERAL PRACTITIONER:



    DOCTOR PRONOUNCING LIFE EXTINCT:                                      Dr REDGRAVE

^ DATE, TIME AND PLACE:                                                   i5 April 1989, 1550 hours
| ------------------------------- ------- .----------------------------

   a t the Temporary Mortuary in the Gymnasium a t Hillsborough Stadium.

    PATHOLOGIST:                                                          Professor UNDERWOOD

    STATED CAUSE OF DEATH:                                                Traumatic Asphyxia



    BLOOD ALCOHOL ANALYSIS BY CR FORREST - RESULT:

                                                                           Negative

    IDENTIFICATION EVIDENCE:                                              At 0025 hours, on Sunday 16 April 1989,

   Malcolm RAMSEY i d e n t i f i e d the body of his so n' s f r i e n d , Chr istoph e r EDWARDS,

   to P o l ic e Constable                   1958       HILL      in      the Temporary Mortuary at Hillsborough

   Stadium.                                                                                                                   __
                                                                                                                    T . 2073.0!
                                                                                                                                               4 -




                                                                                                                                                     c




              M                f i *   ^   4         C^   a             i '             ^             t o    i l i       A        *   .
                                                                                                                                 0^       0   / r

                   t Z * ,                 U
                                                                                                                                      f i M j s
                                               t /            K                             /


t e f i u y k              i j                                              t ' ^ ' j / - ^ 4 ’^            d ^ L                              it




^       ^     r      l A           d       l         & -P         3                 fi»                                          *


    u                      f         p         A                            ■       i       f     r              ,           s
    .   l j       * , .,        y  i o
                               f j o U ^  b  o
                                         . t *            £           - 0       ^       J d i & 8^ C             r           ^

                                                                            #       *           v    /       ^       -




                                                                                    |f) o s i ~ o   x^j
                                                          CI RCllMS fANCE S


                                                          At about 1200 hours on Saturday 15 April 1989
                                                          Mr Malcolm RAMSEY t r a v e l l e d with hi s son and
                                                          Mr C h r i st o p h e r EDWARDS, deceased by p r i v a t e
                                                          car to S h e f f i e l d .   They intended watching the
                                                          FA Cup Semi Final f o o t b a l l match a t
                                                          Hillsborough stadium.             They a r r i v e d a t the
                                                          stadium and e n te re d the Leppings Lane
                                                          t u r n s t i l e s a t about 1440 hours. Mr RAMSEY
                                                          and h is son l e f t Mr EDWARDS in sid e th e
                                                          stadium as the y had s e a t t i c k e t s and he was
                                                          to go to the t e r r a c e s .


                                                    2.    Following t h e severe c rushing in t h e West
                     IDra      H E M lu U d M A i         Stand t e r r a c i n g , Police Sergeant 2425 Martin
K/
     sl^  P sln , a ,                                     John HEMMIN6WAY e nt e r e d Pen 3 and attempted
t:
D M W f c A - r C ^ C O U t^ S .              H£          to r e s u s c i t a t e a man, now known to be
_£rAv/i£- f/3 V                     ASS *      l          C hr is to p he r EDWARDS, who he found lyin g on
                                                          the t e r r a c e .    The o f f i c e r was unable to
                                                          revive him and he l e f t Mr EDWARDS t o a s s i s t
                                                          others.


                                                    3.    Police Consta ble 337 Martvn John BALDWIN,
'Hbsu L D A sC                  tl& V \h A i              Po lice Consta ble 259 Michael P e t e r CONEY,
L £ f rT    (tfV                   ^     6 . crru&A-      Po lice Constable 2515 Marcus S ta n le y SMITH
M*   P o i- .> C £ M £ b l   U P t H im f & c M
                                                          and P o li c e I n sp e c t o r P h i l i p Anthony WOODWARD
fbjfS Z .                    VJ-Hfi'T vs/b£        l//S
                                                          l i f t e d a man, now known to be Mr EDWARDS from
C y D h ix s ( ~ T /tO/0
                                                          PEN 3 and passed him out through th e g a t e to
                                                          ot her o f f i c e r s .


                                                    4.    Chief S up e r in ten den t John Arthur NESBIT and
                                                          Police Consta ble 1863 Michael BUXTON r e c a l l

Q & C tH d -       ~Xh <L ~ h f v \ k l   .               a s s i s t i n g t o pass Mr EDWARDS along a l i n e of
                                                          o f f i c e r s a t the gate from PEN 3 and onto the
                                                          pitch.
                                                                                 Police Consta ble 70 Thomas John               whttfi   fv
                                                                                                                                ".       ' *■■ \y^vy
v iu fr T    'f t A l t Z b fo      y / h i7   £   l   £W   3& C                Mr EDWARDS lying on the p i t c h being t r e a t y
m y     Sdaj        h € ih !^            'r / z e # T £ n     .                 by u n i d e n t i f i e d persons.    The o f f i c e r was,
                                                                                a s s i s t e d by Polic e Constables 54 Paul
% & & !*! v / m r         r /te     /7w                                         jBBOTSON, 679 David Jack HUDSON. P o l i c e
2c*i2l il~/c> d         WIh & a]         C f i & p ({?-£>    Tffis ~ T H &      Sergeant 2759 Trevor           TURNER    and Sean Davv j
9VMW&$iuAA fk[^ fi-r WhAT ~TJtvi&                                               PARKIN, a steward a t the f o o t b a l l ground,                t.
                                                                                c arry Mr EDWARDS to the gymnasium where
HcuJ ~LDCb ~*7u/Z/\j                           tC dosd 'TrtAT                  temporary mortuary had been s e t up.                  PoTvv*
D r t £ . £ > j* 'T f f i z .     f& o P ju Z           /h fe /b jtia          Sergeant TURNER r e c a l l s t h a t r e s u s c i t a t i o n
(Y l-f S o n           ir /fr 3      &         Do^^To/Q.                       was attempted on the p i t c h , by persons ,
                                                                               including a Doctor, who have not been
                                                                               identified.


                                                                               At about 1548 hours P o l i c e Constable
^ 2 M i b l u i ^ f g 'S            f& Q /V )                                 John HILL assumed r e s p o n s i b i l i t y f o r Mr
A c .£ & P 'r a w < L £                  d v           H iu u                 EDWARDS a t the gymnasium.
'To                                                    &i
                                                                              At 1550 hours Dr Allan Paul REDGRAVF e x a n r i ^
h a    H    M     £ £ A m            ?         A < S2)            7   *

                                                                              Mr EDWARDS a t the temporary mortuary and
                                                                              certified life extinct.


                                                                8.            At about 0025 hours on Sunday 16 April ISSu)
                                                                             Mr Malcolm RAMSEY i d e n t i f i e d the body o f
                                                                             Christopher EDWARDS to P oli c e Constable H i l l
                                                                             a t the temporary mortuary.


                                                                9.        The o f f i c e r l a t e r e s c o r t e d the body of Mr
                                                                             EDWARDS to the Medico Legal Centre, where ^
                                                                             confirmed the i d e n t i f i c a t i o n to D et ec t i v e
                                                                             Constable 638 Simon WFTfiffl n


                                                              10.         At 0325 hours on Sunday 16 April 1989 Mrs
                                                                             Sheila Mavis EDWARDS confirmed the
                                                                             i d e n t i f i c a t i o n of her son to Detective
                                                                          Cons t a b le 2631 Stephen ELLIS a t the Medicc
                                                                          Legal Centre.
              O .0 \= s m o t\;s >             -" T o       G £           4 S K E D                 O    a   J          B e b M A h

                                                  or
                                                                  ^       s                        £Y                  A s P ^ ik k .




                                                        0


        (J)      10Wu                c.<x-^A                  (Vo         01\<2_                  . c?^\.Qr^f v.qUi                    Ae^tiP
                                                                          S=3<\-        V ^ A             W."S         ,^ous        0 ;02>S
                 V l . ^ vovfcl^              Vo^.          »g>Vc&o j              ^oio_                           <2aA ^ c k M                   <5a        d:
                 <bU :        fflQ c ^ is t     (X        lu k = j< L -       f U c f k t: & T          < 3 -/U jr U A ^ W           "^T       S -^ ,
                         A.        (Vu-r      Vu.L^<xwA                                  As              ^ o * t:o                 <5 Lfis^rV.oi^
                 Van. V ^ cz. Q jb -t^ w                  \rg^_Lf^Si          <3pp           '5y^^u^X !V w                    (W _ortL ^ft^ '
                 V\<g_ -^VvCLrv V .O J^ Jso                           Of'wO-'S.irV.ti'P^                                           t.MQ.fl * p ip ^ l^ .
                  U5bt o             \e£        U S          ^rto^o                v^iLoi;                       Vo.pp<s R e - i a .


     SlJ      V\)<2_                 VvojOQ- p f o c r r                  Ap.CVU25>              I C c f ij            lo»*oooVc£, <3Ateo
                              v^d          p lt e lv        O c t.        ^ S g g g L                                    U     5 ^         < ^ r t*    .
                ^fccr^U.^C<2_V                     OiaaL-i.            VA.Afcc£.                                          ^
               VOcSL- W oe. CM_b V^i<a^oc><As o^> 'H                                                                           Udo^s. qv.o^-rv
               V^oo                                                                                     V    cf^ V .     V(J[HclS          ^o V o ,\h _

                cx-fcW             3 >j3 o £ £ U                                         *

( 3 j         V O W s t .                         Wo-002Yl_                       No^-i-cfe2*2 i4.                  t^vC   ^X<ViclS
               XpjCA.o^                    V o o ^ ^  o  i                          cyv b o                            o\_tck                     o\a
                'i'Q.YV            O O O ^               ^>^A. ^                       Of\Xw              to            ,1'o Q -     0TOn\D^<\.Ce ^
                n PriA         *       "■'XVo'-fc             oofeSi             ^lo-Uo                          ^ v q W t p - G -ri
                                                                  -^o\-


(A)            VJWm                    'ooW-i^e. <iVja                         Vzv^vs.^ cVvo-Ac^o^. j cvS U3q„
 —             \oOC>*3o*ol              >SU^<£_         J^C                                              VicA\_t \ \X.iH <2.               W _         VOC>^
                ^> ro-<v3^<vcLc-_^                                    <


                 V W o CofV?-                        v.<o<^-                                                                       w V o          xb       v_C'3Jn

                V.0 V    .0            N ^ J v j ^ A A ^ ^ v , q 5^ _.                u £ W g vv                                       cx\v      ovWq-v
                 VaXQoS-*^   \e^b                        ^ W L r           ^V2*.fcus^-.                                                       ^           ,
                  VO^L    CV2C?A                        >kb                  SLo      W                      VC-^             -W l p ^ o               «3vd
                                                     CSV             YoCi        crLO Cl .




                                                                                                                                              P "^ O
^          <K(VoW                 voo-Aie^                         -forvv.
                        \^>-W<\0.      ^u_i         &U.C          ^OVvCA.t^                Hr
    •\            \                                                                      V\rcxvv\\
    c^^cj               ^clA^     'cVjC*s>   Jf o \ ^ v    <>\c     o<-ct         J3 3   vv3>
    VA\.bd.                           o S - ^ af<\oort            O Ooi     .
                 V^oQ<2-    ^3                            iVyt      <3< c         Q c S q,
         d il^    Ofn      ^ xrT f^   tf     Xfc VS 'uuLo^\)^(\A<^<vfc.
                                                                  *S^A jC   cla   «-jv-^________
Our ref:    JC&PA OWENS




                                                         15th O c t o b e r   1990




Miss E M Steele
Hillsborough Steering Committee
C/O Castle Chambers
Cook Street
LIVERPOOL
L2 9SH



Dear Miss Steele

We are the parents of Jonathon Owens who was one of the 95 victims
who lost their lives at the Hillsborough Disaster on 15th April 1989-

When Mrs Owens attended the meeting in Manchester on Wednesday
3rd October 1990 you asked that if any of the families h a d cause to
be dissatisfied with their own individual inquest and wo u l d like if
possible to have points cr details clarified for when the inquest
is to be reopened in November 1990, to write to you and y o u would
give these matters your consideration.

May we respectfully point out that "it may be advantageous to yourself
if you would read the enclosed transcript of J o n a t h o n ’s inquest
before proceeding to read the remainder of this letter.

From the enclosed transcript of J o n a t h o n ’s enquiry there are a few
matters which we consider warrant clarification and in soae cases
possible amendment.               At the beginning of PC P a r k e s ’ summary it
states       J o n a t h o n ’s intentions were to travel to Sheffield by private
car - whose car?               In fact this car was Mr Owens Senior company
vehicle which played a major part in the misidentification of our
Son. and we feel that if this had been mentioned it would have given
a clearer understanding when an explanation of misidentification was
later given.            Secondly and immediately following the above is an
account of Peter Birckett. Michael Robertson and Jonathor.'s
whereabouts from the time they arrived in Sheffield at 1 1 -15 a.m.
until they joined the crowd at Leppings Lane, said here to be at
1U.U0 p.m.           We wish to s t a t e at this point that in November 1989
at the request of the West Midlands Police we attended tr.e showing Oi
visual evidence surrounding our s o n ’s death.              We were giver, for the
first time a visual and a verbal account of what happened to
Jonathon from when he a r r i v e d in J”n e f f i 3 ld and up to and v n e n he
carried across the football p i t c h by •two police officers and a
spectator who l i v e s in Southport.           The verbal a c c o u n t g i v e n by uhe
p o l i c e officer carr.e in the ~sin from Kichiel Robert;
statement that he had trade to t h e D o l i o e 'orr.e weeks ea:
Miss £ M Steele

15th October    1990




From this account we learned that when the three                         ' •
in Sheffield at 11.15 a.m. they went to a snooker hall                        v«<j
played snooker and they left these premises at a p p r o x i ® * * . * ^       hhey
13.15 D . m .      We should have liked this to have been a d d e v|        ^
part of the summary.          No doubt this snooker ha l l came              ' Aat
description of licensed premises and we are not going t * ^                  ^?ie
that fact but feel it would have given a clearer accoun,,                    ^ute
.Son's whereabouts in Sheffield prior to Peter and Jo n a , ^ N               Sir
                                                                               'death.
 Thirdly and immediately following PC Parkes gave an
 arrival at Leppings Lane.         At approximately 14.40 p^m. t - W , xVf
 joined the crowd outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.                ^
 further on Mr Popper asked PC Parkes to turn to page 7,                 ^   Viges
 wished to deal with the timings.          R e a d i n g from Mich;ael
 statement it says that they had been to the pub and left ^                   V.^n's
 14 40 p.m.         They stood around For about 10 minutes and,
 tried to get into the ground.          Assuming from this that ^             YViey
 me n t i o n e d is fairly close to the proximity of the g r o u ^ (
 a couole of minutes away, leads us to believe that the>
  the crowd outside Leppings Lane turnstiles and tried t j ^
  the grou n d sometime around 14.52 not 14.40 as said in , v ^                ' nto
 summary.    If they did however join the crowd outside                      \ eSf
 turnstiles at 14.40 the video evidence that we saw d o s *                      Lane
 this.    An accurate time cannot be gi v e n for this v i d e ® * v s,u «show
 it is part of a sequence of film taken between 14.37                  ^ ^ ce.
 The video that we saw was towards the end of the s e q u e ^ *               * 0 p .m .
 time was narrowed down to between 14.45 and 1 -5 P ’®"               \\-    ^ the
 Jonathon clearly standing in Leppings Lane with Pe.er ^                  m 'Aows
 Map Reference 128. and in no way are they joining a c , ^ c h a e l .
 to get into the ground.        In fact they were just s t a n d v x ^ A     \-ing
 in an a^ea of free movement and in the background can „ A ^                  xind
 other croups of people also standing around.        Tne s u t r a ^         U
  to iiv« a brief factual account of the last moments o,                    ;\n tinues
 and F ° t e r 's lives. - Factual though it may be there is           ^ ^on's
  of a tunnel which slopes downwards from its point of d;r,Vv \tion
  cate        to it« exit into enclosures 3 or 4.    They w e n t v x o p p o s i t e
  Tn to «nclosl & e 3 and we are thankful for the fact they y ^ ^ t h e r
  but chased as it is in this context it leads us to                         * ogether
  walked through Gate -C* and directly into e n c l o s u r e ^ .      ^     -hat the
  totally dissatisfied with this part =: tne s-.s.s..sn-                     ^re
  previous points made as we.' find then: -both misleading                        with
  cases   inaccurate.                                                          son.-
     15th   O ctober   1993




     We should like y o u to consider           these points on our behalf       in
     to obtain a c l e a r e r account of       these facts.

     We should like to state at this point that we w e r e never shown
     this summary b e f o r e it was read out in Court d u r i n g J o n a t h o n ' 3
     inquest on 27th April 1990.       In fact the first time that wa
     even saw this summary was only on Wednesday 10th October 1990,

     We should further like to confirm that we have ne v e r met Miohaa\_
     Robertson either before or since Jonathon's death-      Michael
     friendly with P e t e r and Jonathon had been in his company o n at
     number of occasions.      We were told in November last by the
     Midlands Police that Michaelkhew Jonathon on first name terms
     only as Jon as d i d most of Jonathon's friends and a c q u a i n t a n c e s ,

     We have had to rely on West Midlands Police as the only s o u r i3a
     of information surrounding our   S o n ’s death and are sorry to
     that after the inquest were disappointed, b e wildered and san\«wy ^
     confused.

     We look forward to hearing from you in due course.



     Yours sincerely




17    J C Owens                         P A Owens
                                                                IZ^fslooevvNbel- W o


                                                                                               SSj
                  H is                                                                         '■^'5
                                                                                               «
                              rt|^t£nc^ to            tKe    resuj
                                                                                               i ®
   toKCcK cxjjL ciuiL to staU: ©v%IQ”"*                                                        iM
   LOC.                                ^dutr.^ty f t j p p e c        lK>t^ a s        tb        It
                    't '""
                             to'dtK the e^ovbs ldKicK tooU
                               W     I .M - 3 p »m   ou-vd      3    i5p   n   .A s   ouV

  2>Ov-> .   .    -------    Cocts               ^ pvoriou>\c^i^. cb.cid a t                     -s&«
   ■   : i . r;
:-• •<& boi        rl(0 :6 0 .Koujls ..f-tkis ts oL Ko u s e f o u^.                           :- ® :
           Coe (\OLlCL l^Cll :lh 'tk ^ ^cilCfi. v :
  ^Uhfc ^ W c x ^ s t b ^ c ^ s - l b 13 she3£d' fcK6t
         Sinclair CaLcby cocxs ^cu-Vexl b y
  <£y | o ^ n l_.cx.vK0              a n c c m ySe^uo-/              Regtsbru'''

  uKo           'tKcx.tr PbVLvJp to a s diLcxd. (-0^.
  loov^dcy CoK^ co o s iir fcKoir^TV ^cxne,b
   RosernCu-^T^cnDrC                   headed           to          CLo^U-no          Philip

  Coas           dLc,o.cl LoKe^->        fck<2- S e ^ - i 0 /       ^(^stra/^
                     ••■•»•■-j;   r_ ^u*+£L---- — f*1^*      .. .0 ■

                                    T*/    C o U W          hcTa           olrto-dy             C f i ^ j i d


                     p     ^ - ^ = ' ^                                                                          _;
                           Nf     Adhn    C>   b ™       fcc^U., P H d i p                vocus

                           ^oJjrik        to                    resustvtrofc-o^                   ^

                                       uswist- c           St       $ok«s




B S f f i l S B I          ^                                                                -»        *?       b ?   1

■   ■                                                                                 >     *     .        ^     ’



                                                 is “ s g              i ' f              “a ^ E               * ^
                                                                                                                            L->:.
                           to      uS;               .                 p     ,        ^     U ^ d      O c ta M to ^     Ty^i*
                                      'SV.o.rko-.g          y o u      y N       y


                                                                vj o u               S-v-^C^r^lsH j

                    •- i
                    - i
  G |0 4   s   K   c   <s £                             ~ U Js£ L     c o \ £ . i - 0 ‘2 / < 3 _ < d   •




 Q — Hoto                        C an     <x +»or\e o{L cJecx+K                                        be                       cxs <5 o ‘cJocAl
           on            t K?        posV- rv\orkrv\                         r e p o r t?
  u )W *r*                it      Uicx-s          rv\ocK             \ate_r             be^cfQ ftajuJ                               p ro n o u n c e d
   6<2-CXc 3 -                 l(o-C ^O    O r\    fU C L            p o ll 0 2            f e .p o r t <      .

  Q -                             ss -tKere                S o cK cx large ^ cxp .

 T K e .' p o U c e                  .SgrYh vb>ouL5id~ 3                        tdxl             vO ^nt"             _fo    irko L ^ p p jn g -S

®U.CAn<2               Q rd        op                 p il-c h              c x c x jo r d t o                                    p o lic e
  -f£port                      S W o rV lj    cx^KJ'                iSoS             KoufS.

  X                             Q ie e ’ .-N V o         O f\o e.rsi-o .»^ o                       tK d J -        f e u u jl    V\<\6~b2<Z,r\

   fass<2.c$                      oner        or\f©                 "T ^ e        p ilc K                  ou-\d     iOcx-S        <S2.€r\ b y

   S^nt.                3 -oy:       ne_<xr^.r              to             3-                  .n          -fKe     ^cp^l         a/e. a

   a cco rc5 .f^                     Vd      p o lic e              pKoVo^rcxpKs.
   Q -              i/OKa.1" ~hrv\e                 c3i<j                                3ox_                          Corv€ »nVo Contract
    tovtK                fhjo\

   Q -             ute                       -Vo\o        'tKoi                          onVCncOoo                    p>e_f-Sor\      Kao      +YV?cj

    TO             r ^ S v jS ih x V €            Pc l o \ (           L O h a i-               "hr^o              u ^ s    ‘rrf->iC ?


    Q          -       "j^ o               o i k e r                  *Vw \ q     o ^ c e A                S       rv \e .rN t\o r> p d    ' K a o O
                                                                             p>
    Ou-vvj^VV^>nC|                   oJooui"              1r^ \ C -

    Q _ tOK^j                      \^Q-SQ         r\0           p a / Vn CO 1c u S                             -h x K e n . op                  o t? v e /

      cfocVof                   A/\<^a Vi O A J ? 6             -




                                   /U.£ -j— r w ^ S         ^       s'~^   aa    O     ^       ■A '^y
                                  Hillsborough Family Support Group


                                                                                 13 November 1990
TH/ATR

Mr D F r a s e r
Silverman Livermore
1 1 - 1 3 Victoria S tre e t
Li verpool
L2 5QQ


 •      „
Dear Doug
THE INQUESTS
F u r th e r t o our           discussions           I would confirm my i n d i v i d u a l              family
 " m a t t e r s ” ar e as f o l l o w s : -

 Sarah      Louise Hicks
 You al ready have c o p i e s of t h e summar1^                                the crush,
 Jeffrey Rex and Lesley lud or a l l repo                       t    pe r haps they may
 presumably you have « P i e *                « « e o t i ™ o f Mr F o r t u n e , I se e Dr

                                                                                                 bactc.b e e i

  s ! ? - , s                                                                        r   w       r       v       s


 * r ! c ^ s , v r K . s ? . ' r : « s .                           -         .               -       «       «   •
  statement?

  At sometime between l b . 38 and             ^ i ^ p p r e c i a t e ^ h i s p o i n t has
  medical team s t a t e d Sarah was b^ ° , n.d ^ p *l e , s evidence but t h i s i s                                an
  ssivoaHv bpcn            wi   by Dr Colin r l c n l s,y                     * - 4   ic ic                          Tn


   and c e r t i f i e d " l i f e e x t i n c t .




 < $B0 & 0{/r
V ic to r i a Jane Hicks
n      -+h carah Mr i p O e v Tudor s t a t e s he saw Sarah and V i c t o r i a around
H S t h VictoVia a p p e lfe d to° be' *n d i s t r e s s and he d e s c r i b e s h o w th e
crush contin ue d and'how he became trapped                            J    ^    J            ’ Pi1e
b o d ie s , b e f o r e e v e n t u a l l y being r e le a s e d and taken t o h o s p i t a .

PC 1926 P e t e r Oohn M e a n n e s s s t a t e s t h a t , with o t t . r P . o f l . , *    p u lle d
                                    o n ^ o Y h e " i d , in v ideo/p h o t o g r a ph s timed r t
15.28.   There i s           no evidence i n the summaries r e l a t i n g
minutes.

Mr Paul                 « f 56 .D ev o n f'e lJ
        ^ /n   0 5 0   Mr Tavlor       gave       a   p e rfe c t   desert   ion   of   V ictoria. T




                                                                       He described now ne sax anu
 ruddled       ner Tor some       minutes         uciui«
                                                                      t nass^d von to the pitch . ~
 t h “ S i * mi n utes S S l d H m been v i t i l to V I c t o r l . . ■ . * « m v . l 1         f
 r e c e iv e d proper a t t e n t i o n a t t h a t time.       I would l i k e IMr Taylor and kc
 McGuinness (eoth who appear not t o have been ca e )                                   summaries of
 l i s t of w i t n e s s e s . No r e f e r e n c e w hatsoeJ n^ / P P esa0r s ™ th Be          his
 Mr T a y l o r ' s c o n f l i c t i n g evidence.       I would a l s o l i k           py
 formal s t a te m e n t and t h a t of PC McGuinness'.
  V i c t o r i a and I l e f t in t h e ambulance a t approximately 15.3^ ftnd ^ J ; 0 0
  pm Dr J a n e t Dore a t Northern General Hospital c e r t i r i e d l i f e e x t i n c t .




  I am busy co ve ring some general p o in ts and I w ill pass t o you/Tim King
  as soon as p o s s i b l e .

   Regards,




   Trevor Hicks
                                                             M £~             ft       S       .<=y\cA g - r s e n -




       _                                                                           ~                      "



" “"                             J3L_JPirv_.
    ,-        c- u ^ r                   - r c ^ ^ ,_ ^ r v d i ^ o r N _ ^ T v o
_._.C€L_-V~~\                                 *f--
J^^J\Cv-Uw«.V_C^V                          U>M~StaOVaC^
                                                     V   .   V   W"       H            ( ^ 3   o       ^ A .C   a   .        S ’* -
 . S & ^ ^ o A S - 3b.O , „ O S « u - . V o ^ - -.^—                                           ^
                                  V     V-   — r v                    -V - > 0                            ---- J \ . ^ a ~ '= ' --------
                rV(XrU^C£.\           e0sf__Z3Ctv^<                    — ^-                               .
•+v__ r— - v -                                           .'^cV ._-^._d>se .> ^ -to s » -.*
^                P           H               *                   "                        "




                                                                                                                          _9               i
                                                                                              ^'=J o c c U '                               I



                                                 3 f C U O c l - ■-tfcfl0.!^ k :; ^                                        a r te *
           O P ^ d          VDy L'~!             Pci-'c-e                .O.ccl L C - > t . - ^ - - .....
           ope^              ^                    i m                                                  W c x ^ c * neb .
           n o t ...bJ^.o         C" p ^ ^ A -*^}                                       '          '
           CF   .Vd^2j2-a    \ C \ \ J —'^C-{ .      _
                                                                           , if-■■ /C _ j l r\ f o ^ ^ l •
                                                                         o T



*\
                                                                           12. i l - ^ o

TXexxr             k_r t                                                               -



                   -I                             rxJCo^                   .r£xj<trcl
                 'ck~£_        H-O-J. ^ bcjT^r^-_i.c^)-\ ... 1r \ G va£lsK



  crr-\           rvx^-rvclcci-^             ' Cf

.. .1 f? 9 . ^       .O ^ u j T .    ScrrN                C o U r > „        O tncltK -

  PrsV-orsfJ-                .^OCXS.          o-rfNcrr^0i                     -fcKa_

_ f?S>           u j K o    ... .Ai53»i~-                         .  .__




 „ O j C _ ._ \ - K J J ^                         ^             csc*
   cxjr~ ^~ ..nx!LrYNbeA>                                  o f . ,t^ _
    V4-vAJ ^ b c r r z r u g ^ ■
    5-o^ppcrrV-                     Qrsr^jp           „    c x ^ d           -tf

    VV04s tzscnrc^Ag ^                     lr^u^£_s>)“                            r ^ x -p .
                           LO-^_                                              ^
    cU~           oJ&                                           &4-           XZ*^L -
    V K J L A st^ r n sx ^ K         F c ^ v -.                   S w p p c r f)
 jC ^ V -           i W-   9       <'•—         —    S ' S , r“- v ~ .                c r '
 'T r^ ^                                             -t"Ko-                       S^lS\LT.
 k3 ^ ~    , _ _ c ^ h                oJr-~          X ^ SL-         ' ,          ,     . .

            „ ........- p ^ k              s-—             ^         ^ h o . ^

 'vAJ © A VC O - J             .                 _DT'C<-/'-m)                  p -f
_f e i          r                                               ^
_ Q j C    . i + U J i . t > 0 - 0 r ^ g U                      c U x -d                      ...

   CX IXc/-                        £ul"         \X r c -S -      ,         c u -r ^

           t K o - u ^ V J -                           ----

  o >       ^
  'u t o - £ S . J n q     cc*_*. -
   <=,0                                             V".    C f rV)^                      M

                                          V~0

     rV-'.'.        p-eo p ' ^ -                d ^ - ^ ci     _ .

                       ■■-■'-•            ^AjO            K C H -
                                                                           o J-         c r W '
                   k j L                                             ^
                             o ^j—                              p ' ht-k
  cU.ac'                            i S i ^ U / T .             ^ d .      >7

    -Srejiorvd^

_ _ \ = .M     ^    ^              ___ ' Ct^ JP‘
, _ h - a j ^ ^ c ^         J=^=c_/-^.- ..g U _            c J.   a_r^ci            ^

_jaJLDjd       . .--(o->-A--- - P * - ^ -              U ^ - x K / N f i r V ' - >‘r''

_ . . C ^ o c ^ r r        , ' i . ^ c . U U )                    o r .    X k ^ „

     uo^_si“        ., r > s J . j ^ l c ^ c s ^ s —      P o V ^ S ^

                                                            s      “t k   j \   -
             P -^ rs      ^                                       .. p   k c r - H ^



. . . u o - e s h ... r r > ^ . d I . c u v d ^ . -                  f°-^          ^    —   P&
                                               pbVliC-^—                 Ccr^Sh^-b-V^>-

. / f ^ o d h W                C \X )               - s h x te js *               ■tK^i-.-



 O J^-— :... . P “? - 0 .. X   4   — .t                                                              *
                   ^     iO                V    *7 -^       »—£      O^S.U^

„_Sry^oOU.__.^UpS .__ o f                                           W2*a c U o _ _ b        --
 •bKo-. . . _ ^ O ^ h _ X V ^ G l                            £cu^v£U              ..per^ir^r-

_ ^ K o -          C ^ c X .. . rs-Crtl                                                .__i^_    -




  c ^ J s - ^ r ^ s S              u   s                l                    s                  --

   \      VvCuj^-                      i— r ^ n _ d               . .'K^          ccrr\facj-

                ^OcrrVxCXTN                             . P o U C J L        S^/^ea/\*7

  £-r^r^                               uo*es*Y-                    r^j o i   tc x ^ d s

                                                                             K c .^a



                                                                          fcf ■
                                                                              S   o~r   "tx^_
W    ,     - K s ^ d                           c O ^ b ^ c t ,
                                                          h o       '

c u ^ o

                                                                  :tOjG




                                                          0 f~
                               j-%   _ h > a ^ k          ~r\xyr.
                                                              O -r^ d


    kXa_     b ^ - r ^ - O -         °V-          '’C K i -
    \-b                    O u ~ ^.         C j- ^ r ^ ^ A -
                                      r-'           U_^__

     ^                   K o V c ^          o f
                                                  -fonr
     o i   c U o     f o C r ^ C j ^ -
  a^dL .          C bU                     U-.'S.               . O j cJU \
        -n
                                  .- - -                 -                 -
          ___ P rrx o*dh-QJ~ . p cn -^ N -h                   _ c q )O C A _
0 r€iXj3rVa^          c_,c d   - t \ CJL/~r\S         <-X-S /     P-rvc(

  v^oVO c 4 ^        cn l           —p rk _ la.^             .nrs-LjC-A,
  ck^. *>VT'€-S>^,. ..CX-rvcA .„<Xj^0 u O s i^ .oo&S
_..-bUL                        .. '^^Of-CTT-

                     -.-                                     ___ C A S   -..



  „^L T ^ c La^t > ^ ... .. C^r VS-^~ .        V O l^vixj'— k a r i —
  K c ^ p p - e ^ - e j d . ;. "Ho K - ^ ^ s              .CfO-
   .............. I........ L O O S . . . r v r \0 ^ - N C j t:Kc_
 p*O_A_^rv-'0 3 -O ~            pvAJzs. Lm S> K^jl£X               0 - ?'->v
                                     -^T^r-rx

  vj-        uo..ojs-           -f-u ^ h            p ^ Jc ^ U -sk c d
  LA_r-v. Y\Xjz      'CKi_           € lC L r^            k c r^ ~ /3
    0 \^       S> ^ r N d ^ C o ^          I           f^ r p Y ^ I .,

                           \    CO S o                   ^ ^ t2_C^
       *7




       p<£-"U

        <5 0 +
       Ctr^vO

       .l   a j   V'-O.   cl^V-v^

   -    t"0           t>€_.                                                     ^£?AC[...

        P o U         Cjl_          S> j - c O ' k r v - N

   -. . . . , 'h ~ e o J a u d          . ,l >^ j > ^ c k
 cu^
; _A C c ^ T v - ^ p                          \ < x .c f S
        O-Tvdl

'___:^>£l__.

...-7 cn rlrCs»                                     P o l j o :           u o K o
       CLo-rxVacXIsx^                           cxJ-         - t K _ l s ___

        L                                                                         . . .




       C ^ e .^ c r x _ p - K < r r >           ,                      C C .. c U - S . -

   c ^ 'f p f ^ T v - - ^            o f                s.         i
                                                               c__ C 3 f £ ^ jw ~ \< ^    ..




        Cu^cA                       ^ C X o V v        tXrwj:_            _US?_Cx^

                                                        r\o z i l o c X ^ - j       O f-       :
_ "bkaJ".-                    c_o-p



-C^JLCU^b—         Gnr          ^>n     j   v

  V H L i J V l o C T T ^ T L j ^I o ^

 _C^I        fcL^c-/^

_./~N^x0            X ^ L .         .
                                                            \S i- X c l

                           C jC l   s .
                                      u l o     J. ±   vj   2_s           !

                        t ' c U ' C ^ o - ^ .. —        T ^ l _           h ^ c r r tK a r r \

                              _£X_/^C^____ __________________________

 . H x ' ^ . C W ^ s K ^ r ^ - , .__ . . C u > d                  _ _.0   O - f T ----- -

           (Xjr^AJ^-' ___ 1^^r^-'^rrk- r ^ > . -

  _A                                                                          _ ...o ^ tz .
                    S                       .      C^r^oi
                        "ho             Pv^sCcJ^— ^            .     .0 ^ - S ~ ^
                              ■n -\j1_^-\)—                  teAA-A_y-\ g

                         t-t=                      g              k. e n - v ^ _

                ^ a S - e                              kcxcA               nxySi-^c/

                     last"              t'Tc^u'-N             _      C ^r^d          ^OGj
       0k_r

   °f-            .C-Q L^r\
                                                            S ^ -o ^ c L c c
                                                     -j                     _>
                                                          K-Cl q I       /-^c\jd
                  - 0 ^          VVo O w w i ~ 0 \             ,    ^A_r^cl

Co-vi'-t^                                            of        ..r\o      (ctt^ / :
                          -   - P ^ o - r ^ _ J             t f c ^ r x n ^ ^ h ^
-■ftc r ck d .          . po O                   . S>
-c*-rs.c£_u*_s>

—bo------%h^^fvj2_Xd                                                      ___
                                                                          0€_S

-+ o     K        ^ d           c ~ '~ U -            i j o K o h . -K o y rf....
 ^NC^pp^_-r^Gi                      - h o ._ c r \ _ ^ _ / -         S c ^ r x

             --    -                  u      H   k    .

 uj? \Jc^                 ho beO                 dO <
                                                    >r e g a r d
  ^■crr“                            r j ^ U ^ J r ^ g        S> ,     C O ~ n£ ^

       d        tk c J -                     uh . oOCO Crrslu
       c - r tf   erLO"                       v_>oI-vjlX^ Corrrw^
     "h o      Silr>-C.^a2JL Ci                  -    - I'f .

    ^rcpcx/^€_c^                         "Ho - 1                              C^st~
    --pko-fT^>           3     r z > - p K s . ., c x _ / \ r ^ ; _ J o o c O L t s           .



    .. \ r z x X 3 < ^ r          d   c3         . " b K o < J~: ..           f c K o_/-\

     5 4 “ CV-t^                          . C ^ rs-c j               I crr>g^=v'

      Y^o-'f'L               ) v ^ c r n ^ o

—    )^v-D_        .^. . } r s £ X ^ ^ > ^ L s > ~ -* 2 _ ^ t        f~ L 3       C r u o '

     S?errr>^                ------- :-------------------                               ------.

____________ ___\ . f c                   O O C L S ..     A A O O . k _ / S _ . . c r O ...
     ^ •'ol-t^cLcoj - . A                               -fV|0 r\J.    uO
                              ' e A j r e ^ - r n ^ a w^ c _ ^            \ ,cLc_/>]n / - ^

         a n ^ r              Sscr-^v %                     ^ o c L o j         , c ^ r-^ .

                                              - U j ^                d J L c x d • LC-s<
     ^VTN^.                                          do2_(cx_^                O - i ^ s o (xctL^

      U A a o u ^ o i t L h ^                           :        1                 e^-oo



     ■    S ^ f f - ^ r ^ d                                     C^rrNV^uJLACss
                                             c x _a ^ j    ,

  CCL A           _.ttr\dO                   < k a S            .                      I-

                 K-    _ ..t^Kc^jr                        ^ c r r v ^ ^ t ^ u r v g

                                                               ^C 5 - r v ^         aJocrur

                                                                ^ ~ ? \C * jjr .

._ r v o b o c L y ^ ^ A j r e r                                    K a s           fo
                         ...rUsJl. ... 0 - ^ 0 0 0 ^ ^ ^                             c^NC*

 c L _ ^    S»   V l^ € _ S . 5 *                              -g   o J


..-P-u^r—              r f x x - r r ^ X q ___



           • -   O - U - C .......<bo

                                ^    c   d    ' -   . - f e k j s         .   d   C rC S *




 ' T V v O j c H L r S>              )'io                           c^_SL_cx„Ut~

                            c x j~
                                                                                          i
12-




-< 0   r t A J O C X J^Q JL S          ry -^ x c k ~ £ ~

                  ..lrK_X-J s . - l o c r r " ^ ^ U . -          .1 r \ c ^ ce<vo^

                              U o r d .       ._ITCu       H

^ T c L ^ l c r T          *€^r>c^2_cf . . crcr^/:                          Ct

  <^j-€_cxy~            C A - O j C u g ^ x c t _ .c * u ~ > d        cxs

_ ...- f c ^ cx s» . I      K l^ o
  \.’s* - k^veD    o tK T L T . .
  v_y~>
   v^Ok.QJ-g-             -Q_A ^-€_            lS          U ~         U J Q     iX   ^

                                                                        _   -________

                         OVT 1             4 V t i > ^ k J-1     i   I .t . ,
                   ■4
                                                                                                                                                                                         I    \


                                                       D      A      V. I E S                      W A L L I S

                                                                          F O          Y S T E R
                                                                         S    O   L    I   C   I   T    O   R    S                                                           t
                                                                                                                                                                             tV-.
                                                                                                                                                                                v..;
                                                                                                                                                                                   .f
                                                                                                                                                                                    yj

                                                                                                                                                                            UT51



                                                                                                                                   Your Ref
          Hillsborough Streeing Committee,
          Castle Chambers,
          DX 14100 Liverpool                                                                                                       °""ut      PAB.CC.JOYNES

                                                                                                                                   Da"        12th   November              1990
          For the attention of Mrs Wright


          Dear Sirs,

          Re:       Nicholas Peter Joynes (deceased)
                   Our Client - Gillian Joynes_________

          We are instructed by the above named in relation to whom you have been
          dealing direct in relation to the adjourned inquest.

           She has telephoned us and asked to write to you in relation to the
           Coroner's decision to take evidence only as to matters arising before
           3.15pm on the day of the disaster .

           Nicholas Joynes was pronounced dead at 16.00hrs. at the temporary mortuary
           in the gymnasium at Hillsborough stadium by Dr. Byrne.         Our client
           therefore wishes evidence to be given as to what happened upto, say 4.15pm
           or 4.30pm.   Our client understands that the adjourned inquests are in
           relation to why the disaster occurred and what its cause was but it seems
           to us that a question of how the emergency services coped on the day and
           whether more lives could have been saved is of relevance and therefore
           evidence should be given in relation to matters arising upto 4.15pm or
           4.30pm at the very least. We trust that our client's views will be given
           due consideration.

           In addition, we understand that you now have a list of doctors that
           attended the dead and injured during the afternoon.    Our client has been
           given to understand that her late husband was attended to by a student
           doctor and our client therefore wonders whether you have available in your
           possession information in relation to student doctors which may assist our
           client in tracing the particular doctor who treated her late husband.

            She does of course know the identity of                                                                   the doctor who    pronounced her
            husband dead but she would very much like                                                                 to meet the    student doctorwho
            treated her husband.




         5 CASTLE STREET, LIVERPOO L L2 4XE TEL: 0 51 -236 6226 TELEX: 627685 FAX: 0 5 1-236 3088 DX: 14128 LIVERPOO L
lames C.M. Davies. G uy St. J. Wallis. Mark J. O 'Connor. A ndrew J. Green. Christopher R.J. Sorrell. David N. Clay. Ian Titehmarsh. Michael P. Jennings. J. Bnan Rhodes. Richard C. Holman
Gerald F. Power. Anthony R. Catterall, Christopher R. Durrant. T. Duncan S. Chadderton. Barry K Holland. Jonathan S. Bramley, Jennifer A. G em m ell John Gower-Jones. Alvin R. Pmder.
      Elaine H um . H. Andrea McWatt. R. Anthony H indle. Edward T. Boot Land, N'igel B. Wallis. M ari SeJwyn. Graham Sidlow. David L Wood. Richard jacJclin. A. David Blaqui£re.
            Nicholas- H. Dickinson, L Christopher Smith. Susan K Parker. Michael Fetherstone. Robert F. Coward. David K. Sherlock. A ndrew J. Livesey, David Davidson Lund
                                                             R. Jane Janvier, Susan M.C. Frankland, Graham P. Small. Paul Berry
        Associates. Peter Gelling. Gwyneth Hentage Consultants: J. Aylmer Johnson. Barn' J.K. Guver. David M. Hallworth. Ken Shaw Partnershtp Secretary: Richard H. Evans F.C.A.

                                                   Offices at M anchester Tel: 061*228 3702 and Blackburn Tel: 0254 56333
                                                                  Authorised by The im i' Society to conduct investment business
                                                     Davies WaUts Foyster is the merged firm of Dodds Ashcroft, Foysters and Domes Wallis
                                                                              DAVIES      W A L L I S
            /        ,                                        F O Y S T E R
       /             1.
      /          ,
     'J '            Anyinformation   that you cangive us    will assist and we trust that our
f                    client's views inrelation    tothe content   ofthe inquest    will also be
                     considered and acted upon if appropriate.




..          I)


                 #
                                                                                                                     fo r fe c l          (^£aOpM
    2 __                                                    «f¥»H           •                                                             1,1™  ^
                                                           .nritx.                                                                    w lR \
                                                                                                                                             1      IC^ot
                Silverman*Livermore                                                                                                                 '
                S       • O       • L           • I ■ C             • I • T           • 0              • R            j

                    W * «        05,                        W                     12 3 2 « .                         «>«
                                                                             Our ref:
                                                   * •? >D *           *•
                                                                             Your rtft
      ' '                   •           .♦•            '       *■                     '            •


                                                                             When calling please asll t e r


                                                                                                                                                            \
   <?01L -t     v   £           f i^ T 'fn S .fO 'fto j\l              O f                 H fl •                                           •0 £ J ^ Q fr e v




 w u s m s ^ a                                     -

  Date .v                                      .. V W . l .,..............                                                       ••

  Time                                                                                                                 •«-... "

  Number of gases to follow....Ar....................                                                                            ••••

  To (Addr^sJ .. fcf. •                       U \ . f O t f U ••                VbM.-.                                                .



  A ddressee’s Fax No . . Q 7 \                             H               Z rV 3 .

   R m (Our Ref) .                                                                     ■

^ f o u r Ref
   Gantts . J\UUSL..ASiSU. \iUfcU..                                                                                                       . ••
                Cjrpsi             Tc          W   ajlaaa                                                     ’fvTCV’

                    P$Lt~        't^aidUJU                          whkk




                    U^PlVA                                            \a J M      ^        ,




                                                                                                                       •*'/


                            A . riRRANO U.B.. C..M. Mll'LMY Lt S., B.t! F8                                          ' 1K2* 1L' B‘
                                 FA"“A “ L , - . « * » Lu....
                     ASW«: lU'Uiri.X'** Milt. S W « C,<>.                                              ,;>        0} . a „ :r«
                                 13“ LsaiiKf Un*. H^W-vcaU. L.*< TS          «■ ' ■   j        ^             ni!ffs i* Rr^;wt> a«l»;uffl.

                        -                                                                                              —
                                 fc"‘                          o.-*®— X.\*.1444312*1
                   H I L L S B O R O U G H          S T E E R I N G       C O M M I T T E E


                                   c/e CaftU Cfamfors, Coo& tnct, Liverpool L2 SSM
                                     TeC: 051 2550628     051 23€ 0047 'DX 14100




                                                                         Our Reference : F3K/1H


         Dr S L Popper                                                                            (
         H M Coroner for South Yorkshire
         Medico Legal Centra
         Watery Street                                                                            ^-
         Sheffield
         S3 7ET



f)   ®   •
         3rd January 1991



         Dear Sir,*"       ;   ■

             BE: RESUMED INQUESTS - INDIVIDUAL QUERIES

             W. writ, further to our letter of the 19th December 1990. to
             with a summary of outstanding queries which have been raised by famine
             in connection with deceased Individuals•

             in a number of inatances, family member, are seeking
             to the West Midlands Police Summaries.      We are enclosing copiesof j
             relevant documentation but for your ease ‘of reference will sujpiarise
             the amendments/additions and queries below!-

             Amendments/Additions to West Midlands Police Summaries
             1*    Christopher Edwards
                   The Summary indicates that a number of named officers attempted to revive
                   Christopher. The Edwards family would like more information as to what
                   Christopher's condition was when the various officers attended him
                   also what time these attendences took place.. The family
                   Summary amending to reflect these details and we enc os      p
                   specific question of the Edwards' for your consideration, It may be
                   that the various Officer's statments may provide the information th
                   Edwards’ desire.

              2,   James Gary Aspinall
                   The Aspinall family are concerned about what happened in the time
                   Jal.s being identified on the pitch, ie. 15.27, and being eartifUd 4ead
                   at 15.46. Is there any other visual evidence which ”**. »“ «>?*       k
                   missina 18 minutes and can the summary be amended to reflect to
                   t l l l i S s Aspinall >s letter of the 15/11/90 is enclosed for your
                   information.
Jonathan Owens
The Owens family would like the S u m m a r y amendlng
together with his friends, Peter Birckett and Michael J°b^ o n , were in
a snooker hall between 11.15 and 13.15 on the day of the tr®8«dy. J f *
information was contained in a statement given to tne West Midlands Police
by Mr Rebertaon.

The Owens family also dispute P.O. Parke s' account                      th0
crowd outside Leppings Lane at 2.40pm. Video evidence timed somewhere
between 14.45 and 14.50 showed Jonathan and his friends standing in
Leppings Lane and making no attempt to join the erowd. Can this
discrepancy be clarified ? You will note that in our l«*ter         avidene.
19th December 1990 we requested that P.O.                  * S* CQpy
and it was with this issue in mind that we made this request. A copy
              Owens’letter dated the 15/10/90 enclosed for your Information.

Adam Edward Spearritt .
Adam's father, Edward has been attempting for some time to discover what
happened to Adam before he wks signed in fro,it of *ha SPl « K o p at 15 25.
The Summary (paragraph 5) gives the impres,aion                           ,
pass between Pens 4 and ’3 at around 15.05 and,therefor.
minutes unaccounted for. However, the release of P. *        15 ««    d 1S 3Q
statement show that in fact the sighting took place between 15.22. and 15.30,

 Mr Spearritt would like the Summary amending to reflect ^Jesetimings.
 He would also like to know if other sightings w e r e made ofAd*nprior to
 p!c! Harratfs other than the unconfirmed ones at 15.08 and 15.09.

 Phillip John Steele
      Summary Indicates that Mr John Liam Boyle gave assistance to Phillip‘  s
 The Steele family would like if possible to know what
 was given and the Summary added to accordingly. It m a y b e that the answer
 S their a c t i o n is contained in Mr B o y l e ',s statement and we would
 respectfully ask that you consider releasing a copy to ourselves. We enclo**
 a copy of Mrs Steele's letter of 12/11/90 in this- regard for your
  information.

  Paul Brian Murray


  Reference 5/32 timed at 15.32 shows Paul being carried on a temporary


  releasing Sergeant Fox's statement.

  w* .neiaas a cooy of Mr and Mrs Murray’s undated l e t t e r . which outlines
  their concerns and should be obliged if it would be P®®®3- e or yOU °
  kindly consider the further questions contained therein^,

. Sarah Louise Hicks
  The Hicks family are anxious to establish whether Sarah received attention
  between 14,50, when she was seen by Paul McCaffrey and 15.21 when she
   was helped                                        ^      ^
                                                         of Mr Hie,.'letter of
   13/11/90 is enclosed for your information.
                                         -3 -

$,    Victoria Jane Hicks,
       You may recall that in our letter of the 19th De4«nb«r 3 , 3 9 0 we requested
       that you kindly consider calling P.C. McGuinnessjanrl Mr Paul Taylor.
       We enclose for your consideration a copy of a lettap dated 13/11/90
       which provides further details of Mr Taylor's accost of his contacts
       with Victoria. Mr Taylor-' s account of cuddling             conflicts with
       McGuinr.ees 1 account of removing her from a pile of bodies on the
       terracing and the Hicks family would like this c l « p ^ ying if possible.




Further outstanding Queries.
1.      .Tnhn Alfred Anderson                              ,
       The Anderson family are anxious to have clarified    the Inquest that
       their son's consumption of a quantity of alco ol pi^or to the game
       did not contribute in any way to his death. We «nsji0ise a COpy of
       Mr Anderson's undated letter to ourselves in this *«gard for your
        consideration.

 2.     Colin
        colin MarK
              Mark Asncroi
                   Ashcroftt
        The Ashcroft family are not content,with th& poeitton of Colin on the
        terraces as identified and would like if          tio view the video
        footage again. A copy of their letter dated 12/U/g0 is enclosed.

 3. Nicholas Peter Joynes
     The Summary indicated that Nicholas was attended Wpon by a young doctor
     from Liverpool. This doctor has not been identin„d up to the completion
     of the Summary. Mrs Joynes would very much like          this individual
     and wishes to know if he/she has been identified, A copy Qf Mrs Joynes
     letter of 12/11/90 is enclosed.

     We are obliged to you for your assistance in regard tr, the above mentioned
     queries and ask that you kindly contact our Miss Prang*, Kennah if you require
     any further information.

     Yours faithfully




r
     HILLSBOROUGH STEERING COMMITTEE




                                                                            <
                                                                            i
                                                                        /
                                                                    /
