                                                                                           M I R . 15



   OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                Date and tim e raised                             Number

t-oT                                                       „                  ^
s ;i|.        'fUMSMtT                C/T      l^ 1* IwA^iwid                      o\t>WD_______________
   In c lu d e source and any document number i f relevant)                        P
***. Refcetver's instructions   - urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                     Receiver




                                                                                                                     Indexer
   Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

   No(s) o f actions raised                                                                                         W
                                                                                                                 Statement Reader
   Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                     Indexer
    Indexed as indicated

    No(s) of actions raised

    Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                   SIO




                                                                                                                     Indexer
    Further action No(s)


   When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Number Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL,    1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

               PAUL DAVID BRADY




                      Before

DR. S.L. POPPER,   LL.B, B.MED.Sci,   B M , B S , MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                        At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery S t r e e t ,
                  Sheffield.

                        On
                   4th May 1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:




MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                            INDEX

                                                       Page


          OPENI         IG BY THE CORONER

           PROFESSOR ALAN USHER Called
                    B
                        \y THE CORONER

           DETEC IVE CONSTABLE PETER GADSBY Called

                        iy THE CORONER

           GEORGE JACOB Sworn

                        Jy THE CORONER

           DETECtlVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                        3y THE CORONER


                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        Friday. 4th May, 1990


                                      THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                                                PAUL DAVID BRADY
                    B
                               MR. FRASER:   Sir, the evidence you will now hear
                          relates to Paul David Brady.   Paul's parents are in
                          court this morning and members of his family.   The
                          practice which represents them is a member of my Group,
                          sir, and I appear on their behalf as agent through the
                          steering committee in the usual way.

                               THE CORONER:     Good morning.   Mr. and Mrs. Brady
                          and everybody else, can I explain to you very briefly
                          what we are going to do so you can follow and so you
                          know what to expect?    I am going to read to you first
                          of all what was said on the 19th of April, 1989.    Then
                          I will deal with any amendments or corrections that
                          need to be made to that statement.    I read it as it is
                    D     and then we deal with the corrections.    Then I tell
                          you what the blood alcohol was, if any, which Dr.
                          Forrest calculated.    Then we turn to Professor Usher
                          who is a pathologist and who will deal with the
                          pathology.    When he has completed his evidence I think
                          we will listen to the presenting officer.    When he has
                          finished we will pause for a moment and we will have
                    E     Dr. Jacob come along and tell us of his involvement at
                          the hospital.

                               Then we will turn to Inspector Layton.   Inspector
                          Layton will deal with the visual part of the evidence.
                          He will describe it first of all in words, so to speak,
                          and give us all the references and then he will show us
                          on these big plans what he has been talking about.

                               This then is a resumed inquest which was opened on
                          the 19th of April, 1989.   On that occasion Neil
                          Anthony Parkin, acting Coroner's Officer said:

                                "The body which is the subject of this inquest has
                                been identified to DC 2947 Liversidge of the South
                                Yorkshire Police as that of Paul David Brady by
                    G           Harry Brady, his father.

                                He was 21 years of age having been born on the
                                23rd August, 1967 at Bootle.   He was a single man
                                and he lived at
                                Liverpool.

                                He was a refrigeration engineer by occupation.
                H
                                                   -   1   -




J. I. Harpham Ltd
    He died at the Northern General Hospital following
    an incident at Hillsborough football ground on
    Saturday, 15th April, 1989.

    PS 447 Fryer caused   the body to be moved to the
    Medico Legal Centre   and there he identified it to
    Detective Constable   Simon Weigold who subsequently
    identified the same   body to Professor Usher and DC
    Liversidge.

     It is the family wish that the body should be
     cremated."

Then I adjourned the inquest.   I have said that Simon
Weigold identified the body to DC Liversidge.   That is
not right.   There is no statement to that effect.

     I did write to you and on the 9th of May, 1989,
you signed a form, Mr. Brady, to confirm that the
details regarding your son were correct, the name,
address, age, occupation and place of birth, which I
think is Bootle.

     Blood alcohols were estimated by Dr. Forrest.   He
gave us all the details and information on the first
day of these resumed hearings and the level in respect
of Paul was 13 mg/100 ml.

     Now Professor Usher.

            PROFESSOR ALAN USHER Called

                  By THE CORONER:

Professor Alan Usher, Home Office Pathologist and
Professor of Forensic Medicine here in Sheffield? - A.
Yes.

Professor Usher, can you tell us - I think this lad was
identified to you as Paul Brady? - A. Yes.

What reference number did you have in this respect? -
A. Number 84, sir.

Can you then tell me what you found? - A. Yes.   The
body I examined was that of a heavily built young white
man, 182 cm in height, weighing 85 kg.

The external and internal features were typical of a
death from traumatic asphyxia.   There were some six or
eight areas of scratching and grazing mostly, but not
only, about the head.   There were six broken ribs.
They were on the left side of the chest.   That is,


                     -   2 -
                            ribs 3 to 8 were fractured at the front and there was
                            bleeding inside from that.

                            The brain was extremely swollen.    It weighed 1700
                            grams and the normal is about 1350.    The brain was
                            swollen because this man died essentially because he
                            could not move his chest.   He could not move his chest
                   B        wall in or out.   In other words, he could not breathe.
                            When that happens consciousness is lost very early on;
                            a matter of seconds, between 10 and 20 seconds.
                            Subsequent to that he would not be aware in any way of
                            any pain or anything that was happening to him.

                            The broken ribs at the side of his chest may have
                            occurred in the crush or they may have occurred during
                            resuscitation.   It is quite common to break ribs when
                            people are being resuscitated.

                            I should have said when the brain is starved of oxygen
                            because of some impediment to normal breathing, then it
                            responds by swelling and since it is in a closed, bony
                            box, the skull, the forces the brain, the back end of
                            the brain, down through the spinal canal, the opening
                   D        to the spinal canal and the vital senses, the things
                            that keep us breathing and our heart beating, are
                            situated in that posterior part and pressure there due
                            to swelling of the brain is known technically as
                            coning, because it forces a cone of brain tissue into
                            the spinal canal.

                   E        In terms, I give the cause of death as cardio­
                            respiratory arrest due to cerebral oedema - that simply
                            means swelling of the brain - from hypoxia - failure to
                            get blood to the brain - and that was due in turn, the
                            basic cause was traumatic asphyxia.

                       Q. You have already said it but I just want to repeat it.
                          You can say that loss of consciousness would have
                          occurred you say between ten and twenty seconds? - A.
                          Yes, that is right.

                       Q. The consequence of that, and this is the important
                          point, if you lose consciousness you don't know what is
                          happening to you? - A. You are completely unaware of
                          what happens.

                   G Q.      A lot ofwhat you have described, the coning, the
                            swelling and all these terrible things, may well have
                            occurred well after? - A. Almost certainly.

                       Q.    So the patient would not know anything about this? - A.
                            No.

                                 HR. FRASER:   I have no questions, sir.
               H
                                                 -   3 -


J. L Harpham Ltd
    MR. LIMB:      I have no questions, sir.

    MR. CATCHPOLE:      I have no questions, sir.

    THE CORONER:       Thank you, Professor Usher.

      DETECTIVE CONSTABLE PETER GADSBY Called

                     By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:   I am Peter Gadsby, Detective
Constable of the West Midlands Police.

Yes, Officer. - A. The circumstances in this particular
case are that at about 1100 hours on Saturday, 15th
April, 1989, Harry Brady saw his son Paul David Brady
leave the family home with the intention of travelling
with friends to Sheffield.   He had a ticket for the FA
Cup semi final football match to be played at the
Hillsborough Stadium.

Paul travelled to Sheffield with his friends Michael
Anthony O'Keefe and Colin Auton in Michael O'Keefe's
car.   They arrived at the Frog and Parrott Public
House in Sheffield at about 1330 hours where they met
up with another friend, Joseph McCarthy, who we have
heard about earlier this week, sir, who also died that
day.

They all left   the public house at about 1415 hours and
after parking   the car arrived at the Leppings Lane end
of the ground   at about 1445 hours where they joined the
crowd waiting   to enter the stadium.

Both Mr. Auton and Mr. O'Keefe have difficulty
remembering the sequence of events after this due to
the fact they were subsequently injured following the
severe crushing in the West Stand terracing and both
men passed out.

Both were treated at the Northern General Hospital and
both were detained and not released until the following
week.

Mr. Auton recalled that he never handed his match
ticket in and once inside the stadium he stood in
enclosure 3, directly in line with the right hand
goalpost.   He recalled Paul and Mr. McCarthy were with
him in the ground but remembers nothing after this.

Mr. O'Keefe recalls that he also never handed in his
match ticket and does not recall going through the
turnstiles.   He remembers exiting the tunnel under the
West Stand and entering the terracing to his right,
                        which would be enclosure 3.   He took up a position, as
                        described by Mr. Auton, and stood with him.   He does
                        not recall seeing Paul or Mr. McCarthy at this point in
                        time.   He states he was aware that both men were
                        behind him as he exited the tunnel.

                        Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
                    B   terracing, Police Constable 1734 Phillip Foster,
                        together with other officers, went to the perimeter
                        track at the Leppings Lane terracing and assisted in
                        the removal of dead and injured fans from the
                        enclosures.

                        Whilst at this location a man he now knows to be Paul
                        was passed to him by unknown persons.   At this point
                        in time Police Constable Foster believed Paul was
                        passed from the gate of enclosure 3, but he has since
                        re-clarified this and now states Paul was passed
                        through the gate in enclosure 2.

                        Police Constable Foster carried Paul on to the pitch
                        where he was joined by an as yet unidentified St.
                        John's Ambulance personnel.
                    D
                        Extensive resuscitation attempts were made on Paul and
                        at one stage Police Constable Foster thought he
                        detected a slight pulse and in view of this decided to
                        transport Paul on a hoarding to seek further assistance
                        in the North Stand area.

                    g   Police Constable Stephen William Harratt and 184 Alan
                         Geeson assisted Police Constable Foster to carry Paul
                         across the pitch towards the gymnasium where they saw
                         an ambulance parked with its rear doors open.    Paul
                        was placed in the ambulance and the officers left after
                         explaining the circumstances to the ambulance crew.
                        Unfortunately, to date that particular ambulance crew
                        has never been identified.    However, Paul was taken to
                         the Northern General Hospital where extensive
                         resuscitation was carried out by Dr. George Jacob. At
                         1605 hours the same day Dr. Jacob certified life
                         extinct.   Paul was transferred to the hospital plaster
                         room which was being used as a temporary mortuary.

                         Some time later that day - it has not been possible to
                         establish the exact time - Mr. Neville Udall, a
                    G   mortuary technician at the Northern General Hospital,
                         accompanied several bodies in an ambulance from the
                        hospital to the gymnasium at the Hillsborough Stadium
                        where a temporary mortuary had been set up.    At the
                         gymnasium Police Sergeant 447 John Fryer assumed
                         responsibility for the body of Paul from Mr. Udall.

                H
                                             -   5 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
At about 0530 hours on Sunday, 16th April, 1989, Police
Sergeant Fryer accompanied the body of Paul which at
this stage had not been identified, to the Medico Legal
Centre.   There he identified Paul by his body
reference number to Detective Constable Simon Weigold.

At 0645 hours on Sunday, 16th April, 1989, Mr. Harry
Brady identified the body of his son Paul to Detective
Constable 2947 David Liversidge at the Medico Legal
Centre.

On Monday, 17th April, 1989, following identification
by Detective Constable Weigold, Professor Alan Usher
carried out an autopsy and submitted a report giving
the cause of death.  Evidence is included regarding the
analysis of the blood sample from the deceased when the
presence of ethanol was detected.   Witnesses proving
continuity of the blood sample are Philip Rich,
Detective Sergeant John Turner and Detective Sergeant
James Fletcher.   Dr. Alexander Robert Forrest carried
out the analysis.

Found in the personal effects of Paul was a full match
ticket, but under the circumstances it cannot be
established exactly how or when he entered the stadium.

There is some visual evidence, sir.

     MR. FRASER:      No questions, sir.

     MR. LIMB:      No questions, sir.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     No questions, sir.

     THE CORONER:      Thank you very much.   Mr. Jacob.

                    GEORGE. JACOB Sworn

                     By THE CORONER:

You are Mr. George Jacob? - A. Yes.

Perhaps you could give us your qualifications? - A. I
am a Bachelor of Medicine, Master of Surgery and a
Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons of England.

I believe you are now a consultant surgeon at the
Hallamshire, although at the time of this incident you
were Senior Registrar? - A. That is right.

Are you a consultant at the Hallamshire? - A. Yes.
0. If you could think back to the 15th of April, 1989, I
   think at that time you were working at the Northern
   General? - A. Yes.

(). At about twenty past three or so you learned there had
    been a major incident? - A. That is correct.

 . You took yourself down to the casualty department
   because that is where the likely incident was going to
   be? - A. That is correct.

Q. When you got there you could hear the ambulances
   arriving? - A. Yes.

(). Can you tell me how you came to be in touch with the
    gentleman we are talking about, Paul Brady? - A. At the
    time I was finishing a case in theatre when the- message
    came through that there was a disaster at Hillsborough
    so I went down to the A and E department, but the way I
    approached it was from the back rather than through the
    front doors.   Paul Brady arrived in the resuscitation
    - or in a room which was being used for resuscitation
    so I was immediately involved in his resuscitation.

Q. Can you describe his medical condition at the time? -
   A. He was cyanosed due to a lack of oxygen - blue - and
   he had fixed dilated pupils at the time that we started
   to resuscitate him so there was strong clinical
   evidence that he was already dead but we thought in
   view of his age and the nature of his injury that
   resuscitation should be started and so it was.

   Initially I think you thought he was a bit older than
   he turned out to be? - A. I did, yes.   I did not
   realise he was as young as he was.

Q. The point about fixed dilated pupils is that that is an
   indicator of brain damage? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you recollect what in fact was done? - A. As I
   arrived he was already being ventilated with a bag by a
   nurse.   Somebody was involved with cardiac massage to
   try and improve his cardiac output.    I took over that
   part of the resuscitation.   We were shortly joined by
   a junior anaesthetist who had come in.    He had seen
   the ambulances arriving.   He had driven up.    I cannot
   remember his name, but we were joined by an
   anaesthetist and he was intubated and was given various
   drugs to try and stimulate his heart, to re-start his
   heart.   He was given intravenous fluids but I suppose
   after about fifteen or twenty minutes it became obvious
   that we were not getting anywhere and that further
   resuscitation was pointless.


                        -   7   -
                               In fact in your statement you said that you certified
                               him dead at five minutes past four? - A. Yes.

                        (Jj.   That would be right? - A. Yes.

                               You did not, of course, know who he was at that time? -
                               A. No.
                    B
                               Can you remind me how we know we are talking about the
                               same person? - A. It has always been my habit when I
                               have been involved in the resuscitation of a patient
                               who has died to actually put some evidence on the body
                               that I was involved so that subsequently if there was a
                               problem they knew who was involved with the patient.
                               This was particularly appropriate because most of the
                               patients coming in were not identified.   I thought as
                               I was involved in this patient, for future reference
                               ifthere was an inquiry then obviously I would be
                               identified as involved in his care.

                               In fact you wrote your name on his abdomen? - A. Yes.

                               That is how we have been able to link you, so to speak?
                    D          - A. Yes.

                         3. For the record, nothing was written in any notes at the
                               time? - A. No.   Obviously these patients were arriving
                               thick and fast and the records did not catch up with
                               the patients who survived until quite a period
                               afterwards and there was no documentation.   Obviously
                    E          once we had finished with Paul Brady there were other
                               patients to deal with.   We were not able to stop and
                               record everything that we had done.

                         3 . I am not wishing to criticise.      I am just wanting to
                               establish it.   I know that is a fact but the
                               consequence of that, of. course, is that Mr. Wardrope
                               and other people when they tried to reconstruct what
                               happened have to rely upon what you can recollect
                               rather than what they can read? - A. Yes.

                                    MR. FRASER:   I have no questions, sir, but I am
                               sure the family are most grateful for that explanation.
                               Thank you, sir.

                                    THE CORONER:    Perhaps I can say - I have had a
                               word with Mr. Jacob and if the family would wish to
                               spend a minute or two with him afterwards Mr. Jacob has
                               said he would be willing to give them some time.

                                    MR. FRASER:   I am sure they would be grateful for
                               that, sir.


                H
                                                    -   8   -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                    A
                                 DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                                              By THE CORONER:

                                THE WITNESS:   Sir, I am Michael Layton, Detective
                           Inspector of the West Midlands Police.

                    B$. Yes, Inspector. - A. An examination has been made of
                        video film and photographic evidence and Paul has been
                        identified alive in enclosure number 3 and subsequently
                        receiving treatment on the pitch.   Michael O'Keefe has
                        viewed visual evidence and has identified Paul alive in
                        enclosure number 3, specifically on a BBC video tape
                        referenced MAP.l timed at 1456.32.05.   At that stage
                        Michael O'Keefe is also shown on that identification,
                        as indeed is Joseph McCarthy.

                           Police Constable Foster has viewed visual evidence and
                           has identified himself attending to Paul on the pitch
                           on a BBC video tape referenced MAP.7 and between the
                           following times, sir: 1523.26.08 and 1526.22.   He is
                           also shown carrying him on a hoarding across the pitch
                    r|     on the same tape, the BBC tape, MAP.7, timed at
                    U      1530.17.20.

                           Sir, the officer has signed a plan of the pitch area
                           indicating the approximate location at which he
                           assisted with Paul and that plan has been referenced
                           PNF.3.

                    E      Sir, Ian, one of Paul's brothers who is in court today
                           has assisted in relation to some of the visual evidence
                           and to the best of his ability has confirmed it.

                           Sir, can I refer you to a plan which has been
                           referenced MWJL.102, which is a plan of the terraces?

                         }. That will be C.245. -       A. MWJL.101, which is a plan of
                            the pitch.

                         }. Yes, that will be C.246. - A. Sir, in relation to the
                            identification in enclosure number 3 on video, this is
                            enclosure number 3 and the point at which we believe
                            that Paul is shown is in this position here in
                            enclosure number 3.   In relation to the pitch
                            identifications the video tape MAP.l, on the pitch
                            there is an identification in this position here,
                            almost directly oppose gate 2.   A further reference to
                            MAP.7, which is the point at which Paul is being taken
                            across the pitch, that is approximately here, going in
                            the direction of the Spion Kop end.

                           These points are just where wehave been able to
                           identify somebody on a visual?    It doesnot mean to say
                H
                                                    -   9   -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
he was not at any intermediate points, but there is no
visual evidence? - A. That is right, sir.

If you can just confirm that PNF.3, the position on
that plan is in fact identical to the one you have show
us? - A. Yes, it is shown here.   That is the plan by
PC Foster and it is the same location.

Opposite... - A. Near to gate 2, sir.

     MR. FRASER:      I have no questions, sir.

     MR. LIMB:     No thank you, sir.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     No questions, sir.

     THE CORONER:    Mr. and Mrs. Brady and all the
rest of the family, thank you for being here this
morning.   I hope hearing Mr. Jacob himself - of course
it cannot bring Paul back and in that sense whatever
you have heard today is minor, but I hope that having
heard what Mr. Jacob had to say and also, indeed, in
the summary as to what happened, what people were
attempting, it may at least make you feel that people
were trying.   The fact they did not succeed, of
course, is very, very sad and I feel for you in this
terrible loss which has occurred in your family.
However, it does sometimes give a little comfort to
know that people did make an attempt, so to speak.

     Thank you for being here and I am very sorry
indeed that you have suffered this tragic loss.

   (The inquest into the death of PAUL DAVID BRADY
       was adjourned until a date to be fixed)




                         -   10 -
