                                                                                               M I R . 15




    OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and tim e raised               £■*                       Number


             —7 p p y y 3 .g r/2^/g*7    C JJ1      A/             c >T ~2?if^/74£V \>   /-/f&JLi'SxjTO               Ojdcn+Qo
    T itle
    flnclude source and any document number i f relevant)          C 'J L . C / '^

(   m
         »iv6r's instructions - urgent action - Yes/No
                                                                                                                                      Receiver




                                                                                                                                          Indexer
    Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

    No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                                Statement Reader
    Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                                          Indexer
     Indexed as indicated                                                                                                                  =?"
    No(s) o f actions raised

     Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                   \         11 C \
                                                                                                     ®— ii-ii---- wa&----- 1—
                                                                                                                                    5)m          SIO

              1■    • '        ""                                                              \         f ‘i i 1           \   c
                                                                                                   \ | \\J S ~ J
                                                                                                                                \m
     Further action No(s)


     When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

             STEPHEN FRANCIS HARRISON




                     Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, B S , MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                       At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                       On
                20th April, 1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                      INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                            Page N o ,


                        Opening Remarks                         1.

                    B
                        DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER Called
                           By THE CORONER                       3.


                        DET. SGT. JULIE APPLETON Called
                           By THE CORONER                       6.


                        DET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                           By THE CORONER                      10.


                        DET. SGT. JULIE APPLETON Recalled
                D                                              12.
                           By THE CORONER


                        Closing Remarks                        12.



                    E




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
20th April, 1990

     INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF STEPHEN FRANCIS HARRISON

     THE CORONER:     Please sit down.

      MR. FRASER: Sir, there are more people behind me than
usual. That is because you are about to deal with the
Inquests of brothers Stephen and Gary Harrison.

      In relation to Stephen Harrison, sir, I appear before
you as a member of the Committee and I also represent
Mrs. Susan Harrison on a personal basis.

      I asked you to delay returning for a few minutes longer,
sir, so that I could spend some time with the member of the
Bar who has been instructed to represent Gary Harrison's
family and I think those few minutes have been wisely
invested and I am sure we can now proceed and deal with both
Inquests as expeditiously as possible sir. Thank you for
your indulgence.

      MR. KIDD:     Sir, I appear.

      THE CORONER:     Could you tell me your name?

      MR. KIDD:     Sir, my name is Mr. P. Kidd.

      THE CORONER:     You are appearing in connection with
Gary Harrison?

      MR. KIDD:     Yes.
      MR. FRASER:     Sir, if I can pick out Mrs. Susan Harrison
for your benefit?

      THE CORONER:     Yes please.

      MR. FRASER:     The lady on the front row.

      THE CORONER: Thank you. Were any of the Harrisons,
if I can use that as a collective noun, present on the first
day?

      MR. FRASER:     No sir.

      THE CORONER: Well I will very briefly tell you what
happens so that it is not completely strange for you.

      We are going to deal first of all with Stephen Harrison
and the way we are doing these Inquests is that I read out
what happened on the day when I opened the Inquests.

      In some cases there are a few mistakes in the evidence
on that opening day and in fact there is one in this parti­
cular case. Don't worry about that because we will correct
it as we go along and if I have missed anything else then I
will be told no doubt.
                                                                 THE CORONER


                              Having done that we then listen to the Pathologist
                        who tells us what he has found. Then we listen to the
                        Presenting Officer from West Midlands Police who tells me
                        what he has summarised with regard to the evidence and then
                        we hear another West Midlands Officer who tells us what he
                        has found on the photographs and so on though we don t
                        actually look at the photographs, we use plans wherever
                        that is necessary.  Then I conclude.
                    B
                              We usually just rise for a moment and then we resume
                        and I think although you are all actually in Court and
                        we could run straight through I have not brought both my
                        files in so I will actually rise and it also gives the Jury
                        a chance to stand up and stretch their legs but it is not a
                        long delay.  Is it all clear? Have you understood that?
                        That is clear to you as well, Mr. Kidd, isn't it?

                                MR. KIDD:     Yes sir.

                                THE CORONER:     I am sure it is.

                              This, then, is a resumed Inquest which was opened on
                        the 19th April 1989 and on that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin,
                        Acting Coroner's Officer said:
                D
                                "The body which is the subject of this Inquest
                                has been identified to D.C. 1688 Johnson of the
                                South Yorkshire Police as that of Stephen Francis
                                Harrison by James Terence Harrison his brother.
                                He was 31 years of age having been born on the
                                6th April 1958 at Liverpool. He was a married
                                man and he lived at
                    E
                        Is it                    Is that how you pronounce it?

                                MR. FRASER:
                              THE CORONER: That is another error, I will come to
                        that in a minute but what we wrote was:
                                                              Liverpool.  He
                                was a driver by occupation.  He died at the
                                Northern General Hospital following an incident
                                at the Hillsborough Football Ground on
                                Saturday, 15th April 1989. D.C. Harrison
                                caused the body to be removed to the Medico-
                                Legal Centre and there he identified it to
                    G           Detective Constable Simon Weigold who
                                subsequently identified the same body to
                                Dr. Slater.  It is the family wish that the
                                body should be buried."

                         We then circulated a form which actually went to Susan
                         Harrison, I think to you, to check whether all the details
                         were right and I think we had everything right apart from
                H        the place of birth which should have been Huyton-with-Roby,

                                                         - 2 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                       the   coroner




                            Liverpool. We still had                |
                                                                   -   How do y°u sPe11 this
                            word, Mr. Fraser?
                                  MR. FRASER:  Sir, the spelling seems to vary every
                            time I see it but I understand it is

                                 THE CORONER:      Then       is
                    B             MR. FRASER:     Yes.

                                  THE CORONER:     And                 I presume should not
                            be difficult,                              Is that right?

                                  MR. FRASER:     Yes sir.
                                  THE CORONER: Liverpool, I think we can just manage.
                            And the rest of the information is correct.  Date of hirtu
                            6.4.58 and that he was a driver and Stephen has got a ph ,
                            Is that correct?
                                  Now in common with everybody else we did the alcohol
                            levels and these were actually formally introduced on the
                            first day by Dr. Price.
                D                 in the case of Stephen the level which was measured
                            was 30 mgs/100 mis.
                                  Now if we turn to the Pathologist please.


                                                DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER Called
                    E                                    By THE CORONER:

                        Q. Now you have already been sworn, Dr. Slater, haven't you,
                           but if you would just repeat your name for the benefit of
                           the family and for those of the Shorthand Writer please.
                           - A. My name is Dr. David Neil Slater.

                        Q    Now you undertook the post-mortem in the case of this young
                             man and you are satisfied that the report which you are
                             giving me relates to Stephen Harrison as he was known to
                             you at the time and identified by number 91 as well.  Is
                             that right? - A. I am absolutely certain sir, yes.

                        0. And I think you know his age because I have given you that
                           haven't I a moment or two ago? - A. I know it is 31 sir,
                    G      yes.
                        Q. Can you now take me through your post-mortem report and
                           give me the cause of death and also your relevant findings
                           please? - A. Yes sir. My examination of Mr. Harrison
                           showed that there had clearly been a degree of medico-
                           surgical intervention, specifically a catheter had been
                           inserted into a blood vessel on the right side of the
                    H
                                                          - 3 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                        DR. D.N. SLATER



                     shoulder.
                           The marks of injury externally were quite trivial
                     with the exception of a 2" scratch over the left loin.

                           The main findings however v/ere within the chest.
                     Firstly relating to the cause of death there was substantial
                     damage to the lungs on both sides in terms of both extensive
                 B   haemorrhage and bruising. This was accompanied by extensive
                     bruising of the chest muscles on both sides and in addition
                     there was a fracture to three ribs on tne left side.
                     This I felt was the primary cause of death.   In addition
                     the left side of the lung had collapsed due to the accumulation
                     of air around the lung. This is a condition we medically
                     call a pneumothorax and this had resulted from one of the
                     ribs on the left side piercing the surface of the lung.
                     I felt this was also a contributory factor towards deach.

                           I examined the areas of medico-surgical intervention
                     extremely carefully and I am happy that nothing adverse
                     had happened here.  Specifically I should mention that I
                     think the pneumothorax on the left side in no way was
                     connected with any attempted insertion of needles on the
                     left side.
             D
                           In addition I should say that if any resuscitation
                     had been attempted the rib fractures, the position of them
                     was not that normally associated with resuscitation, so
                     I am confident in my own opinion that the fractures were
                     of traumatic type.

                 E




                 F




                 G
                            My stated final cause of death to you, sir, was la.
                      respiratory failure, that is respiration stopping due
                      to lb. traumatic pulmonary contusions, these are the
                      bruises I mentioned in the lungs due to the trauma and
                      fractured ribs and then I had a contributory factor under
                      2. fractured left rib with pneumothorax.
             H
                                             - 4 -

L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                DR. D.N. SLATER


                        Q.




                    B



                        Q.




                        Q.
                D




                    E


                        Q.



                    F




                    G


                                   THE CORONER:   Is that satisfactory as far as you
                             are concerned?

                                   MR. FRASER:  I am sure the family are grateful for
                H            that offer.  I certainly have no questions at this stage
                             sir, thank you.

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                     - 5 -
                                                               D.S. J. APPLETON


                                THE CORONER: Yes, thank you.     Any questions from
                          any of you?   (No response)




                    B
                                Have you followed Dr. Slater's evidence? In a sense
                          all this is nothing to do with our Inquiry but it would be
                          very foolish of me not to deal with it because it is
                          very important point from the point of view of the family
                          and as an incidental, of course, if you like a spin-off
                          advantage from the autopsy. This is not the reason why it
                          is done but it is one of the things that one looks for to
                          see if there is anything which is useful for other people
                          as well.

                                Dr. Slater, thank you.

                                What I think we will do - Mr. Wardrope you are here
                          aren't you — what I think would be the easiest thing cO do
                D         is if we listen to the Presenting Officer and then if anything
                          arises which you can help me on perhaps I can call on you,
                          if that is satisfactory to you.


                                         DET. SGT. JULIE APPLETON Called
                                                 Bv THE CORONER:
                    E   Q. Could you tell us your name please? - A. Yes, Julie Appleton,
                           Detective Sergeant of the West Midlands Police.

                        Q. Would you take me through the summary please? - A. At about
                           10.30 hours on Saturday 15th April 1989 Mr. Thomas Wright
                           saw his stepsons, Stephen Francis Harrison and Gary Harrison
                           leave his family home with the intention of travelling to
                           Sheffield. They were to travel by coach to attend a Cup
                           Semi-Final football match at Hillsborough Stadium.

                                  At about 13.45 hours Mr.   Brian Joseph Harrison was
                           in a motor vehicle in Leppings    Lane, Sheffield when he saw
                           his brothers, Gary and Stephen    standing in Leppings Lane.
                           He was unable -to speak to them   and he did not see them
                           again.
                    G            Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
                           terracing Police Constable Stephen Harratt went to the
                           perimeter fencing at the Leppings Lane end of the ground
                           where he assisted to carry a number of people from the
                           terrace to the pitch. One of these is now known to be
                           Stephen. The Officer carried Stephen onto the pitch and
                           attempted resuscitation but Stephen did not respond.
                H
                                                    - 6 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                             D.S. J. APPLETON


                         Police Constable Philip Foster was tending another man
                         nearby and he checked for a pulse on Stephen but he could
                         not find one.  Stephen was left with a St. John's
                         Ambulanceman who has not been identified whilst the
                         Officers went to assist other spectators.

                                Police Constable Peter Gallimore saw Stephen lying
                          on the pitch being treated by a number of persons near to
                    B     the Spion Kop end of the ground. Fireman Raymond Cawkwell
                          attempted resuscitation on Stephen and this was continued
                          by Dr. Miles John Davidson and Dr. Roger Graham Quartley.
                          Police Constable Gallimore accompanied Stephen by ambulance
                          to the Northern General Hospital where resuscitation efforts
                          were continued.
                                Dr. Andrzej Kurpiel was involved in treating Stephen
                          at the Northern General Hospital.  He attempted to resuscitate
                          Stephen but resuscitation attempts failed. Dr. Kurpiel
                          certified Stephen -dead.

                                Police Constable Gallimore escorted the body of Stephen
                          to a temporary mortuary in the plaster room at the hospital.

                                Dr. Janet Rosemary Doore later examined eleven bodies
                D         in the plaster room, including Stephen, and confirmed that
                          life was extinct.
                                At 19.45 hours that day Police Constable Alan Hodgson
                          attended the Northern General Hospital and escorted the
                          body of Stephen by ambulance to the gymnasium at the
                          Hillsborough Stadium.  The Officer later escorted the body
                    E     of Stephen to the Medico Legal Centre where he confirmed
                          the identification by reference number to Detective Constable
                          Simon Weigold.
                                At 11.20 hours on Sunday, 16th April 1989 Mr. James
                          Terence Harrison identified the body of his brother to
                          Detective Constable Nicholas Kinsella.  This was at the
                          Medico Legal Centre.
                                On Sunday, 16th April 1989 Dr. David Slater carried
                          out an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of death.

                                Found in the personal effects of Stephen was a ticket
                          counterfoil for the match but under the circumstances it
                          cannot be established exactly when or how Stephen entered
                          the Stadium.
                    G
                                That is the end of my evidence sir.

                        Q. Yes, thank you.  Just bear with me for one moment because
                           there is quite a lot in this.

                                If you turn to paragraph 3, as I understand it what
                          we are saying in this paragraph is that having been brought
                H
                                                  - 7 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                    D.S. J. APPLETON


out onto the pitch one Officer was attempting to resuscitate
this lad, this was P.C. Harratt and Mr. Foster was close by
dealing with somebody else was also checking to see whether
he could feel his pulse. That is right, isn't it? — A. Yes.

In fact unfortunately they formed the conclusion that this
lad had died? - A. Yes.
And that is when they left him with the St. John's Ambulance­
man. That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

And then, as is not uncommon, various other people come
along and try, that is right, isn't it, to resuscitate? -
A. Yes, other people tried to resuscitate Stephen.

Including two doctors who had turned up by then? - A. Yes.

In fact Dr. Quartley on page 45 says that when he got to^
this young man at half—past—3, I think, 15.30, can you find
it, it is about the fourth line down,"he was cyanosed and
not making respiratory efforts.11 That is about four lines
further down.  Is that right? "The victim was quite intensely
cyanosed." Can you see that? - A. Yes.

Then the doctors tried, they put tubes and needles in and
all kinds of things.  That is right, isn't it? - A. That
is right, yes sir.
And they sent him off to hospital and in fact Dr. Quartley
says he checked that the people knew how to do the artificial
ventilation before he went on his way. That is right? — A.
Yes.
When he got to the hospital it was Dr. Kurpiel who I thinjc
saw him.  Is that right? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

And it seems, well whatever the reason Dr. Kurpiel really
tried very hard, didn't he? - A. That is right, yes.

But in the end that proved to be unsuccessful as well
unfortunately? - A. Yes.

One final point:   the Northern General number which was used
was number 21.   Is that right? — A. That is correct sir,
yes.
      THE CORONER:  I think that is my final point.     Let
me just check through.
      Mr. Fraser, is there anything that you want to ask?

      MR. FRASER: No sir, Stephen's family have no questions
for the Officer sir, thank you. If you would give me a
moment sir?

       THE CORONER:   Yes, of course.
                                                               THE CORONER



                              MR. FRASER: Sir, it is a slight query about the
                        presence of the counterfoil. The ticket counterfoil having
                        been found in Stephen's possession it is assumed that ne
                        went through the turnstiles but of course there is no
                        evidence to confirm that.
                              THE WITNESS:  It certainly would imply that he had
                        gone through the turnstiles but we do not have evidence
                    B   to support that.

                              MR. FRASER:     I am grateful.

                               THE CORONER: Perhaps I can just explain that to you.
                        The Officers of course can only recount what is written
                        down and unless somebody can make a statement to say:
                        111 went through the turnstiles with Stephen then one can
                        only guess. The chances are, as the Officer said, that
                        ifyou have got a ticket counterfoil   then you went through
                        the turnstile but you can't say "I know he went through
                        because there is not anybody who says:    I went through
                        with him" and therefore can say from personal knowledge.

                              We have got to do it this way because we have ^got
                        to be accurate.  If we start guessing and saying:    Well
                    D   you know, the chances are ...11 then you are on a very
                        slippery slope.  You have followed that, haven't you?
                        And Mr. Fraser, you are quite happy with that, aren't you?

                              MR. FRASER:     Yes sir, thank you for that.

                              THE CORONER: Mr. Fraser, as I said a moment ago
                        Dr. Wardrope is here because I actually asked him to
                        attend in case we needed him.
                              You heard what he said on the opening day and if
                        I remind you, Mr. Wardrope, I will just pick out your
                        comment on this. You said:
                               "Stephen Harrison.  There is definite evidence
                               in the medical record and from the post-mortem
                               report that Mr. Harrison received intensive
                               resuscitative efforts."

                        You may not have used those words but that was the sense.

                               Do you wish to hear from Mr. Wardrope personally
                         this morning?
                    G
                               MR. FRASER:     I don't think so sir, but I wonder
                         perhaps if M r s . Harrison might have a few words with him
                         privately.   I wonder if Dr. Wardrope could spare a few
                         moments to talk to Mrs. Harrison later sir, it may help
                         her?
                               THE CORONER:     I am sure you won't mind?
                    H
                                                   - 9 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                               D.I. M. LAYTON


                             DR. WARDROPE:    I would be delighted sir.

                              THE CORONER:   Yes, thank you.     If we deal with that
                        later on.


                                      DET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                                               By THE CORONER:
                    B
                              THE WITNESS:  Sir, in respect of Stephen I have made
                        an examination of the visual evidence available and it has
                        been established that Stephen was actually in the enclosure
                        which we have referred to as number 3.

                              Police Constable Harratt has identified hiraself on
                        video, at a BBC video tape, assisting to carry Stephen onto
                    C   the pitch and treating him. The reference in respect of
                        that identification is on a video tape reference Map 7,
                        15:25, that being 3.25 p.m., so the full reference is
                        15:25:27:17.
                              Police Constable Gallimore has signed a plan of the
                        pitch indicating where he found Stephen and he has referenced
                D       that plan PRG/1.
                              Fireman Cawkwell has identified himself on a photograph
                        which shows him giving resuscitation to Stephen on the pitch
                        and the reference number for that photograph is NGN1/97.

                              On a photograph which is referenced PR7/20,
                        P.C. Walton is shown leaning over Stephen and this photo­
                    E   graph is timed at 15.43. The Officer saw Stephen put into
                        an ambulance but had no further dealings with him.

                              Mrs. Susan Harrison, Stephen's wife, has viewed
                        visual evidence and she has identified him on a video,
                        again BBC video tape, the reference being Map 1,
                        1450:45:03, so the time in respect of that would be 2.50 p.m.
                        At this stage he is alive in Enclosure number 3.
                    F
                              Sir, if I could refer you to a plan which has been
                        given the reference number by me MWJL/48. This refers to
                        a plan of the terraces and shows the location of the
                        identification which was made on the BBC video tape of
                        Stephen alive.
                              It will be seen on that plan there is a second
                    G   identification and that is in fact what I would term again
                        not an absolute, it is a possibility that it may show
                        Stephen. The first one is a very definite identification
                        but the second one is just a possibility.

                              There is a second plan sir, MWJL/121, which is a
                        plan of the pitch.   Sir, do you want the reference numbers
                        for those two plans?
                H
                                                - 10 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                    D .I . M. LAYTON


Yes, if I can do that. MWJL/48 is going to be C30 and
the other one will be MWJL/121 which will be C31. Don t
worry about these numbers. We need them because of the
procedure. Could you show us on the marked plan where
these positions are? - A. Yes sir.

       (The Officer moves to a visual display board)

 Sir, if we can refer first of all to this plan of the
 terraces and specifically in respect of MWJL/48.

      The identification made by the family when Stephen
was apparently alive is in this location here. That is
in Enclosure number 3 and perhaps sir if I can tell you
that, I can perhaps give you a time for that ....

 Yes, that would be useful. - A. Sir, that is at 1450:45:03.
 I think I have mentioned that.
 You have mentioned that. - A. But that is specifically
 in relation to that.
       The identification which was a possible identification
 refers to a photograph which in fact was somewhere in this
 area here, again in Enclosure number 3.

       In respect of the plan MWJL/121 on uhis map here
 of the pitch, on the video tape   reference Map 7 the location
 at which Stephen is believed to be is in fact here which is
 almost directly in front of Gate 2 on the pitch, and there
 is another identification which shows Stephen at that stage
 where he is being given some treatment down the Spion Kop
 end on a tape with the reference TB/4 which is down here.

       Sir, I cannot give you the time reference at this
 moment but I can in a few seconds if that would assist.

. I don't think we need the time references in this case
  because we have got the other evidence of the doctors and
  so on. Yes, carry on, I am sorry, I interrupted you.
  - A. Sir, that is the two plans I refer to.

        THE CORONER:   Perhaps look up the times and   give
  them to me.
        While you are doing that, did we read the paragraph
  that deals with the blood ethanol analysis?

        MR. FRASER: No sir, neither Officer has done but
  in your opening you did indicate what the alcohol level
  was but the continuity has not strictly been proved.

        THE CORONER: Perhaps when you have told us the times
  if you would just come back. We both overlooked it. We
  just need it for the record.
                                     D .I . M. LAYTON


      THE WITNESS:  Sir, if I can refer to the plan
MWJL/121, that is the plan of the pitch.

      Specifically referring to the reference in relation
to the video tape TB/4 which in fact is a South Yorkshire Police
video tape, that specific reference here shows, it is
Fireman Cawkwell in fact in the process of attempting
resuscitation, and it is timed at 15:35:5 6 at the Spion
Kop end of the pitch.

      THE CORONER:    Before you come, any questions of
Inspector Layton?

      MR. FRASER:    Thank you, no sir.

      THE CORONER: Any questions from any of you?
(No response)  Thank you, Inspector.


             DET. SGT. JULIE APPLETON Recalled
                        By THE CORONER:

It is paragraph 12. We omitted it? - A. Yes. Evidence is
included regarding the analysis of the blood sample from
Stephen where the presence of ethanol was detected.  The
witnesses providing continuity of the blood sample are
Detective Constable David Green, Detective Sergeant John
Turner and Detective Sergeant James Fletcher.  Dr. Alexander
Robert Forrest carried out the analysis.

      THE CORONER: Now I have also got a feeling that
although I asked Mr. Fraser whether he had any questions
of this Officer I never gave the rest of the Tribunal an
opportunity but is there anything you wanted to ask?
Obviously if I did not ask them I did not look at you
either, so I am sorry about that.   (No questions) Thank
you very much indeed.

      That concludes the evidence which we are going to
take in respect of this Inquest at this stage.

      Mrs. Harrison, thank you very much for coming and
of course all the rest of your family who are here with
you today.
       I am of course very very sorry that this terrible
tragedy has happened to the family, to you in particular
and of course to all of you because there are two boys
who are involved which does not make it twice as bad because
of course one loss is just as bad as two, but it does I
think make it harder, so we are now going to rise for a
moment or two, stretch our legs and then we will deal
v/ith Gary.

      I don't know whether one of you would be, I was
                                                            THE CORONER


                        going to say gentlemanly enough to allow Mr. Kidd to come
                        for his case because it would be easier for him and a lot
                        easier for me.

                              MR. FRASER:    It is my intention to retire to the
                        side-lines sir.

                              THE CORONER:    I see.
                    B
                                        (The Inquest into the death of
                                           STEPHEN FRANCIS HARRISON
                                     was adjourned to a date to be fixed)



                    c



                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                    H
                                                  - 13 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
