                                       CcSn I'7
                                        C c £   t




    P o s t-It' Notes from 3M
                                        5   Z
    Ref. No. 7666




                                                    s-mrecnetJTS
i
       DAT E                    TIME
                                                    0
FAO MIKE WEBSTER - CITY SOLICITOR
Apologies for not
enclosing bundle
of statements
with letter                           If*.
16 / 6 / 9 2 .
These are attached
                                     i'
                 with compliments
                        °f   I        .

                   H.M. Coroner
Christopher P. Dorries
Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield                Telephone: Sheffield (0742) 738721
S3 7ET                                  Fax: (0742) 726247
                            M alcolm J. G regg & Co
                                                    Solicitors
  L. I nnpaa l l b                                                                Telephone:        0 5 1 -2 3 6 9085
  M. J. QREafrLL-B.                             SECOND FLOOR                            Fax No.     0 5 1 -2 3 6 4182
j. J. M. HAWTHORN, m.a.                      CENTURY BUILDINGS                               DX     14175
                                           31 NORTH JOHN STREET
                                              LIVERPOOL L2 6RG


                                                                                                            f. {.J
                                                                                                          *0


            Our Ref: JH/LF/H359
            Your Ref: CPD/PMS



            The Office of HM Coroner
            Medico-Legal Centre
            Watery S t r e e t
            SHEFFIELD
            S3 7ET                                                            2nd June 1992



            Dear S i r s

            Re:     Hillsborough Inquest

            We thank you f o r your l e t t e r of 22nd May 1992. We en clo se herewith
            a copy of th e Memorial submitted to th e Attorney General, t o which
            are a ttached two bundles of f u r t h e r m a t e r i a l . In r e l a t i o n t o Appendix
            1, in r e l a t i o n t o the se ction deali ng with Ian Glover, by an
            o v e r s ig h t th e middle page of th e l e t t e r from John Glover dated
            15th October 1990 was omitted. A copy of t h a t middle page i s s e p a r a t e l y
            enclosed which we have marked 50a f o r i n s e r t i o n i n t o Appendix 1.
            I n c i d e n t a l l y , in r e l a t i o n t o t h i s l e t t e r , we ar e not su re i f Page
            3 has been c o r r e c t l y copied in th e bundle and would be g r a t e f u l
            i f you would supply us with a copy of th e Page 3 t h a t you a c t u a l l y
            received.

            Omitted from th e material sent to the Attorney General was the
            t r a n s c r i p t of t h e "mini inques t" of Ian Glover held on 4th May
            1990. We have submitted t h i s to th e Attorney General by se p a ra te
            letter.

            Also enclosed are copies of th e Form 86A and th e A f f i d a v i t in Support
            which comprise th e a p p lic a ti o n f o r Leave to Apply f o r a J u d i c ia l
            Review. As you are aware, t h a t a p p l i c a t i o n sta nds adjourned pending
            a d e c i s io n of t h e Attorney General on th e Memorial.

             I f we can a s s i s t you f u r t h e r a t t h i s sta ge ple a s e l e t us know.

             Yours f a i t h f u l l y
P   a u l   . crtRuu.e.
PAUL WIT,-LIAM CARLILE



1.   Paul   Carlile the         son and brother respectively         of the

     Applicants Sandra Stringer and             Donna Carlile was born
                     t

     on 8 th August, 1969, and was 19 years old when he died

     at Hillsborough football ground on 15th April, 1989.



2.   He went to the stadium • in the company of friends, but

     it is not     known whether he was in            their company when

     he took up a        position inside the stadium in enclosure

     3.



3.   During the course          of the mini inquest       the jury heard

     fromProfessor        Usher    that     in his    view the . cause of

     death was     traumatic asphyxia.           The death      would have

     been   painless as         he would      have fallen       unconscious

     within 10     or 2 0 seconds         of his chest    being crushed.

     This was     follcvcd by          the evidence of    Police Officer

     Geraldine Evans and Detective Inspector Michael Layton

     which when combined produced            the following chronology

     of events: At 2.45 p.m.              Paul Carlile was outside the

     ground near to        the perimeter gate.           Some time before

     3.03 p.m.     he climbed          over the fence from enclosure 3

     into enclosure        4.    Eetween     3.03 p.m.    and     3.15 p.m.

     Michael     Hollinghurst, an          off duty   nurse, found      Mr.

     Carlile lying on the          floor unconscious in enclosure 4

     whereupon    he tried        to    resuscitate him     but was     not




ANNAAF                             0
     . successful.            He     then    moved        on       to 'treat'^another

      casualty       after         being    told     by        a    uniformed ; police

         officer to leave the terrace.                Shortly after 3.15 p.m.

      DC Goulding and DC Pont saw Paul Carlile being carried
                        t
     , from    the general           direction       of        the tunnel,       in    the

      concourse at           the Leppings        Lane end            of the     stadium.

      The     two    officers and           an   unidentified             ambulanceman

      attempted to revive               him but were not              successful.       At

      4.35    p.m.          behind      the Leppings           Lane stands        Docto*r

     Monaghan certified Paul Carlile dead.



4.   The jury also heard directly from Mr.   Eollinghurst
         T *
     that it was only when the pressure began to ease in

     enclosure 4 that he realised Paul Carlile was lying at

     his feet.         He began         helping him and another                 man who

     was unconscious              a few feet       away.           Eventually     he was

     told that it was time                 for him to leave the enclosure,

     and he did this through a hole in the perimeter fence.

     He recollected           two ambulancemen             had arrived          to take
J                             •

     over     from      him        in      the   attempts            to   resuscitate

     casualties.



5.   The Applicants submit that much important                            evidence was

     not put        before the          jury thus     depriving them              of the

     opportunity properly to consider                      what happened.             Much

     of this        evidence was           also relevant             to the     issue of




ANKAAP
       whether death was aggravated by lack of care," an issue

       which was not left to the jury.



 6.   The evidence           that Mr. Hollinghurst gave               was markedly

       different           to that       contained       in a     statement he     had

       previously           made.        In this     he stated      that he      first

       became aware of Paul when                   he felt him climbing up his

       legs.        He    was pulling himself up by                holding onto Mr.

      • Hollinghurst's            trousers.        Mr.     Hollinghurst       reached*

       down and           took Paul's hand         and began pulling          him up.

       This task          was made        difficult by          people standing     on

       Paul.         He lost        Paul's hand and         so took hold       of his
                *
       hair'.       All    this time Paul was trying               to pull himself

       up.      He was in           pain and aware         of what was     going on

       around him.           This contrasts strongly with the evidence

       of Dr. Usher           that Paul would have              fallen unconscious

       within 2 0 seconds of              being crushed and would not have

       been in pain.              In the statement Mr. Hollinghurst also

^     said that           he was     told to       leave the       enclosure by     a

       policeman or ambulanceman on the grounds that he could

       do no m o r e .      However the        person who told him to leave

       did not        himself check         Mr.     Carlile       to see   if there

      were      any       signs     of    life,     before       instructing     some

       supporters to           carry him to         the back of       the terrace.

       The Applicants submit that this evidence was extremely

       important and possibly indicated that Mr. Hollinghurst




•ANNAAF
was given insufficient time           to attempt to resuscitate

Mr. Carlile.



There was    a ^discrepancy between PC Evans account of
               f
the    activities of DC Goulding and DC Pont and DC

Gouldii:'g's own account.          This account, contained in a

statement he had        made, was to the effect        that he was

initially on his own with           Paul Carlile.     He then left

him in    order to      see what    his colleagues     .were doing

after which he returned to him          with DC Pont.      DC Pont

then left and returned to him with an ambulanceman.

      *
The Applicants       were informed by West      Midlands Police

Officers that Paul        Carlile was the first        casualty to

have been taken       off the terraces.       This matter never

came out at the inquest.           They are deeply concerned by

the    fact   that he    was   left    in   the area     and    only

certified dead at 4.35 p.m.           They feel that he 'should

have been one of the first persons to have been placed

in an ambulance and taken to hospital.              They were also

informed that Dr. Monaghan          had requested the use of a

machine when     he was attending       to Mr. Carlile.         This

possibly indicates that he believed that he could only

be    certain that    Paul Carlile      was dead     or alive     by

using such a machine       or that alternatively efforts to

save Paul may have       been successful had a machine been

available.
 9.        The Applicants submit     that had all this ':evidence‘•and ;•

           the evidence   of Dr.    Glynn Phillips, Dr.     John Ashton

           and Mr.   F. Eccleston   been put   before the     tribunal,

           there would have been     sufficient material for them to

           consider whether to return a verdict that the death of

           Paul Carlile was aggravated by lack of care.




'a n n a a f
   HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


             PAUL WILLIAM CARLILE




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B .MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                      At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                      On

                3rd May, 1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       AP P E A R A N C E S :




MR. D. FP.ASER                Hillsborough Solicitors’ Group
                              Steering Committee

MR. ?. SMITH                  Medical and Dental Union of
                              Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                              Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN              Trent Regional Health Authority and
                              South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                              Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY                Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE                Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN              Police Federation of England and
                              Wales

MR. P. ISAACS                 Cnief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and          Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF                Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                                                     Pg.fTe ?;o»

P^OF. AI.-.*T!                Cr.13.od

         "V TTTD COi1C?~:SR........                                     2

         :~y IP?. ' P l l M m r i .....................                 3
OFFIC E       CrjgR/J.DTrlT: !?1 T%ATT;tit 3VANS C a l l e d

        r-Y TTTTv CORONA!?.......                                       h

r o L ic--: i n s p s c t o t * tucttatvT, l a y t o n c a i i o d

        ;;y Ti^-v CCV^ONISn.............................                6




                                           (D
<Tl»   ........
                  10 OQ—


         i r y ^ S T iirro Ti-r? d:;.‘ttt op patjj, yjTjt a i ’ capxit.::

            T’
             .12 C011Gin-n:     Good nominj,       Please sit down.

      !”l. F-lASoIi:   Sir, the evidence you arc going to
hoar now rolntos to Paul Villiam Carlilq.      Sir, Paul's
mum is within tho precincts of the building but would
rather not hoar the pathological evidonce so will come
in, as it wore, halfway through the hearing. Paul's
stepfather and two sisters and aunt are present in
Coxirt, sir.     Sir, tho practice that represents them
is a menber of ny Group and I, therefore, appear in tho
usual guise this n o m i n j as their agent through the
Steering Committee.

     TIED COP.OllEn:           You, sir, are tho stepfather, is
that right?

            oTJI’FATI-«Ii:    Yes.

     T1T1D C011CI7ER: Just so X knov who I am looking at.
Which arc the two sisters? PjLght.

      Can I just c^rplain to you, before we begin, so to
speak, the procedure so that you know what is coning.
You have probr.bly already been told, in the circumstances,
but very very briefly I am going to read the evidence
which I took right at the beginning last year in April,
in fact, tho 1 9 th, and then, when I have done that, X
am going to toll you what tho blood alcohol levels •
wore and then we vrill listen to Prof. Usher who will
toll us about the pathology, I think I will pause then,
Mr. Fraser, so that wo can allow Paulfs mum to c o m e back
if she wishes. ’..lion wo arc all settled again, 0 0 to speak,
the presenting Cfficcrs of tho V e s t Midlands 3 olice will
present the evidonce which they have summarised for me
ttnd Inspector Layton will deal with the visual side of
the ovidonco. lie will describe it, first of all. There
is not, I think, in fact, very much visual evidence,
is there, in this particular instance?

     XIJSP^CTOPv LAYTON:             There is, sir.        Some of it is
not confirmed.

      THU CORONER:   Anyway, he ’./ill describe it. You may
find that bit a little bit confusing. Do not be too
worried about that because, in a moment, after he has
described it, I10 comes round here and, as far as ho is
able, he shows us on these big plans what he has been
talking about and then it falls into place somewhat
bettor.




                                     -   1-
             T h is ’th en         is   a    rcs.ui.iof'.    Inquest      w h ich    was    opened      on
 th e      19 t h    .V - 'r il,    1 0 C9             0:1    th a t   o c c a sio n ,   " o il   A n tho ny
 p j i x k i ' ’,   '■ c t i n g   C o ro n e r* .O ffic e r,          said ;


                     i!Thc body which is the subject of this
                    Inquest has been identified to DC 3^55
                    Uallace of tho .South Yorkshire Police
                    v.s that o f I;iul William Carlile by George
                    Peake, his luicle, li e was 19 years of ago
                    haying been b o m on tho 3th August, ">969
                    at Liverpool. lie vr.s a single man and he
                    lived at
                    Liverpool. He vas a plasterer by occui^ation.
                    ITe died at Hillsborough Football•Groimd
                    following an incident there on Saturday,
                    1 5 th April, 19S9-   PC 1212 Goulding caused
                    the body to bo ronovod to tho Uodico Legal
                    Centre and there ho identified it to
                    Detective Constable Simon T.feigold v/ho
                    subsequently identified tho sane body to
                    Prof. Usher. It is tho family wish that
                    tho body should be cremated,”

      I then adjourned the Inquest and what I did was, I
wrote to you and, in fact, I think you, llr. Stringer
 signed the form, James Stringer, which I -sent to yoti on
the 2 7 th April, I9 C9 and asked you to check names and
addresses and, although tho pronounciation of thesurname
van    correct, in fact vo had mispelt it a n d it shouldbe
spelt *.Carlilef, And vo had also mispelt            because
v:e had loft tho *!<:* out. It is spolt           pbut I
have been told that it is pronounced |              ~o I
am learning. Apart from that, I think, all tho other
information vr.s, in fact, correct?

           in. J. STTHTTGZSrt:                    Yos.

     T?"0 CORCK'31*:  '..lien I opened this Inquest Dr.
Forrest c£*.ne along and tolc’ us all about the blood
alcohol levels for everybody and, in the case of Faul,
the level which ho measured vas 61 mg/ 1 0 0 ml.

           ITov vo are going to turn to Prof. Usher.
                                   PROF. ALAI 7 USHER Called:

                                        By TIIS CORONER:

Q. Prof, Usher, you are a Home Office Pathologist and
   1’rof. of Forensic Kedicino here in Sheffield, is
   that right? - A. Yes.

r*. Prof. Usher, you are going to tell mo about a nan by
    the name of Paul Villiam Carlile and what number did
    we ••.. - A. 73, sir.
•■■I, That is right, yos.                         Can you tell me then, please? -


                                                       .        ®
                                                                      T«**:T.r»/
                                                                              *'r•*
                                                                                  N
                                                                                  .




                     A. The body X e::cnir.ccl v.-as that of a heavily-built ,
             A       clark-liairod young, white male, 171 cr.is in hei~ht and
                     weighing GO 3vgs. The typical signs of traurratic
                     asphy—ia vere pro cont both externally and internally.
                     There was sorrc swelling of the brain which is, ajain,
                     not uncenmon in trannatic asphyxia, and occasional
                     petechial haemorrhages on the lungs.

             B

                                                                   • A. In
                     fivct, I give his cause of death as traumatic asphyxia.
                     I really believe that he had an average expectation of
                     life for .his age.

             C



                 C
             D




             E


                          I'r, Fraser?

                                         nv NR. FRASER;

             F   Q. Trof. Usher, can you offer some reassurance to the
                    family about the timescale for this type of injury
                    in terms of the time that you think it may have taken
                    for Paul to lose consciousness once the crushing1 that
                    we have hoard about actually started to take place? -
                    A. Yes, the reason for Paul’s death was that his
                    chest was held so tightly that he could not breathe
                    in or out and,, once that had happened, then he would
             G      have been unconscious in a matter of seconds, between
                    10-20 seconds, lie would have died within a few
                    minutes but at the time, of course, subsequent to
                    his unconsciousness, he would not have been aware of
                    any pain.

                          T3IE COIJOITiDR: Can you check that the family got
                     that because it is so important that people shoviL d
         H           appreciate it.

                          HR. PHASER:     Yes, thank you.
arpham Ltd
      TiHS CC-iCJIjSR:      Any questions?          (Mo ouostlons from
 tbsJurv)

1’r o f .. Usher, I ani m os t obliged to y o u and tho sane
a r r a n g e m e n t as boforo, thr.nk you. - A. Yos, indeed,

         TUJi: COTlOlJUIi:    Prof, U s h e r is in the b u i l d i n g so
ho joo s b a c k to his officb.           'Toy;, shall v/e v a 5.t f o r
n u n to come ba c k?       (IKS. C A H L I L 75 CAi-": I N T O CCUTTP)
P a u l ’s m u m is n o w w i t h us.

     Iloilo, Mrs. Stringer. V e vill call the Ivcst
Midlands Police Officer, I think.

        OFFICE     O S R A L D T M 3 ELIZADI5T H EVA??S C a l l e d :

                         13y TITS CORONER:

*Jhen you are ready vill you introduce yourself and
take me through the summary, please? - A. I arn
Geraldine Ulirsabeth 15vans, an Officer of tho T.rest
Midlands Police.

Yes, toll me what you have summarised in this case,
please? - A. At about 0930 hours on Saturday, 15th
April ••••

I am sorry, not vhat you have summarised, what has
boon stunmarised wottld bo more accurate, I tliirlc ? -
A. At 0930 hours on Saturday, 1 5 th April, 1 9 8 9 , Mr.
l-'aul l/illiara Carlile, together with a Mr. laul Darren
tJurray and Mr. Ian Joseph Ford, left Liverpool and
travelled by train to Sheffield in order to vatch
the F A Cup Semi Final football match which was due
to be held at tho Hillsborough Stadium that day.

Upon their arrival in Sheffield they boarded a bus
which took thera to the Loppings Lane end of the
Stadium, arriving at about 1 2 3 0 hours. They met up
with other friends and sat on a wall outside the
ground whilst they had refreshments.

Shortly afterwards Paul went off on his own stating
that ho was going to a nearby public house in order
to try to swop his terrace ticket for a soat ticket.

At about 13^0 -hours a llr. Paul Patrick William Nagle
was outside the Stadium in Leppings Lane when he
saw Paul who was in the company of Mr. Carl David
Lewis. Mr. Nagle arranged to see the other t w o men
later inside the ground. In fact, this is the last
time Hr. Naglo saw either man again.

That was at 13^0, was it not, I think you said? -
A. Yes.  Shortly after 1515 hours and following the
severe c m s h i n g in the West Stand tcrracinc, DC
Cou.lding and DC Font entered the Stadium via Gate-
C and saw a P'un who they nov: lenov to bo Paul
Carlile being carried f r o n t t h o general direction of
the tunnel on the West Stand concourse. Together
witli an ambulanceman, who lias not boon identified,
the officers attempted to revive Paul but without
sticcess. The persons carrying Paul have not been
identified.

A Michael Thomas TJollinghurst, an off duty nurse,
vas a spectator at tl?c natch and was in i'on 4 at the
Leppings Lane end of the ground when lie became aware
of the increasing pressure being exerted on hin by
the crowd. After being subjected to this pressure
for approximately 15 minutes, Mr. ITollinghurst became
awr ro of. a space being created around him, and on
looking dovm to the floor of the terracing, ho saw a
man he now lenovs to be Paul William Carlile. Mr.
I’ollinghurst saw that Paul was blue in-the face and,
on not detecting a pulse, he tried to resuscitate him
by heart massage and nouth to mouth resuscitation.
Paul failed to respond to the emergency treatment and
Mi'. Ilollinghurs t then moved on to treat another
casualty.

Can I just stop you? This is very late information,
is it not? - A. That is correct.

And I think, strictly chronologically, this should
luive come before the paragraph about Detectivo
Constables Goulding and Font because that is still
vrit liin tho terracos? — A. Yos.

That is right, is it not? - A. Yes.

Just so that ire got the order right. - A. At 1635
hours Dr. David Monaghan examined Taul at the rear
of the West Stand and pronounced life extinct.

Shortly thereafter DC Goulding accompanied the body
of 1'a.ul to the gymnasium where r. temporary mortuary
had been set up.

This Officer later escorted the body of Taul to the
Medico Legal Centre where he conJFirmcd the
identification _to DC Weigold.

At approximately 0300 hours on Sunday, 16th April,
1909, Mr. George lerJ:e identified the body of his
nephew to Detective Constable Wallace at the Medico
l.ognl GontT'c.

On Monday, 1 7 th April, IpO?, following an identification
by Detcctive Constable Weigold, Prof. Alan Unher
carried oxtt an autopsy and submitted a report giving
caur.e of death.
Dvicicnce in included regarding tho analysis of the
       sar-.;:le from iv.ul vliorc the presence of ethanol
vas detected. Tiio witnesses ’■•roving the continuity
of tiio blood sample aro llr. Philijj Harvey llich,
Detcctive Sergeants Fletcher and Turner a.ncl 'Jr.
Alexander Robert Forrest carried out the analysis.

Pound in the personal effects of Paul was a full
match tickct. He is shown on visual cvidcr.cc, sir,
near to the outer perimeter gate at      hours.

        That conclude3 the summary, sir.

        TiLJ                   !:r. Fraser, anytli5.ng you want to
as!:?

        I I.     J.-C-i:      *:« (uroatilo-ia.

        Ml. LJIf.1}:       ITo, thank you, sir.

        ir:. C-'-TCrH'CLF,:       I*o, thank you, sir.

            PCLIC'J Tirol-IDCTC-P. i-ICIIAEL TAYTOIc Called:

                              '3 v t:t; cc^n-sn:

Yes, Inspector? - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
Inspector, ’.Jest IIidl:uids 2‘olice. Sir, if I can sa3r
thoi-o are a number of snjall additions to the cvidcncc
that you c>.ro to hear so if yoii could bear with rae.
Sir, "-n examination has been made of video film and
photographic evidence and i'aul has been identified
alive outside the stadium.

Do“jia Carlile, I-aul*s sister, and in fact the same
applies to Ilichellc, his other sister, who is also in
Court, have identified Paul on a photograph which has
been ^iver. the reference number IH.X10/33A. This
photograph, sir, is timed at 1b ^ h and shows Paul
alive outside the ground near to the outer perimeter
Cate. In fact yesterday, sir, on a second photograph,
i::.'LlO/3/j-A, which is timed at 1^55» Taul again has been
identified by Donna s^id Ilichclle as being near to the
outer perimeter gates.

Carl Lewis, as you have heard, also one of those who
died at Hillsborough, is not on the photograph and
there is no evidence as such that they were together
after being seen at 13^0 by Hr. Hagle.

Sir, on the 2 9 th March, 1990, Donna and ilichelle v.rerc
a^cd.i soon and perhaps I should point out that, in
total, the two girls have viewed visual evidence for
something like 13 hours together with their social
worker and, in fact, they r.:adc further identifications
of "aul both 0:1 photographs and video.
   TI;o ^ositioii ?.«, r.ir, that, \:hilst tho girlo to the
   boat of their belief foci thr.t those pboto^ra^-hs and
   vinocc chov ]        they 'cannot bo 100 ncr cert certain
   f’i:c to t’:o detail that is s~hovn,




   That i*Ji0 t 0 ‘;rnph, sir, is not tir-iocl.

   There r.ro, in fact, then, sir, a number of other
   photographs and I do not know whether you wish mo
   to road " 1 1 tho rofcror.ce numbers out but I have
   roforrod-to ono of them or. the pl.'.n -which J will
   indicate later.

Q. Pic1:. that one because they arc all, 1 take it, fairly
   clo::.o together? - A. Yes, they ax>e, s5.r, and i.u fact
   they are in !>nclosurc no. 1'. apart from the first one
   J have just mentioned.

   Sir, the photograph I have referred to on tho plan is
   V2.-J?- and if you could just boar with me a second,   sir,
   I •'./ill confirm tho time. Sir, that photograph is
   tiir.ee! r.t 15°5« Again, on a 7311C video, referenced
   MAT G and timed r.t 1503:50:18 and also 1503:52:03,
   again the person that tho girls believe is Paul is
   sbov.oi on that video. All those identifications
   jxctunlly arc in Jinclosurc no. ^ apax’t from tho first
   0310   .
' I . y-£ I con just stop you there because at this point I
   soci;: to x'crncniber bocausc every effort had been made
   but this was still just tho start and this vac ono
   of the eases where. v;o thought it was Enclosure h but
   i;o could not really bo ccrtain? - A. That is right,
   sir. In fact, ono of the points I was going to make
   was that the subsequent evidence you will hear vrill,
   in fact, slightly altor the ficures which I gave to
   you on the first day and perhaps I will mention it
   in a moment.

   Sir, in respect of the last identifications I have
   prepared a plan which has been given the reference
   no, Jr-JJL 128, There is another addendum, sir. In
   respect of Mr, Ilollinghurst, whose evidence you have
   already iioard aUcmt, he has viewed photographs and
   confirms that Faul is one of tho persons that he
   tried to revive and h e lias signed a plan of tho
   terracine indicating the position at which he treated
   Paul, That plan, sir, is referenced I-fni/1. I think,
   sir, that probably covers the additional visual
   evidence,
^■jcloruro 110,     and that possibly two, r.t that Gtago,
nit'y 'ir.vc been in ’Jnclosurc no, k, As a result of
tho evidence of l«!r, Ilollinghurst, in fact, it is now
sight people that we believe were in no, 4 ojid one
that nc.y have been,
0±ry car. I refer 3rou then to a plan which has been
given the reference no, IH'JL 170 and that relates to
tho identifications outside the ground, six*.

That will be C221. - A, X have already referred to it,
sir, but ITJJL 128, which is a plan of the terraces ,,,

That is C 2 2 2 , This is tho one where the two young
ladies, if I can refer to them, spent so nruch effort?
A, That is right. Finally, sir, MTH/1, which is Mr,
Ilollinghurst *s .plan.

That will bo C223, - A, Sir, if I can deal, first of
all, with the identification outside and that is
II'JJL 170* The point at which we believe Paul — -
well, wo know Paul is shown is at this point heret
the outer perimeter gates near to here. These are
the outer perimeter gates and it is in this position
hero,

     TIIE COriONEIt:    Ladies and gentlemen of tho Jury,
can you see that?      Not Gate C ....

     TITS ’JITNESS:    It is tho actual outer gate, sir,

     TIP} CORGITUR:  Yes, ■* A, Sir, in respect of the
terrace j>lan, tld.s is Enclosure no, 3 and this is
Knclosuro no. l{ and, in respect of the identification
where it appears that Paul is, as it were, going from
3 to h at the dividing fence, the position that I
believe that is shown is at this point hero. In
respect of tho photographic and video identifications
actually in Enclosure no. h f as I say, on the plan
I have referred to just one, PRT/2, but tho position
shown is here. I thinlc it is fair to say, sir, on
those photographs and the video, I am satisfied that
Paul is probably still alive at that stage but I
cannot say at. what stage of the medical process that
you have already-heard about Paul has actually reached

Yos, on tho assumption it is Paul, the person you are
looking at? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

Then in respect of the photograph MTIl/1 , Mr.
Ilollinghurct *s ....

Not photograph - plan, I thinlc? - A. Yes. Ke has
indicated a position again in no. h Enclosure and in
this position here, in Enclosure no. k ,

                         - 3-   ©
                                                                           M. i.■iv'TV"



                    O,   VjK: | oT course, Hr, Hollinghurst *s ■ovidenco " r . * quite
                A        cloor that Iio was it*, jjnclosuro -J, vns it not? - A, That
                         .is ri*;ht, sir, yes.

                               I>•ri. PilASIi.'v:    Mo questions, sir, thr rile you.

                               jr.’.                ?.‘o, thank you.

                B              i-Vi. CATCHiTLIis         i:o, thank you.

                                    VRs'iSiZll: Sir, just before you conclude, vill
                         you lot ne road a very short note that the family gave
                         to r.:o this morning which contains words of thanks
                         which come hotter from then than mo, sir.

                               Tin-: COTlG:-;;;ns      'Yos, thank you.
            C
                              IK?.            Tho note is front the family in
                         general, sir, and X road it as it stands. They want
                         to thank Michael Layton and l'cter Hogan who, X
                         miderstand, is an Officer i/lio assisted Inspector
                         Layton, sir, for their help throughout the Inquiry.
                         They v;ant to thank the two Officers, Goulding and
                         Pont, for tho assistance which they cave to Trail on
            D            the ciay, together with the ambulanceman whose name has
                         not been traced. Sir, they want to thank Maureen Yroe
                         and Peter Hyde from Moseley Social Services and they
                         have 7>een, in the family's words, sir, a "lifeline for
                         us throughout the last year*” Sir, they want to thank'
                         Michael Ilollinghurst for trying to save Faul« They
                         say, "l/ords vrill never express how we feel but knowing
                         that he was with Taul, we are all grateful*" Finally,
            E            sir, they want to thank you for being, again tlieir
                         words, "so thorough and a gentleman" as you have
                         been throughout these Inquests and, in particular,
                         the Inqxiesr into their loved ono.

                              TIII5 CGROinST>:         That is very kind of you*          Thank
                         you over so much.           ’.Tiich is Donna?
            F
                              I thinlc I have told you, ladies and gentlemen,
                         that there are very few families that I have the
                         opportunity of speaking to but I have spoken to you,
                         in fact, and I have probably spoken to Michelle as
                         veil but I did not know who you were at the t ime.
                         So you are one of the for/ families whom I have had an
                         opportunity to speak to and it is very good of you to
            G            say nice things about me. I appreciate it very much.
                         I appreciate it even more that you have said nice
                         things about the Officers, in fact, I think they are
                         both in Court, and, of course, all the other people
                         who you have mentioned and who we have heard about.
                         X must say that X was very pleased that we managed
                         to get the evidence from Mr. Hollinghurst because
                         not only does it help with the technical problems as
            H            to where he was, it is the fact that* he was a n u r s e ---
                         okay, lie did not succccd in reviving Paul but at least
                         you have tho confort that fairly immediately after
                         the incident there was somebody who was actually near
rpham Ltd

                                                                ay)
Paul doir.j hit; host and that is sotnc ciicouraconont and
fill credit to hi::i and all credit to yon for acknowledging
it. Tl’.'uik you very nuch indeed.

      J     - in a sense I r.ri just echoing what you lia\re
.said - very very conscious in all Inquests but the
only one I ar.1 thinlcing about at the ronent is this one,
thinking about Paul. I am very very conscious hew
greatly loved people are who v.’e hear about and today,
at the norient, wo have hoard about Paul £<nd I would,like
you to Icjtov hot/ much ue foel for you and for you, Mrs.
Stringer, a very hard time for you and I am sorry that,
if you lilce, we have added upset to you this morning
but you are here, you have got your family, and they
will support you, I am quite sure.

     The last point is I am exceedingly sorry that you
had the delay because,  of course, that vjould have added
to your stress today.    It v:as not    anybody* sfaultbut
there is 3iothing I can do about. I am very sorry that
it happened to you today. Anyway we waitedbecause we
did net want you not to be here. Than]: you for coming,
God bless you.




                          -10-
                                       M. T. HOLLINGmmST

           MICHAEL THOMAS HOLLINGHURST S w o m
                    Bv THE CORONER:
It is Michael Thomas Hollinghurst? - A     Yes.
Of                                                - A.
No, I have changed addresses since then.

Tell us what it is now? -


You are a charge nurse by profession? - A. Yes, that
is right.

And also a football fan? - A. Yes.
Following Liverpool I take it? - A. Quite right.
Is it right that bn 15th April 1989 you went to the
football ground in Sheffield to see the Semi Final? -
A. Yes.

Am I right in thinking that you went by car? - A.
Yes.

You left I think at about 10.30 with four friends? -
A. Yes.

What time did you arrive in Sheffield? - A. We
actually parked the car up at about 2.15.
That was quite a long journey. Was there any reason
for that? - A. There was quite a lot of traffic in
and around the Stockport area but when we got almost
to the end of the Woodhead Pass we decided to call
and have something to eat as a couple of us had not
brought anything to eat and we called in for
something to eat and a drink.

You stopped at the Woodhead Pass? - A. At the very
end, the Sheffield end.

What time did you get to this place where you
stopped, about? - A. About 1 to 1.15.

You had something to eat and then you came on? - A.
Yes.

Having parked, you made your way to the ground? - A.
Yes.

You do not know where you parked I take it? - A.
Overton Road.
                                                          62


                                          M. T. HOLLING;mrec;fr

Q. How far from the ground? - A. I would say it is about
   a ten minute walk.

Q. Were there other supporters going to the ground at
   the same time? - A. Yes.

Q. Liverpool or others? - A. Mainly Liverpool.

Q. Did you notice anything about their behaviour which
   worried you in any way? - A. No, everybody was good
   humoured.

Q. Did you see anybody drinking cans of alcohol? - A.
   There were the odd ones but not excessive numbers.

Q. What I am interested in is - and I am not trying to
   pin you down to say if there were 22 - an approximate
   percentage of the total crowd that you saw in your
   judgement? - A. Of people who were walking to the
   ground who were actually drinking?

Q. Yes. - A. Not a high percentage at all.    As   I say, we
   saw the odd one or two.

Q. Very few as far as you were concerned and their
   behaviour was fine? - A. Everybody was good humoured,
   yes.

Q. I think you got to Leppings Lane at about 2.25? - A.
   Yes, an approximate time.

Q. What was it like outside? - A. We immediately made
   towards where the turnstiles were and there were a
   few hundred or maybe a thousand or so people already
   around the turnstile area.

Q. When you say the   turnstile area do you mean the
   actual turnstile   area or the area outside the
   perimeter gates?   - A. The area that actually leads
   down towards the   turnstile.

Q. Had you been there before? - A. The previous year.

Q. So you had been there before? - A. Yes.
Q. So there were about 500 to 1,000 people? - A. Making
   a rough estimate, yes.

Q. Just look at the model so that we get it right. Just
   show him the turnstile area ( indicating). Are we
   talking about that area there or the area outside the
   gates? - A. We immediately went down to the area that
   has got a partition dividing it down the middle
   leading towards the turnstiles.
                                                           63


                                         M. T. HOLLINGHURST

Q. That is the   turnstiles A to G? - A. I think that is
   the area we went down to, yes.
Q. That is the area where the people were? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you see any mounted Officers or anybody else? -
   A. I noticed in particular one mounted Officer who I
   had seen several times outside Liverpool's ground.

Q. Where was he? - A. He was in that area.
Q. Did you see   what he vras doing, if anything? - A. He
   was trying to get some kind of order, people to queue
   in some kind of order.
Q. Why did he not succeed? - A. There were already a
   mass of people. There would be no particular queues.
    There didn't appear to me at that stage to be anybody
    sectioning people into queues which is the kind of
  . arrangement I am used to when I go to football
   matches at Liverpool certainly.

Q. Because the configuration at Liverpool is completely
   different, is it not? - A. Yes.
Q. Was there any pushing? - A. As I say, there was no
   order at all and so there were no orderly queues and
   there didn't seem any facility for making any orderly
   queues. People were just sort of massed in what was
   really a small area trying to get through a few
   turnstiles.
Q. Did you   see anybody distressed? - A. Yes.
Q. In that   area I am talking about? - A.   Yes,becoming
   more so   over the next few minutes.
Q. Why was that? - A. The crush got more    andmore. We
   arrived and more and more people were arriving behind
   us and so the numbers we are talking about originally
   obviously were swelled by the people arriving behind
   us.
Q. Did you feel anybody pushing you? - A. Everybody was
   being pushed. It got to the stage where there was a
   crush of people and, in fact, some people were
   distressed and trying to make their way back out of
   the crush outside the turnstiles.

Q. You did not take that course? - A. No.
Q. Does that mean you were not particularly
   distressed? - A. Yes, I was quite frightened at that
   stage actually as most people around me were, you
   know.
                                                         64


                                        M. T. HOLLINGHURST

Q. At this point, as I understand it, you could not help
   yourself any more? - A. No, as I say, I got into that
   area and people were arriving behind us and it just
   gradually got worse.

Q. Did you hear anybody making appeals for people not to
   push? - A. People were shouting all sorts of things,
   "Don't push, there are people getting hurt, there are
   people getting crushed".
Q. It made no difference? - A. No, it didn't seem to
   make any difference at all.
Q. You entered through a turnstile, is that right? - A.
   Yes.
Q. You did not see any of the big gates open, is that
   correct, or did you? - A. I didn't, no.
Q. Having got in, do you know what time it was that you
   got in by any chance? - A. Only judging by the next
   few minutes I would say between ten to and five to
   three.

Q. That is an estimate, is it? - A. That is an estimate,
   y es .

Q. You do not actually know the exact time? - A. I don't
   remember looking at the time.

Q. Having got in did you go down the tunnel? - A. Yes.
Q. When you got to the entry of the tunnel before you
   went down did you by chance look towards the pitch? -
   A. Through the tunnel?

Q. Yes. - A. Yes, that is what I am basing the time on
   because as we were entering the tunnel the players
   were on the pitch. The match hadn't started.
Q. We know what time that was and your time is quite
   accurate actually. At the entry of the tunnel the
   players were on the pitch. You could see them, could
   you? - A. Yes.

Q. What was the tunnel like? Was it empty, full, or
   were you able to get down it? That is what I am
   trying to find out? - A. We were getting down it.
   There were a lot of people going down but it wasn't
   crushed. A lot of people were making their way
   through the tunnel.

Q. Before you went in you actually heard people talking.
   I think you mentioned that you heard stewards or
   somebody saying, "Plenty of room inside" or words to
   that effect? - A. Yes.
                                     M. T. HOLLINGHURST


Where was that? - A. Once we got through the
turnstile everybody thought they were out of the
worst of it because it was such a bad crush outside
and we were relieved to get through. Of the four of
us who were making their way through the turnstiles
we lost one and so the three of us were still left on
the groundside of the turnstile and we met up
together. Obviously we wanted to make our way
straight into the ground and there were stewards
around and a couple of Police Officers. I distinctly
remember a Police Officer saying, "Make your way
straight in. There is plenty of room on the
terraces, plenty of room inside".




                             /Q. Did he point you in.
                                                         66

                                            M. T. HOLLINGHURST

Q. Did he point you in any direction or did he just say,
   "May your way through"? - A. Just generally.   He just
   said, "Make your way in."

Q. He didn't point in any way.   He just said, "In lads", or
   words to that effect, "There*s plenty of room"? - A. Yes.

Q. Was it said to you personally or just generally? - A. No.
   I mean, within a couple of feet of me as I was making my
   way.
Q. Down you went down this tunnel and you got to the other
   end of it, of course? - A. Yes.

Q. You went left or right? - A. Left.
Q. When you got on to that terrace - we call it pen 4 - tell
   me what happened and how it was? - A. Well, on the way
   through the tunnel the three of us were still together.
   Having been there the previous year, as I have said, when
   it was quite full the previous seasons we had noticed
   that the terracing to the left corner had been
   particularly empty yet where we were was crushed, the
   season before.   Even going through the tunnel, and as
   far as I can remember even on the way to the match that
   day, we said we would make our way to that left terrace.

Q. That is the banked one, the high one? - A. The left hand
   corner behind the goal.   Of course, not knowing that
   that end was penned off in separate pens. We thought it
   was all one complete terracing.
Q. So that was your objective to get... - A. Out of where it
   was crushed.
Q. You entered pen 4, however, because you were expecting to
   walk along the terrace? - A. Yes.
Q.    Just describe to me what that pen waslike wnen you
     enteredit? - A. It was quite full - well, very full, but
     nothing that I had not seen on a football terrace before.
     It was fairly fluid because we could make our way
     through, albeit it was a struggle at first for a few
     minutes.   Then it suddenly became more and more tightly
     packed by the minute really.

Q. Do you recollect when you first entered, when you said it
   was quite fluid, had the match kicked-off? - A. No.

Q. It had not? - A. No.
Q. Then you say it became tighter, that was the word you
   used.   Do you recollect what time that was in relation
   to the match?   I am not asking you to tell me what time
                                                             67

                                           M. T. HOLLINGHURST

   it was, but in relation to what was going on on the
   pitch? - A. I think we are talking about around kick-off
   time that it really became oppressive and got more and
   more so in the next few minutes.

Q. The tightness, was it coming from behind you? - A. As far
   as I could gather it was coming from behind me.

Q. You had initially made your way in, as you say, and then
   it got tighter.   Did you come to a stop? - A. I think
   what we actually did was come across the dividing fence,
   that we didn’t know was there, obviously.    Then we just
   came to halt and stopped virtually where we were.
Q. Against that fence? - A. We came back in slightly   and
   then...
Q. So you were able to move off the fence at that stage? -
   A. Yes.
Q. Was that kick-off time or before? - A. That was just
   before kick-off time we hit that fence. Roundabout kick-
   off time we are talking about now.

Q. At that point had you ever been in a situation like this
   before on the terrace? - A. No, that is when it started
   to become really frightening then because...

Q. You are saying at kick-off time it became frightening? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Up to then you had coped, so to speak? - A. Yes.   As I
   say, I have been in football crowds before but it becaae.
   unlike any football crowd I had ever been in before.

Q. I think you were rotated once or twice, is that right? -
   A. Certainly once, yes. At one stage I had my back
   completely to the pitch, facing upwards towards the
   stand.

Q. Did you see people being pulled up at that point? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Then did you manage to turn round againor were youmoved
   round? - A. I just remember that...   I did get back the
   other way.   I don't know how I managed to do it.
Q. You had lost your friends by that tine?- A. Yes.

Q / What happened then?   What did you see or notice? - A.  ^
  V The crush got worse rather than better and after a few   (
 J minutes I was aware that somebody was on the ground right
f by where I was standing, by where I was positioned.




                      <5D
                                            M. T. HOLLINGHURST


Q.    Was the    match still in progress when you became awareof
     this or can you not remember? - A. Yes, the match was
     going on.

Q. This was in fact a young man? - A. That's right.

Q. Being a charge nurse you checked to see whether his pulse
   was going and things like that, as soon as you could? -
   A. Yes, but not at that particular moment.
Q.   I realise that. - A. As soon as the crowd cleared...
Q.    That isin factray next question.   How long did it take
     before you were able to get at this lad? - A. I really
     could not put a timescale on it because it just seemed
     like forever.    It seemed like it was getting tighter and
     tighter and you were fighting for your breath.    It was
     probably only a matter of ten minutes at the moment, five
     or ten minutes.
Q. X presume the match had stopped by then? - A. By that
   stage, yes.
Q. Did you see it stop? - A. I was not aware    of what was
   going on to be quite honest.

Q. Most people aren't... - A. I was not aware of when the
   match particularly stopped or when...
Q. Most people can remember bits but they do have great
   difficulty with timing so don't be concerned about that.
   What you are saying is that the pressure eased after
   several minutes, it is difficult to say how many but
   after several minutes? - A. Yes, the pressure began to
   ease and a space...
Q. Then you were able to get down? - A. People were in more
   and more space and that is when I actually saw someone on
   the ground below me.

Q.   As I say, at that point that is when you had a look to
     see whether there was anything that could be done for
     this lad?_- A. Yes.
Q.Cln fact I think you came to the conclusion there wasn'tX
  Cis that right? - A. I tried, as well as the lad who was
   immediately below me.   There was somebody just a couple
   of feet further away.   He was also in the sane
   condition.

Q. So you tried for both of them? - A. Yes, I was going
   back...
                                                        69

                                          M. T. HOLLINGHURST

Q. Did you know whether the other person recovered?   Have
   you any idea? - A. Pardon?      .

Q. Do you know anything about the other person, not the lad?
   We know about the lad because you identified him, didn't
   you, in due course? - A. I believe...   Well, I
   identified the other person as well.   I believe they are
   both deceased.
Q. It was somebody called Paul Carlile? - A. The young man
   was.




               Q. He was the first
                                                            70

                                     M.T. HOLLINGHURST


Q. He was the first one of the two whom you tried to help?
   - A. Yes, he was the one who was immediately next to
  —me and the one who I had been av^are of originally.

Q.   Did you see any activity on the perimeter fence? - A.
     By that stage people were trying with their bare hands
     to rip the fence, you know get the fence down. That is
     what I was aware of going on around me, people were
     pulling at the fence.
Q. Were you attempting to help the lad when people were
   attempting to pull the fence down or was it earlier.
   Can you remember that? - A. From what I can remember as
   I was helping the young lad and the other fellow people
   were frantically trying to get the fence down.

Q. But it had not yet come down? - A. No, they had made
   a hole. There may have been a gate opened, I don't
   know.
Q. Would that have been at the same time as you were
   resuscitating the lad or had you already started
   resuscitation earlier? - A. Well immediately there
   was any space at all when I saw the lad under my feet.

Q.    Of course that is what you were concentrating on? -
     A. Yes.
Q. And how did you get out yourself? - A. Through a hole
   in the fence eventually.

Q. You went frontways? - A. Somebody picked me up and
   said:  "It is time for you to get out yourself". By
   that time I think two ambulancemen had arrived and
   taken over from me trying to resuscitate.

Q. Somebody had come into the pen? - A. Yes.

Q. Well I know, I think I know anyway that the family
   were very grateful that you were there with regard
   to that young man, Paul Carlisle.

           Do you remember this was the witness whom we
     discovered so to speak half way through the Inquests
     in April and May so I thought it would be good to have
     him in here.


                   Cross-Examined by MR. KING;

Q. Mr. Hoilinghurst, can you just help us a little about
   your experience in 1988 the previous semi-final. You
   gave some evidence that you had made your mind up in
   1989 that if you could you would go to a different
   place? - A. Yes.
                                                           71

                                       M.T. HOLLINGHURST


Q. Where had you been on the terraces in 1988? - A. I think
   we were, it would probably be Pen 3, the one to the
   right of the tunnel.

Q. As you come down the tunnel ....      A. Rather than the one
   to the left, yes.

Q. And what had been your experiences in that pen in 1988
   which had led you to make the decision you had for 1989?
   - A. Well it was quite crushed. It was quite crushed
   in relation obviously to the situation that we could see
   in the corner of the pitch which is why we made the
   decision in 1989 to try and make our way in that directio
q   . i am sorry to press you a little, b u t when you mean
     "crushed" could you put that into perhaps a little detail
     of what it meant as far as space went of the people aroun
     you? - A. Well it was a heavy football crowd. As I said
     when I first came in 1989 it was probably still fluid but
     there were quite a lot of people in that particular area
     compared to an area which was a few yards away where
     there was nobody as far as we could see.
Q. I just want to go back to 1988 because you clearly had
   been concerned of what had happened in 1988? - A. Yes.

Q. What had been your concern? - A. I thought somebody may
   have been injured in 1988 and at half-time people were
   clambering into the Stand in 1988 during the half-time
   break out of that pen.
Q. Do you mean clambering up ....   A. They were being
   helped up into the seated area at half-time to get out''
   of the standing area.
           MR. KING: Thank you. I ought to say because as
     you know I represent, or you may not know, a large
     number of the be.reaved and injured including the
     family of the boy who you helped. Can I say also on
     behalf of them how grateful they are for what you did.
     Thank you.

                  Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:
Q. Mr. Hollinghurst, when you said you got to Leppings Lane
   at 2.25 did you mean right at the top of Leppings Lane
   or did that mean right by the perimeter gate? - A. No,
   we made our way straight down to where the entrance was.

Q. What I am trying to find out     is where you were at 2.25?
   - A. We went straight to the     turnstile area. From
   walking from the car we went     straight to the ground, we
   didn't make a stop anywhere,     we just went straight to
   the ground to get in.%
                                  M:T. HOLLINGHURST-


How did you know it was 2.25. Why did you say that
time? - A. That is just a rough estimate. Approximately
2.25 judging on the events that, you know, my perception
of the events that followed.

So you are not absolutely sure about the time then? -
A. I did not look at my watch at that particular time.

What was it like anyway when you got to Leppings Lane,
was it easy enough to walk right down to the perimeter
gate? - A. Down to the area where the turnstiles was but
as I say there were probably 500/1000 people already in
that area. They were in that area, the immediate area
before the turnstiles and obviously trying to get into
the ground at that time.
So the crowds were mainly congested just near the perimete
gate, they weren't spreading up the Lane at the time? -
A. I don't know what you mean by the "perimeter gate"?

The main gate before the turnstile area? - A. They were
in the area that you funnelled into before the turnstiles.

       MRS. McBRIEN: All right.     Thank you very much.


                 Further By The CORONER:

1988, do you know what time you arrived in 1988 as a
matter of interest? - A. I could not tell you sorry.
We want you to mark the plan, want you to show us where
you were. We are asking all the witnesses. If you would
walk up to the overhead. - A. Is it where I ended up?
What I want you to show me, I want you to mark the positio
where you were with a cross where you finished up near the
lad whom you helped. Point out which is Pen 4? Before
you mark it you had told me that you were next to the
perimeter fence. Are you saying that you managed to move
back off, the radial fence, you moved back off it, didn't
you? - A. When we came to a halt in the fence we just
stepped back inside.

       THE CORONER: Mark it then.    That is fine.

       MR. BEECHEY: 345 sir.
       THE CORONER: Thank you.

When you   got to the radial fence before you moved back
off, was   that when kick-off had taken place or had
kick-off   not yet taken place. I just can't reir,amber
what you   told me? - A. I don't think the match had kicked
off.
                                                              57
                                                     P. EDWARDS



Q. I am sorry? - A. I was worried about how packed it
   was in 1980.

Q. When you say very packed, I want to know which bit
   was very packed. Are you saying that the whole of
   the terrace from one end to the other was packed?
   Sergeant Griffiths, can you put the ground plan up?
   This, of course, is a ground plan of 1989 but if you
   just turn round and look. Just indicate the
   terracing from one end to the other.  Ignore all
   those radial fences because you are quite right that
   they were not there. Are you saying that the whole
   of that was packed or are you saying that just a
   central section was packed? - A. When .we first came
   in to the right that was less packed. As we moved
   across it was packed for a good distance.   It was not
   just the centre. A wide area was packed.

Q. It was sufficiently dense there for you to want to
   move towards the front? - A. Yes.

Q. Is that because right at the front it tends to be a
   little bit easier? - A. Yes.

Q. Because people   do not actually like standing there or
   whatever? - A.   At the time I was young and that is
   where a lot of   young people go at the fence, out of
   the way of the   crowd and you have got a better view.

Q. I do not think you are very old now but you were
   younger.  Thank you very much indeed. - A. Yes.

                     IAN J OHN FEARNS Sworn

                        Bv THE C O R ONER

Q. You are Ian John Fearns? - A. That is correct.

Q. Is it still                   A. It is, yes.

Q.                           I believe? - A. That is right.

Q. Mr. Fearns you are another lifelong Liverpool
   supporter? - A. Yes.

Q. You came to the 1989 match anyway on the 15th
   April? - A. That is correct.

Q. Did you come to the 1988 one as well? - A. Yes, I
   did.

Q. Let us talk about 1989.    I think you had a ticket? -
   A. I did.
                                                                                 58

                                                                         P. EDWARDS


Q. Y ou came b y train I believe,           is that right? - A. That
   is correct.

Q.   It was not a football special b ut it was just a
     r e g u l a r train? - A. It was a shut tle train that was
     on its w ay to Norwich w h i c h p a s s e d t h r o u g h Sheffield.

Q.   You s t o p p e d off and you got off I th i n k at about
     q u a r t e r to twelv e I think the train arrived, is that
     r ight? - A. That is a p p r o x i m a t e l y q u a r t e r to twelve.

Q.   It does not       have to be to the m i n u t e or anything like
     that.     When    you got off h o w m a n y p e o p l e w e r e there?
     W e r e you b y   yourself or did y o u t r a v e l w i t h a
     g roup? - A.      I t ravelle d w i t h one f r i e n d on the train.

Q. W h i c h one was that? - A. Te r r y Mainwari ng.

Q.   I th ink you m et two or three oth er p e o p l e I think? -
     A. We m e t three other friends wh e n we w e r e actually
     p u t on to the buses that w e r e laid on to take us to
     t he ground.   We actually met th e m on the actual bus
     itself.

Q. Was t hat Paul Carlisle,           Paul M u r r a y and Ian Ford? -
   A. Yes, th a t is right.

Q. W e r e y o u w e a r i n g football gear? - A. No,       I was
   w e a r i n g c asual jeans and a jeans shirt.




                                           / Q . So h o w c o m e ....
                                                       59


                                        I.J. FEARNS


Q. So how come that you got on to the football coaches? -
   A. Well as we were coming off the train the Police were
   saying:  "Liverpool supporters this way, Nottingham
   Forest supporters the other way", so we just followed
   their directions.

Q. Then you were steered towards these coaches? - A. We
   waited in the forecourt, car park of the area till the
   buses actually arrived.

Q. So you were quite pleased because you came with one
   friend and you had met three more so there were five of
   you at that point? - A. Yes,.that is correct.

Q. You then, I think the coach eventually or bus took you
   towards Leppings Lane. Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you got off near the ground about half-past-12
   something of that order? - A. Something about that.

Q. I think the first thing you did was find yourself a chip
   shop, got something to eat, and then I think you bought
   four cans of lager each. Is that right? - A. That was not
   specifically what I said during the course of the interview
   by the Police. I said we purchased a couple of cans of
   lager.  I did not give any quantity.

Q. I see, so how many cans did you actually have yourself?
   - A. I myself only purchased two.

Q. It does not matter to me whether it is one or ten. Well
   ten might matter to me but all I am trying to find out
   as briefly as I can, you had a couple of cans. Right?
   I think you sat on some nice grassy slope? - A. Yes, there
   was a verge just across the road.

Q. Because it was a beautiful day? - A. Yes.

Q.   All I want to deal with at this point, I want you to tell
     me about Paul Carlisle, all right, because he was with
     you at about 12.30? - A. He was.

Q.   How long did he stay with you? - A. He stayed for approx­
     imately I would say, what, half-an-hour at the most.

Q. In other words you are saying he left you for whatever
   reason at about 1 p.m.? - A. That is correct.

Q.   You never saw him again after that, did you, on the day?
     - A. Unfortunately not.

Q. So when he left you that in fact was goodbye, unfortunately
   - A. Yes.
                                                           60

                                        I.J. FEARNS



Q. Now Paul, why did he go? Tell me why he left, as far as
   you know. Don't tell me what other people have told you
   at this stage, just what you know as to why he left? -
   A. Paul was saying previously when we met him on the bus
   and for a number of days before that he wanted to obtain
   a Stand ticket. Unfortunately he only had a season ticket
   at Anfield for the ground so he was only allocated a ground
   ticket and he wanted to actually try and swap this ticket
   and obtain a Stand ticket.

Q. I see, so when you say "ground ticket" he had a terracing
   ticket? - A. He did indeed.

Q. And what he wanted was to have a Stand ticket to go upstairs'
   - A. Yes.

Q. Was .that the reason why he left because he hoped to do a
   swap? - A. He hoped to do a swap.                              ^

Q. And in fact I think you went towards a place called the
   Horse and Jockey but you have got no idea, he just said
   "That is where I am going". Is that right? - A. Well he
   said he was going up to the pub up the top of the hill to
   try and swap his ticket. We gave him roughly three-quarters
   of an hour and followed up.

Q.   Oh Isee. And having followed him   you never found him?
     - A. We didn't no.

Q. So you can't say whether he succeeded or not but you know
   that that is what he was trying to do? - A. That is the
   reason he left.

Q. Hoping to do, shall we say? - A. Hoping.

Q. So   you then followed him up and eventually you came back
   to   the turnstile area at about half-past-2 I think. That A
   is   right, isn't it? - A. Yes, approximately quarter-past
   to   half-past. I could not be sure.

Q.   I am not going to take you through the detail of how you
     got in apart from asking whether you went through a turn­
     stile or through a gate? - A. I went through a turnstile.

Q. The only other question I want to ask you is did you see
   any of the big gates open? - A. No, not at all.

Q. You never saw that? - A. No.

Q. When, you got in tell me who you were with when you got
   through your turnstile? - A. When I entered the actual
   ground I was with Terence Mainwaring; Ian Ford; Paul Murray
   and we had met up with a friend just outside called
   Carl Lewis.
                                                        I.J. FEARNS


So it was Ian Ford, Paul M u r r a y ---           How well did you
k no w Paul Murray, did you know him well as well? - a .
We w e n t to home games.      I kne w h i m m o r e through Paul Carlisle
w h o knew h im a lot better than myself.            He was a friend we
w e n t to the m a t ches with.

A n d then you m e t up wi t h this ot h e r lad called Carl Lewis?
- A. T h a t is correct.

You m e t h im on the inside? - A. On the outside.      We were
a ctu a l l y in the area outside the turnstiles wi t h him and
we all e n t e r e d the ground together.

D id he come t h r ough a turnstile as well as far as you know?
- A. He did.

N o w on the inside there were the five of you including
yourself, I think you not iced some Police Officers in that
concourse area.    Is that right? - A. I did indeed.

Do you k n o w about how m a n y you saw? - A. No,               it was just
about three or four, five at the most.

A n d did they search you, can you               remember?  I don't mean
all of them? - A. I recall them                  searching some fans but
I m y s e l f neve r got searched.

So you saw that was h appening b u t you weren't? - A. Yes.

Did you w a i t any longer for Paul or did you decide you
did n o t k n o w where he was and y ou w e r e going ....   A. No,
w e a s s u m e d if he had swapped his St a n d ticket we obviousl y
w o u l d not m e e t up wit h him until the wa y home or if he
h a d n ' t we told h im we w o u l d be in the ground at a certain
place, you know, hoping to m e e t him in there, so we made
our w a y s t r a i g h t there.

A n d did you go d own the tunnel? - A.                  Yes.

N o w s o m e t h i n g p e c u l i a r I think about    Carl Lewis.  Did
he a c t u a l l y have a terrace ticket? -              A. He didn't, he had
a Stand ticket.

W h a t did he do, did he go to the Stands or did he come
w i t h you? - A. U n f o r t u n a t e l y he came in through the tur n ­
stiles w i t h us and we were w a i t i n g for Paul M urray who
was still out side at the time.                I don 't know exactly w h a t
h a p p e n e d b u t b e t w e e n the time we w e r e actu a l l y going in,
w h i c h m u s t have been all of ab o u t two minutes, Carl did
n o t have his stub so he was n o t a l l owed up into the
Stands.

Was you r ticket torn, can you remember, your ticket I am
talking ab o u t w h e n you came t h r ough or was it intact? -
A. No, the p erson on the gate had taken the stub from
the ticket.
                                                             62

                                          I.J. FEARNS


Q. I am not too worried precisely what happened to the ticket
   but what you are saying is he could not get up to the
   Stands because he could not prove ... A. He could not prove
   he had a Stand ticket.

Q.   So if he was going anywhere he had to godown on    to the
     terracing? - A. Well that was the way.

Q, And in fact that is what he did with the rest of you? -
   A. Yes, he did.

Q. And you all went down I think the tunnel.     Is that right?
   - A. That is correct.
Q. Did you know there were other routes into the ground? -
   A. Yes, I did.

.Q. But do I take it that   you liked being behind the goal.
    I don't mean directly   behind the goal but in that centre    (
    section? - A. Well at   Anfield that is usually where we
    stand so therefore to   make it easier when Paul Carlisle
    had gone away to swap   his ticket that is where we said we
    would be.

Q. I see.  So that was where you were hoping Paul would come
   if he had not succeeded with his swap? - A. That is right.

Q.    And you went down the tunnel. The tunnel I take it was
     reasonably clear. You did not'have any particular
     difficulty in the tunnel? - A. No, no real problems at
     all.

Q. And when you exited from the tunnel did you turn right or
   left? - A. Right.

Q. Have you any idea what time this would have been that you
   got there? - A. Roughly about 25-past, half-2.                 ^

Q. How long would you say it took you to get through the
   turnstile area? - A. From the outside I would say between
   15 minutes, you know about 10/15 minutes.

Q. If you got to the turnstile area at the time you told me
   you would have had to be later on the terracing wouldn't
   you? - A. Yes. As I say they were given as approximate
   times.

Q. In your statement you put 20-to-3. Would that sound
   reasonable to you or would you prefer to change that?
   - A. 20-to-3 was when we actually got on to the terracing.

Q. Yes, that is what I am trying to find out.     You have
   understood what I am asking? - A. Yes.
                                                                63


                                         I.J. FEARNS


Q. At that point were you able to find, select a spot where
   you wanted to be? - A. We obviously had to push through
   because obviously there was a crowd there but we didn't
   find any great difficulty at all except when we got in
   obviously the crowd was still increasing and there was a
   lot of pushing going on.

Q. Did you feel any surges? - A. Yes, I did. The first surge
   must have been about quarter-to-3 but that was just with
   psople singing and what have you because as I say at that
   time there was nothing out of the ordinary. Then it must
   have been some time between 10-to, 5-to-3 there was the
   surge that came and that just pushed me right down to the
   front.
Q. Can you remember whether the players were already on the
   pitch at that point, not. for playing but for pre-kick-off?
   - A. No, they weren't.

Q. They weren't or you can't remember? - A. No, they weren't
   on the pitch.

Q. They were not. So you felt this surge which carried you
   forward before the players came onto the pitch? - A. I
   did.

Q. Some time after 10-to-3 you would say but before the players
   were on the pitch? - A. It was before the players came
   on the pitch.

Q. Before, that is right. Did you hear the teams being
   announced? - A. I can't honestly remember. I probably
   did but I can't honestly say.

Q. Did you   see the players come on to the pitch at   all? -
   A. No.

Q. Did you see any bit of the match? - A. No.

Q. I don't mean the detail, but did you .... A. I never got
   to focus on one player or the ball at all.

Q. So you are not able to say any of your events in relation
   to what was going on on the pitch apart from being sure
   when the surge came it was before they had come out? - A.
   It was before they came.

Q. Did you get split up from your friends? - A. Yes.

Q. But I think you did actually see Carl at one point, he
   was slightly over to the right, wasn't he? - A. Carl was
   originally standing to my right just in front of Terry
   who was also standing to my right. When the surge came



                          &
                                    I.J. FEARNS


that pushed me right forward to hear the front I went
off sort of to the left and Carl went straight forward
and that was the last I saw of him.

Was it at this point when this big surge came? -   A. Yes.

Did this surge go forward and ease back at all or did it
stay continuously forward? - A. No, when the surge came
the pressure was so intense with the surge that I decided
me and Paul Murray had been pushed that way, we will see
what it is; like down the front because usually there is
a gap between the railings and where the terracing starts
coming up. We got into this gap and then the surge just,
you know, it became more and more and then we became
trapped unfortunately.

Tell me: when you first got down to the front was there
in fact a gap there? - A. No. We assumed there would be
a gap there but when we got there there wasn't and there
was no way back.

Obviously we know things became dreadful in the front
there, we know that. What I am trying to find out when
you first got to the front bit where you were hoping
things would be easier, was it in fact any easier at
that point when you were moving or being moved by the
surge? - A. No, when we actually got to the front it was
just as packed as what it was up the back and then it
just gradually got worse.

Could you see the little gate? - A. I saw it when I
was further up the pitch being opened once but when I
was forward I had no view of the gate at all.

Tell me about that.   When did you see this little gate
open then, tell me? - A. It was just before the surge
came the gate opened. I don't know for what reason or
whether there was a fan trying to get out. I honestly
don't know. I just remember the gate opening and the
Police Officer pushing the fan back in and closing the
gate.
You say this was before the players were on the pitch?
- A. That was before the players were on the pitch.

You are quite sure about that? - A. Positive.

And you say you saw it opened and the fan being pushed
in at that point? - A. Yes.

After that you lost sight of it? - A. Yes.
                                                        65


                                       I.J. FEARNS


Q. How did you yourself get out as a matter of interest?
   - A. I was stuck in the crush for about a full 20, 25
   minutes and when the pressure did finally ease off a
   little and I was able to move my body and turn, I
   literally panicked and forced my way to the back.
   A gentleman who was nearer the back actually took hold
   of me and he did literally hit me and told me to calm
   down and then him and a friend passed me up into the
   Stand above.




                         Q. You did the.right
                                              I. J.   fearns


You did the right thing to go back actually.     I am sure
that was the right thing    for you to do. I want you to
show us on the plan where you, were when you took your
match viewing position, and then show me the second
position, where you finished up near the front.
(The witness .marked Exhibit C467) I think you said
that in 1968 you were in one of the stands, is that
right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

There was one other thing I wanted to ask you. Do you
remember a beach ball being knocked about? - A. I do,
when I first went in, yes.

Was that the position which you have marked with a "1"?
- A. Yes.

Uere you there at that time?. - A. I was there at that
time.

So the big surge happened sometime after that? - A. It
did.

             Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Mr. Fearns, you tell us that Paul - this is Paul
Carbide - wanted to swap his ticket? - A. That is
correct.

So he obviously did not want to be on the terrace in
the standing area, he wanted to be in the stand.  Did
he say anything to you as to why he wanted to swap it?
- A. He never said anything to me personally but me and
my friend Terry Mainwaring came to the assumption that
obviously he was a bit worried about this. For what
reasons, I didn't get into ....

I am just interested in whether     hespoke to you.   Mr.
Terry Mainwaring is here, isn't     he? -A. He is not, no.

     THE CORONER:   Ask him for the hearsay.     I am not
intending to call Mr. Mainwaring.

     MR. KING:   I see. Sir, I want the best evidence
but this may be the best I can get.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.   I don't mind you taking the
hearsay on this point.

     MR. KING:    Thank you, sir:

 Let me investigate a bit further then: what did you
 assume and why did you so assume was the reason for why
 Paul did not want to be on the terraces? - A. For the
,whole of that season, even being at- Anfield on the Kop,
                                            I. J. FEARNS

on numerous occasions Paul when he did stand behind the
goal, moved away to either the side or nearer the front
because the pressure, he felt it was too much for him.

Do you know whether he had been to the semi-final in
1988? - A. He had been, yes.

Were you there with him in 1988? - A. No, I didn't
travel with Paul.
Did you ever speak to him about his experiences in
1988? - A. Only about the game itself.

Not about his experience on the terrace? - A. Not about
any experiences, no.
           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Fearns, d i d y o u say you saw the perimeter gate
opened before the players came out? - A. The perimeter
gate in area "C" was actually opened once to my
recollection, that I can remember, but that was
immediately shut by the Police Officer who was on the
track.

Yes, you are talking about in the perimeter fence,
aren't you? - A. Inside the ground itself. Not gate C,
as in the concertina gate, no.

No, gate 3.' I was wondering if you could look at C277,
the sixth time from the bottom.  Can you see there it
says 14.59.20, I think it is, "Gate 3 open"? - A. Yes.

So that was a little later than you have said, wasn't
it? - A. No, I said ....

You said you saw it open before the players came on the
pitch? - A. Yes, it did open once. As I say, there was
no big flood onto the pitch. The Police Officer just
closed it straightaway.

It is just the time that I am trying to get correct. -
A. As I say, I couldn't be certain on it. It was
before the teams were on the pitch though.

Because we know the teams came out at 6-minutes-to-3
and 14.59 is when gate 3 opened, so all the events that
you have mentioned in the pen, could they have been
just a few minutes out, do you think? - A. As I say,
that is possibly the case, but I can remember that gate
being opened before the teams were on that pitch.

Yes, it is not the events themselves, it is just the
timing. They could be that little bit later?
                                           I- J. FEARNS

     MR. KING:   Sir, to help Mrs. McBrien, it is a
long time since I made the point, but all we know for
certain is that 14.59 shows the gate in a state of
openness.  Sir, I think Mrs. McBrien, probably not
deliberately, has rather misrepresented to the witness
when indicating at 14.59 the gate was in the process of
being opened.

     THE CORONER:   I think what Mrs. McBrien is trying
to find out is whether this witness could be five
minutes wrong with his time but we don't know.

     MR. KING:   We don't know.  I am only trying to
make sure that there is no confusion over the
significance of 14.59 on the chart for gate 3. That is
only a time when we know the gate was in a state of
openness.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   And it doesn't say anywhere that
gate 3 was opened before, does it, sir?

     THE CORONER:   No, it does not, but you cannot
from that figure say that it didn't open before; you
cannot say that it did; and you cannot say what
happened after it. All you can say, as Mr. King
correctly points out, is that at 14.59 it was open.
How long it was open, whether it was shut again,
whether it stayed open continuously, from the figure
itself you can't tell. What this witness is saying,
and he will correct me if I misrepresent what he is
saying, is that his recollection is that the gate did
open, but that it was considerably earlier, before the
players were on the pitch, that somebody came out and a
Police Officer put him back in, and then it was shut,
but he has no further recollection of any events on the
gate. That is his evidence.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Mr. Fearns, you do say that your
timings could be a little out, don't you? - A. Yes, but
I do know distinctly that the teams were not on the
pitch when I first saw that gate open. As I say, when
the gate was opened it was closed virtually immediately
by a Police Officer who was on the track, so for the
record that might not go down as the gate being open,
but as I say, it was opened and closed straightaway.

When you saw that gate open what was the state of the
pen then? - A. From where we were it was starting to
get really quite packed at the time.  It was just
before the surge actually happened. As I say, then the
surge came and recollection from then was just panic
really.
                                                           69

                                                 I. J. FEARNS

Q. You didn't feel in any danger at all when you saw that
   gate first opened? - A. No. I was feeling a bit
   worried about the intensity of the pushing, but it was
   just like any cup game to me at the time.

Q. Did you see how the gate was opened? - A. No. I can
   only recollect the actual gate opening and the Police
   Officer closing it virtually straightaway.  I couldn't
   tell you who opened, why it was opened.

Q. Did anybody g2 t out at that time? - A. No, the gate was
   closed virtually immediately.

Q. Nobody at all? - A. No.
q.        THE CORONER:      Did you say nobody got out? I
     thought you s a i d somebody got out and was put back in?
     - A. Well, th'ey didn't get out - that was the question.

0. I see, yes.    I understand.
          THE CORONER:   Mr. King, are you happy with what
     you have heard with regard to Mr. Mainwaring? As I
     say, I do not intend to call Mr. Mainwaring because I
     think it isn't really terribly --- I know it is very
     important to the family but it is not terribly relevant
     to the Inquest. Do you want to ask him any further
     questions?
          MR. KING:   Yes. I don't want to suggest
     something which he has no knowledge of.
              Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Q. Did you know Mr. Carlile in the previous season, that
   is Paul Carlile, i n 'the 1988 season? - A. Yes.
Q. Would he go to the Kop at Anfield in the 1988 season? -
   A. Yes, he did.
Q. In the 1988 season did he exhibit the same reluctance
    to be on the Kop and worried about crowding? - A._ Yes.
    I myself only started going to football matches with
   Paul Carlile, it was about the '87 season. Ever since
   then I knew for a fact that he was nervous of the large
   crowds, but as I say, he never, ever actually came out
   and said it to me personally.
Q. In the 1987 and '88 season he was still going on the
   Kop as far as you knew? - A. Yes.
Q. Then he went to the '88 semi-final at Hillsborough? -
   A. Yes.
o : q io   s -io v e K '
IAN THOMAS GLOVER




1.   Ian Glover, the son        of the Applicants John and Teresa

     Glover was born on        20th January, 1969, and was twenty

     years old when he died at Hillsborough football ground

     on 15th April, 1989.


2.   He   was accompaniedto         the    ground by   his    brothers

     Joseph Glover and John McCarthy but only he and Joseph
     entered enclosure        3 of     the Lepping     Lane end      of the

     stadium.



3.   At the     inquest the     jury heard       first from      Professor

     Alan Usher about        the cause of death which           he gave as

     death through        traumatic asphyxia.        Evidence     was ther.

     put by Officer        Geraldine Evans in which          details were

     given, inter alia, of          what had happened to Ian Glover

     between 2.30 p.m. and           shortly after 3.40 p.m. when he

     was certified dead        by Dr. Alan Redgrave.            In summary

     that evidence        was to the       effect that Ian      and Joseph

     Glover took up a position in the centre of enclosure 2

     at approximately 2.30          p.m.    Following a      surge in the

     crowd they     were both       pushed forward.       Joseph states

     that     both were     being    crushed from      about 2.4 0    p.m.

     onwards.     Joseph managed          to escape from the enclosure

     via a     gate in the     front perimeter fence but           Ian was




ANNAAC
     left     inside        about        4     feet        from the        front     of     the

     enclosure.        Joseph tried to                    climb back in to help Ian

     but was pulled           off the fence                by a police officer.              He

     spoke     to     Ian     through               the     fence     until        Ian     lost

     consciousness.              There is            video evidence           of Ian        and

     Joseph together           in enclosure 3                   and of Joseph            on the

     fence outside of the                 enclosure.            Approximately twenty

     minutes later           Joseph saw              Ian being        pulled from           the

     enclosure on to           the pitch by two                  unidentified police

     officers.         He attempted                 to resuscitate           Ian who        was

     then carried on           a makeshift stretcher to                       a gymnasium

     which     was     serving           as     a temporary           mortuary.             The

     officer reported that Joseph                         had that morning said to

     her     that     while         in        the     gymnasium        a      doctor        had

     identified        Ian's     pulse              and     attempted,         for        about

     fifteen         minutes,            to     resuscitate            him         but     was

     unsuccessful.              Joseph assented that                   it was        himself

     together        with       other fans                who    carried      Ian.          His

     statement was then              changed by aWest                 Midlands police

     officer        to read     "may           have carried           .... "        Shortly

     after 3.40 p.m. Dr.                 Alan Redgrave, in the presence of

     P.C. Glave        certified that Ian                   Glover was dead.                The

     transcript        of this           part        of the       inquest hearing            is

     exhibited to this memorandum at Exhibit



4.   The jury never           heard from Joseph Glover                       himself, but

     were merely        presented with                    excerpts from        statements




ANNAAC
     that he had made to the police.                  They did not have the

     benefit of        hearing relevant matters which                 related to

     the period after           the 3.15 p.m. cut-off            point.     These
     matters are set        out in a note of a               statement made by-

     Joseph     Glover     which       was    taken    by      Sheila     Coleman

         (researcher) and is       exhibited at exhibit                   to this

     memorandum.        Of particular         relevance are the notes at

     the     end of     the record       which state          first, that      the

     ambulances        had great       difficulty       in     getting to      the

     gymnasium        because     of    the     presence        of    crowds    of

     supporters        trying to       leave the       stadium and        second,

     that Ian, upon being taken out of the enclosure by the

     police, was left on the pitch lying on his back.



5.   These matters when          combined with the evidence               of Dr.

     Phillips and Dr. Ashton are all highly relevant to the

     issue of whether Ian          Glover's death was aggravated by

     lack of     care, this being            an issue which          should have
     been left to the jury.




ANNAAC
STATEMENT OF JOHN McCARTHY RE IAN GLOVER

- brother of Ian Glover.
Got Ian out of bed on the morning of the disaster to give him a ticket
for the Leppings Lane terracing.

- John had a ticket for the North Stand.
He saw people spilling onto the track and turned to hisfriend   and
said 'Our Ian and Joe are in there'.

He saw a fat man being carried from the Leppings Lane end to the Spion
kop end. His friend was trying to revive him. He obviously failed as
he began punching the ground. John knew then that the man was dead
and his fears for Ian and Joe grew.

He stayed in his seat because although he wanted to get on the pitch
and search for them, police with dogs were lined up in front of the
stands.

Another friend, who was on the front row of the stands, shouted John
and said: 'Your Ian's dead. I'll take you to Joe'. This was
approximately 3. 25r>m.

The friend (Paddy Starkey) took John to Joe outside the gymnasium
(3.30pm approx). John asked:

        'Where's our Ian?'
        Joe answered:
        'He's in there.

John and Joe then went to the door of the gymnasium. There were two
police officers at the door (one had glasses on). They said 'You
can't go in there.' John replied:

        'My brother's in there.'

He moved them out of the way and entered the gymnasium.               a




John and Joe staying with Ian for what John thinks was about 5
minutes.
They were very upset and were taken outside.
John asked a police officer if he could use a phone. He was directed
to a pay phone but could not get a line. He returned to the police
officer who produced a telephone from under the table and he
immediately rang home and informed his Aunty of Ian's death.

Outside the gymnasium John saw people on stretchers. One of these was
Danny MacArthur (Ian's friend). He was looking at John but, John was
unable to respond to him in his state of shock.
John and Joe were taken in an ambulance to BARNSLEY Hospital (18 miles
away). This was approximately 4.20-4.30pm.

   They arrived at the hospital where a doctor told them that they
were suffering from shock and were given a drink of water.

John Glover (father) arrived at the hospital and took them to look for
Ian.
They travelled to the Police Station and Hammerton Road Boys' Club
where he remembers names being shouted out.
Travelled on bus back to the Hillsborough ground.
Had to look through all the photographs and John picked Ian out. His
(Ian's) body was brought to them

They were taken to a table and were questioned by plain clothes police
officers (who we know to be CID).

NR    John remembers about 3 rows of bodies in the gym when he arrived
      at approx 3.30pm. He estimates about SQ bodies. This would be
      about right as there were bodies still at the back of Leppings
      Lane.
NR    John's timings as to his arrival at the gym are quite accurate as
      he remembers seeing Danny MacArthur on a stretcher before Danny
      was taken to hospital.

JOSEPH GLOVER RE IAN GLQYEB

     Travelled to Sheffield with brother Ian.
     In Pen 3.
     Both being crushed from 2.40pm onwards.
     Shouting to get out.
     Gate was opened.  Few people got out then it was closed again.
     Gate opened again. Joegot out.     Police directed him to side pens
     but he went back to the fence to Ian.
     Ian approx 5 yards from front fence.
     Joe was shouting to Ian to move.
     Ian was saying 'I can't, I can't move'.
     Joe was shouting to people around Ian to move and help him, but
     they said that they couldn't move either.
     Joe saw Ian's eyes closing.
     Joe climbed on fence (see video) and was shouting to Ian.
-    Joe ran to ambulanceman and pleaded with him to help Ian.
     Ambulanceman went to Policeman who said 'we can't do anything yet'.
     People were being pulled out.
-    Joe was still on the fence. Ian was unconscious but was standing
     up.
     Two police officers brought him out, laid him on the pitch then
     returned to get more bodies out.
     Joe tried to resuscitate him.
     Someone else also tried but said 'it's too late'.
     Ian was placed on a hoarding and Joe and Liverpool supporters
     carried him to gymnasium.
     In gymnasium Doctor (unidentified) felt for pulse and said 'There's
     a pulse there'. He tried for about twenty minutes to resuscitate
     Ian but then said he was dead.
                              -   3 -


- '.Plain clothes police officers in Gym kept Joe with Ian. They asked
   -Joe for Ian's name and address and they wrote it on a tag and put
    it on his wrist. They emptied Ian's pockets and put his
    possessions in a brown bag.
-• The gym at this time was being partitioned off and Joe was asked to
    move to the side where the injured were being dealt with.  Instead
    he went outside where he met John McCarthy's friend (Paddy
    Starkey). Joe told him that Ian was dead and Paddy went to find
    John.
NB   Joe remembers that the ambulances had great difficulty getting to
     the gymnasium area because of the Nottingham Forest fans leaving
     the ground (the gym was at the 'Forest' end of the ground)'.

NB   When Ian was taken out of the pen by the police he was laid pa h is
     back and left.

JOHN GLOVER RE IAN GLOVER -

Ian's father.                                                     ' ^
Was informed that Ian was dead and travelled to Barnsley Hospital
where he met Joe and John.
Was told at the hospital that Joe was dead - but Joe was standing with
him.
Went to Police Station then to Boys' Club.
   Was taken to ground on bus.
Looked through photographs for Ian.
John McCarthy picked out Ian (no 37).
   Ian was wheeled out.
He had a dirty blanket over him.
His leg was hanging off the trolley and his head was to one side.
John straightened his head and a catholic priest gave him the 'last
rites'.
John and family were then led to a table where they were questioned by
CID officers.
They were asked how Ian had travelled to Sheffield. How much he had
to drink etc.
They were then told that they might as well go home.                ^

NB   John states that looking through the photographs was "the worst
     think in [his] whole life".

MB   It was unnecessary for John and the others to go through this
     process of identification as Ian had a tag on him bearing his name
     and address from Joe's earlier identification.
                                              15 October 1990
Dr Stefan Popper
The Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield

Dear Dr Popper

I am the father of Ian Glover, one of the 95 victims of the
Hillsborough Disaster and I am writing to you in order to voice my
concern regarding the forthcoming inquests.  In particular, I am
concerned that there are specific issues relating to Ian's death which
might not be addressed.

I am aware that the inquest held earlier this year was meant to deal
specifically with who Ian was and when and where he met his death.
However, I have to state that I found the limitations of this format
extremely frustrating and intimidating.   Consequently, therewere a ’
number of issues relating to Ian's death which I felt were
inadequately addressed yet I felt powerless to pursue answers.   It is
for this reason that I am writing to you to ask that you consider
calling evidence in an attempt to find the answers my family and
myself so desperately seek.

I fear that my family has been irreversibly damaged by the
Hillsborough disaster. My wife and I have lost our son Ian,but we
also have to watch our other sons suffer daily.




There are a number of other issues that I feel need raising.    These
are as follows:




                                        cont in u e d .
                                                  o




4.     At the r e s u m e d 'mini' i n q u e s t s m y s o n Jo e p o i n t e d to a f a c t u a l
       e r r o r in th e s u m m a r y w h i c h w a s to be read in the c o u r t .                    The
     . s u m m a r y r e f e r r e d to a n a m e d p o l i c e o f f i c e r c a r r y i n g I a n a c r o s s the
       p i t c h to the g y m n a s i u m .        In a c t u a l f a c t as I h a v e p r e v i o u s l y
       s t a t e d , it w a s J o e a n d a g r o u p of f a n s w h o c a r r i e d I a n a c r o s s the
       pitch.        W h e n J o e i n d i c a t e d t h i s i n a c c u r a c y th e S u m m a r y O f f i c e r
       a l t e r e d th e s u m m a r y so t h a t it r e a d t h a t t h e o f f i c e r iriav h a v e
       c a r r i e d Ia n a c r o s s th e p i t c h .

       I am m o s t c o n c e r n e d t h a t a p o l i c e o f f i c e r ' s s t a t e m e n t c o u l d , in
       e f f e c t , be a l t e r e d w i t h s u c h e a s e a n d w i t h o u t th e o f f i c e r b e i n g
       c o n s u l t e d , p a r t i c u l a r l y as t h i s n e w i n f o r m a t i o n a p p a r e n t l y      _
       c o n t r a d i c t e d .the v i s u a l e v i d e n c e .                                                 V

       I r e q u e s t t h a t an e x p l a n a t i o n be g i v e n as to h o w the s u m m a r y
       o f f i c e r c o u l d a l t e r t h e s u m m a r y an d f u r t h e r r e q u e s t t h a t my s on
       J o e be c a l l e d as a w i t n e s s in o r d e r to g i v e e v i d e n c e r e l a t i n g to
       w h o c a r r i e d I a n to. t h e g y m n a s i u m .

I would ask that you give                  serious consideration                to t h e i s s u e s o u t l i n e d
a n d to th e p o s s i b i l i t y of     t h e s e b e i n g r a i s e d at   the f o r t h c o m i n g
inquests.

Yours     sincerely




John     Glover
                         Q aS ^   v\    \




                                                                          15 O c t o b e r   1990

Dr S t e f a n P o p p e r
The Me dico - L e g a l      Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield

Dear    Dr   Popper

I a m t he f a t h e r of I an G l o v e r , o n e of the 95 v i c t i m s of the
H i l l s b o r o u g h D i s a s t e r a n d I am w r i t i n g to yo u in o r d e r to v o i c e m y
c o n c e r n r e g a r d i n g t h e •f o r t h c o m i n g i n q u e s t s . In p a r t i c u l a r , I am
c o n c e r n e d t h a t t h e r e a r e s p e c i f i c i s s u e s r e l a t i n g to I a n ' s d e a t h w h i c h
m i g h t n ot be a dd re ss ed .

I a m a w a r e t h a t the i n q u e s t h e l d e a r l i e r t h i s y e a r w a s m e a n t to d e a l
s p e c i f i c a l l y w i t h w h o Ian w a s a n d w h e n a n d w h e r e he m e t h i s d e a t h .
H o w e v e r , I h a v e to s t a t e t h a t I f o u n d the l i m i t a t i o n s of t h i s f o r m a t
extremely            f r u s t r a t i n g and i n ti mi da ti ng .      Cons eq ue ntl y, there were a
n u m b e r of       i s s u e s r e l a t i n g to I a n ' s d e a t h w h i c h I f e l t w e r e
i n a d e q u a t e l y a d d r e s s e d y e t I f e l t p o w e r l e s s to p u r s u e a n s w e r s . It is
f o r t h i s r e a s o n t h a t I am w r i t i n g to y o u to a s k t h a t y o u c o n s i d e r
c a l l i n g e v i d e n c e in an a t t e m p t to f i n d th e a n s w e r s m y f a m i l y an d
m y s e l f s o d e s p e r a t e l y seek.

I f e a r t h a t m y f a m i l y h a s b e e n i r r e v e r s i b l y d a m a g e d b y the
H i l l s b o r o u g h disaster.        M y w i f e an d I h a v e l o s t ou r s o n Ian,            b u t we
also have            to w a t c h o u r o t h e r s o n s s u f f e r d a i l y . P




T he re are a number               of   other   issues      that    I feel      need       raising.      These
a r e as f o l l o w s :




                                                                    co n tin u e d . . .
1.   W h e n Ian w a s l i f t e d o n t o the p i t c h he w a s p l a c e d in a p o s i t i o n
     c l o s e to the g o a l mou th .               H i s . b r o t h e r J o e w a s w i t h hi m w h e n a
     p o l i c e o f f i c e r p r o n o u n c e d h i m d e a d a n d c o v e r e d his f a c e w i t h a
     pullover.             J o e a n d a g r o u p of f a n s c a r r i e d Ia n on a m a k e s h i f t
     s t r e t c h e r to t h e g y m n a s i u m w h e r e he w a s e x a m i n e d b y a d o c t o r w h o
     f o u n d a p u l s e on hi m and a t t e m p t e d r e s u s c i t a t i o n (MB t h i s w a s
     a p p r o x i m a t e l y t w e n t y m i n u t e s a f t e r t h e p o l i c e o f f i c e r had
     p ro no u n c e d him dead).               I believe that this issue was in ad eq ua te ly
     d e a l t w i t h at t h e i n q u e s t and r e q u e s t t h a t a d e t a i l e d e x p l a n a t i o n
     is s o u g h t at the s o o n to be r e s u m e d i n q u e s t s b y c a l l i n g the
     r e l e v a n t .witnesses.

2.   T h e r e ar e t h r e e i s s u e s r e l a t i n g to t h e n o t i f i c a t i o n of   Ian's     death
     an d     his i d e n t i f i c a t i o n w hic h I feel n eed a d dr e ss in g :

     (a)      On t he e v e n i n g of the d i s a s t e r I t r a v e l l e d to B a r n s l e y
             h o s p i t a l to s e e my i n j u r e d son, J o e ( h a v i n g b e e n i n f o r m e d of
             his w h e r e a b o u t s by my other son John).                      T h e p o l i c e at t h i s
             s t a g e k n e w t h a t Ian w a s d e a d ( J o e had i d e n t i f i e d h i m in the
             g y m n a s i u m in the a f t e r n o o n ) .      H o w e v e r , an o f f i c i a l at the
             h o s p i t a l c h e c k e d a c o m p u t e r p r i n t - o u t a n d i n f o r m e d me t h a t
             I a n w a s a l i v e b e c a u s e he w a s n o t on t h e list.

     (b)     W h e n I w a s at the g y m n a s i u m a n d b e f o r e I ha d l o o k e d at t h e
             p h o t o g r a p h s of the d e c e a s e d I w a s t o l d b y a p o l i c e m a n in the
             r e c e p t i o n a r e a t h a t b o t h I a n and J o e w e r e d e a d .

     (c)     W h i l s t I w a s b e i n g g i v e n the a b o v e i n f o r m a t i o n in Y o r k s h i r e a
             p o l i c e o f f i c e r v i s i t e d m y h o m e in L i v e r p o o l a n d i n f o r m e d my
             w i f e t h a t J o e w a s i n j u r e d y e t m a d e n o m e n t i o n of I a n e v e n
             t h o u g h it w a s s o m e t h r e e a n d a h a l f h o u r s s i n c e J o e had
             u n o f f i c i a l l y i d e n t i f i e d h i m in t h e g y m n a s i u m g i v i n g h i s n a m e
             a n d a d d r e s s to a p o l i c e o f f i c e r .

     I r e q u e s t t h a t w i t n e s s e s be c a l l e d to e x p l a i n h o w t h i s i n a c c u r a t e
     inf or ma ti on was disseminated.                  M o r e o v e r , an o f f i c i a l c o m p l a i n t
     m a d e b y m y s e l f r e g a r d i n g the a c t i o n s of S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e p o l i c e
     has, to d a t e , b e e n ignored.




                                                                 c o n tin u e d . . .
                                               - 3 -




     *



4.       At th e r e s u m e d 'mini' i n q u e s t s m y son J o e p o i n t e d to a f a c t u a l
         e r r o r in the s u m m a r y w h i c h w a s to be r e a d in the c o u r t .                 The
         s u m m a r y r e f e r r e d to a n a m e d p o l i c e o f f i c e r c a r r y i n g Ian a c r o s s the
         p i t c h to the g y m n a s i u m .        In a c t u a l f a c t as I h a v e p r e v i o u s l y
         s t a t e d , it w a s J o e and a g r o u p of f a n s w h o c a r r i e d Ian a c r o s s the
         pitch.        W h e n J o e i n d i c a t e d t h i s i n a c c u r a c y the S u m m a r y O f f i c e r
         a l t e r e d th e s u m m a r y so that it r e a d t h a t the o f f i c e r m a y h a ve
         c a r r i e d Ian a c r o s s the pitch.

         I am m o s t c o n c e r n e d that a p o l i c e o f f i c e r ' s s t a t e m e n t co uld, in
         e f f e c t , b e a l t e r e d w i t h s u c h e a s e and w i t h o u t the o f f i c e r b e i n g
         c o n s u l t e d , p a r t i c u l a r l y as t h i s n e w i n f o r m a t i o n a p p a r e n t l y
         c o n t r a d i c t e d the v i s u a l e v i d e n c e .

         I r e q u e s t t h a t an e x p l a n a t i o n b e g i v e n as to h o w the s u m m a r y
         o f f i c e r c o u l d a l t e r the s u m m a r y an d f u r t h e r r e q u e s t t h a t m y son
         J o e be c a l l e d as a w i t n e s s in o r d e r to g i v e e v i d e n c e r e l a t i n g to
         w h o c a r r i e d Ian to the g y m n a s i u m .

I w oul d ask that you give                  serious consideration                to t h e i s s u e s o u t l i n e d
and to the p o s s i b i l i t y of          t h e s e b e i n g r a i s e d at   the f o r t h c o m i n g
inquests.

Yours       sincerely




John      Glover




     I
                                              I. SOUTHGATE


               Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE;
When the great big surge came whereabouts did it come?
Go up to the plan and just point. - A. The surge seemed
to come from directly behind and I seemed to get pushed
this way and Phil got pushed forward downwards towards
the pitch.
     THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed.      I am
very much obliged to you.

     Mr. and Mrs. Hammond, your lad was very young and it
is very very sad you have lost him.   I have said this
before already I know, but it is still the same.    I
wrote to you to check on Mrs. Hammond's occupation.
Have you sent it back?   In that case we will just use
the note.   It pure formality.
                   (Short adjournment)

                   JOSEPH GLOVER Sworn

                     By THE CORONER:

You are Joseph Glover? - A. Yes.

Of                              - A. Yes.

You are the brother of Ian who unfortunately lost his
life? - A. Yes.

It is our dad at the back? - A. Yes.

You went by car with Ian and others to the match on the
15th April, 1989? - A. Yes.   In my statement I made a
while ago, it was the day after I buried my brother and I
have left a lot of things out of it.

Yes, that is why you have come so you can tell us.      At
the moment I am trying to findout how you got to
Sheffield.   You came by car? - A. Yes.

What time did you leave? - A. About eleven o'clock.

You had a ticket? - A. Yes.

Did Ian have   one as well? - A. Yes.

Having left by car, did you drive straight to Sheffield?
- A. Yes.

What time did you arrive in Sheffield? - A. It was
roundabout two o'clock, just after two o ’clock.
                                                       J. GLOVER
Q. Did you stop en route at all? - A. No.
Q. That is quite a long time from* Walton? - A. Coming up on
   the motorway we hit a bit of traffic, there were hold­
   ups .
Q. Which way did you come?    Did you cdme across the Passes
   or did you come o n the motorway? - A. N o , on the
   motorways.
Q. You were in a car so I assume you weren’t stopped and
   searched? - A. No.
Q. Did you notice whether the Police were searching coaches
   as you were driving along? - A. Well, when we got. not too
   far away from the ground, I am not sure how many miles it
   was, I think we saw a few minibuses getting stopped and
   coaches.
Q. Of you just drove on? - A. Yes.

Q. It was of no interest to you.     Having got toSheffield.
   You weren't driving? - A. No.
Q. Somebody else was driving.      Was the car parked up? - A jQ
   Yes.
Q. In fact you parked quite a long   way from theground?    - A.
   I think it was a mile or a mile   and a half.

Q. You then had to walk to the ground? - A. Yes.

Q. What time did you arrive at the ground, about? - A. I
   couldn't really say.

Q. How long does it take you to walk a mile or a mile and a
   half, normally? - A. Ten minutes, fifteen minutes.

Q. That is quite good walking.    Did it take as long as that
   or longer? - A. I am not sure.    I think it is at
   Penistone...   I am not sure the road we parked in but it
   was just a straight walk down.

Q. Don't worry about the time. - A. I am not sure of the
   times.

Q. It isn't that important what time you arrived. I just
   like to know if I can find out.   Walking down did you
   see other supporters? - A. There were a lot, all walking
   towards the ground.

Q. Did you see any of them carrying cans of alcohol? - A.
   No.
                                                  J. GLOVER
You didn't see any? - A. No.

None at all? - A. No.
Do you remember walking past a big roundabout before you
got into Leppings Lane? - A. No, I can't place it.

Were you checked for alcohol at any point as you were
coming down? - A. No.
Did you see whether anybody else was? - A. No.
Of course you were driving in the car and you hadn't
stopped from Liverpool to Sheffield? - A. No.

When you got to the turnstiles, never mind what time it
was, how did you sinter?  Did you enter through a
turnstile or through a big gate? - A. We entered through
the turnstiles.

Do you remember the big outer perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

You do remember those. - A. As we walked down we got to
the Leppings Lane turnstiles.   We left Danny, just me
and Ian, and we joined...   They weren't queues.    There
was just like a crowd outside the turnstiles.    We joined
the back at the turnstiles and then a lot of fans started
coming down and getting behind us.   That is when we
first started getting into trouble at the turnstiles.
We started getting crushed at the turnstiles.

Are you saying you were actually crushed at the
turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Did you see any Police horses there? - A. We noticed one.

Was that outside the perimeter gates or inside the
perimeter gates when you noticed that? - A. I think it
was inside.

Which way on was it to you?    Was it broadways or
longways on? - A. Long.

Was he communicating with you or the other people in the
crowd?   Was he shouting or waving his arms or anything
that you can remember? - A. No.   I think he was just
longways by the gates.   There is like a barrier.

How crushed were you in the area outside the turnstiles?
- a . It started getting pretty bad.

Could you feel any pressure from anywhere? - A. Yes.

Where was it coming from? - A. From the back of us.
                                                   J. GLOVER
Q. Did you shout out about pushing or anything at that
   point?    Pardon?   I didn't hear you. - A. There were
   just crowds coming behind us.   I am not sure how many
   turnstiles there are, but there didn't seem to be any
   queues or any stewards or anything there.   1t was just
   people entering the turnstiles to queue up for the match,
   but there were no queues.

Q. Did you see any Police Officers outside the turnstiles? -
   A. Not outside the turnstiles, no.

Q. You didn't see any? - A. No.
Q. Apart from the mounted Officer you saw no other Police
   Officers? - A. I think there might have been two or three
   on the side.   There wasn't any outside the turnstiles.

Q. Were they saying or doing anything that you noticed? - A.
   No.

Q. I didn't hear your answer to my question when I asked
   whether you were shouting out to people not to push.
   Did you do that or not outside the turnstiles, you
   yourself? - A. Yes.                                             ^

Q. Did it make any difference as far as you could tell? - A.
   I think there was just that many coming down and there
   was no-one to stop them.   They just all tried to come
   towards the turnstiles to queue up to get in. With there
   not being any queues it just formed into a crowd.

Q.   I don'tknow whether you will be able to help me on this
     because the perimeter gates were behind you, but did you
     notice whether they were open or shut? - A. I didn't
     notice.

Q.   Did you hear any messages    over the tannoy while you were
     out there? - A. No.

Q.    Did you hear any messages   from a Land Rover behind you? -
     A. No.

Q.    Did you see it by any chance? -   A. No.    Me and Ian had £
     split up by then as we got into    the entrance to the
     turnstiles and he shouted over,     "I'll meet you inside."
     As I got through the turnstiles     Ian was waiting inside
     for me.

Q. So he had got in before you? - A. He got in before me.

Q. So once you had got through - there is a biggish area
   there? - A. Yes.
                                                J. GLOVER
Was it quieter in there?   Was it easier? - A. Yes.
Once you got through the turnstiles, yes.
Were you searched in that area at all? -A. No.

Did you see any Police Officers? - A. No.

None at all? - A. As we got through the turnstiles there
was none on the turnstiles.
Pardon? - A. There was no-one searching at the turnstile
as we went through.
Was anybody searching on any other turnstile? - A. I
couldn't tell you. The turnstileI went through,.there
was no-one on that one.

How long did you stay in this big area behind the
turnstiles? - A. As we got through the turnstiles?

Yes. - A.How do you mean?

Did you go through the turnstile, saw Ian and walked
straight into the ground or did you go to the toilet, did
you buy a programme, did you buy a cup of coffee? - A.
Ian was there waiting for me as I came through we just
went straight down the tunnel.   That was the only
entrance we saw.

Had you been to the ground before?   - A. No.

So you could see the tunnel ahead   of you? -A. That was
the only place we could see.   Usually as we go through
the tunnel we would usually go towards the left or the
right, to the corner, so we could see.    We would have a
better view with only being small, but we didn't know
there were the dividing fences dividing it into pens.
We just thought it was it was one big area.

When you got to the tunnel entrance on the concourse
side, were you able to see the pitch at all? - A. Through
the tunnel?

Yes. - A. Yes, we just seen the tunnel and like daylight.

But you couldn't see what was happening on the pitch? -
A. No.

Before you left the turnstile area had you noticed...
There was a big gate there, we call it Gate C.   Did you
notice whether that gate was open or shut? - A. I think I
just caught it getting shut, so I presume it had just
been opened.
                                                               iy
                                                         J. GLOVER
    Q. Was it quieter in there?   Was it easier? - A. Yes.
       Once you got through the turnstiles, yes.

    0. Were you searched in that area at all? -A.. No.

    Q. Did you see any Police Officers? - A. No.

    Q. None at all? - A. As we got through the turnstiles there
       was none on the turnstiles.
    Q. Pardon? - A. There was no-one searching at the turnstile
       as we went through.
    Q. Was anybody searching on any other turnstile? - A. I
       couldn't tell you. The turnstile I went through, there
       was no-one on that one.

    Q. How long did you stay in this big area behind the
       turnstiles? - A. As we got through the turnstiles?

    Q. Yes. - A.How do you mean?
    Q. Did you go through the turnstile, saw Ian and walked    A
       straight into the ground or did you go to the toilet, dro
       you buy a programme, did you buy a cup of coffee? - A.
       Ian was there waiting for me as I came through w e just
       went straight down the tunnel.   That was the only
       entrance we saw.

    Q. Had you been to the ground before? - A. No.

    Q. So you could see the tunnel ahead of you? - A. That was
       the only place we could see.   Usually as we go through
       the tunnel we would usually go towards the left or the
       right, to the corner, so we could see.   We would have a
       better view with only being small, but we didn't know
       there were the dividing fences dividing it into pens.
       We just thought it was it was one big area.

    Q. When you got to the tunnel entrance on the concourse
       side, were you able to see the pitch at all? - A. Through
       the tunnel?                                           fP

    Q. Yes. - A. Yes, we just seen the tunnel and like daylight.

    Q. But you couldn't see what was happening on the pitch? -
       A. N o .

    Q. Before you left the turnstile area had you noticed...
       There was a big gate there, we call it Gate C.   Did you
       notice whether that gate was open or shut? - A. I think I
       just caught it getting shut, so I presume it had just
       been opened.




                           r r   '■J
H
                                                    J. GLOVER
Q. You actually saw it being shut? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you notice whether a lot of people were still coming
   through that gate at that point? - A. No, I just seen
   them getting closed.   They were just finished filtering
   through.

Q. Are you quite sure that you saw it closed because in your
   statement you say you actually saw it being opened?    Was
   it being opened or was it being closed? -A. No, it was
   being closed.




             Q.   How wide open - when.
                                              J. GLOVER

How wide open - when you first caught a glimpse of it,
okay,- let's assume it was being .closed, was it at that
point when you saw it being closed wide open, or was it
only a narrow little opening? - A. N.o, it was about
three feet wide.
So it had been opened quite wide? - A. It was as though
it had been open full, people have come in, they have
let a few in and they have sort of like closed it, then
we walked down to the tunnel and went into pen 3.

When you got into pen 3, when you first got into pen 3,
did you have a quick look to see what was happening on
the field? - A. There was nothing happening on the   ..
field.
No one was on it? - A. No.
Now you are quite sure about that? - A. I think the
players had been out, a couple of players, and had just
gone off the pitch as we came in to pen 3.
You are quite sure - I am going back to the gate,
because you say the gate had been wide open and was
being shut, you are quite certain about that? - A. Yes.

And yet when you got out of the tunnel there was nobody
on the field? - A. I think they had just left the
field, yes.
Kick-off had not taken place yet? - A. No, it must have
been about 20-to-3 by the time we came in, 25-to.   I am
not sure of the times but it was a while before the
players came out.

How long did it take you, once you got to Leppings
Lane, when you joined the crowd, how long did it take
you to get through? Have you any idea? - A. I couldn't
tell you, no.

The reason why I ask you this is that if the gate had
been wide open and it was being shut, we know from the
video, at least we think we know, that that gate was
opened at 8-minutes-to-3. - A. No, it was before that.

And it was shut at 3-minutes-to-3. - A. No, it was
before that. I would say the gate had been open before
that.
Okay, so you went through, you think, at about 20-to.
You don't know but you think it was about 20-to? - A.
Yes, it was about that time, yes.

You thought the players had left the field? - A. Yes.
                                                          22

                                                 J. GLOVER


Q. But not pre kick-off? - A. No, not pre kick-off, no.

Q. You are right, there were players on the field at about
   20-to-3 or thereabouts, and they were going off at
   about that time. Did you actually see them disappear
   off the field or is that an assumption you have made? -
   A. That was an assumption, yes.

Q. You are not sure, okay. So you got into pen 3, yes?
   Did you see at that point a beach ball being knocked
   about? - A. I am not sure.  I can't remember, no.

Q. You can't remember, or you didn’t see it? - A. I can't
   remember, no. I never seen it.

Q. Sorry? - A. I can't remember, no.

Q. Did you hear the players being announced over the
   tannoy? - A. No.
0. You didn't hear that? - A. No, I never heard it, no.

0. Sorry? - A. I never heard it, no.

Q. You didn't hear it, okay. Did you see the players come
   out before the kick-off for their .... - A. No, by that
   time in pen 3 me and Ian, we were worried, before the
   players came out.

Q. Yes, I will come to that. I am just trying to find out
   what you saw. Did you see .... - A. No, I never seen
   the players come out.

Q. Did you see any players on the pitch at any time? - A.
   Just after kick-off or ....

Q. So you saw them at that .... - A. I ended up on the
   pitch.

Q. Did you see them before you ended up on the pitch? - A.
   No.

Q. Right, so you came out - now we will go back to your
   story - you came out into pen 3, you say? - A. Yes.

Q. Tell me in your words what happened.  You and Ian were
   together, right? - A. We went into pen 3, sort of like
   got through the crowd, took up positions to the right
   of the gate.

Q. Fairly near the front, were you? - A. Fairly near the
   front, yes, and then we sort of like, I think it was
   like a surge, we sort of like just got pushed over a
   bit and then it just started getting tighter where you
                                              J. GLOVER

couldn't move. You were just crushed against people,
where you. couldn't move at all. Then_Ian was, you
could see as though he was-'choking.

Sorry? - A. You could see him as though he was choking.
As I was looking at him, he just, I couldn't explain
it, his face was changing, and I couldn't move.  His
face just kept changing.

That is what you can remember, isn't it? - A. Yes.
Just changing colour in his face.

What happened after that? Was that while you were
still in the pen or had you already left it when you
saw his face change? - A. It was just before leaving
the pen.  I was right by him and then there was a lad
in front of us who vomited. There was a lad in front
of us who vomited on his jumper and there was another
lad who fell onto the floor ....

Have a little drink of water. - A. Could I just have a
break for a minute?

Yes, by all means. Just leave us for a few minutes and
settle yourself down.

            (The Witness left the Court)

     THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, I should
perhaps, while he has gone, say that on the whole I do
not insist on relatives giving evidence.  Basically
where a relative gives evidence it is because he wants
us. Of course this poor young boy is obviously very
distressed but I don t want you to think that I have
made him give evidence against his will and indeed, if
he were to say to me now, "I have had enough, I don't
want to say any more", I would stop because we have
plenty of evidence from other people and we can piece
it together.

     On the other hand, it is only fair that if
somebody was there who is a relative and he wants to
give evidence, that he ought to be given that
opportunity, otherwise quite rightly he will feel, "Why
wasn't I allowed to speak?", so we will wait for him to
settle down and then I might, in fact, ask him whether
he wants to carry on.  I suspect he does want to carry
on.

     While we are waiting, can I mention something else
to do with Rule 37 and documentary evidence? You will
have noticed that I was asking earlier whether Mrs.
Hammond had filled in a form which I had sent to her,
to do with names and things of that nature. What I
                                                          24
A


    intend to do is right at the end we are going to have a
    wad of these, and in fact those of you who were here in
    April/Hay time may remember that with every single case
    I referred to the form which I sent put, where I asked
    people to check that we had got the names and the
B   spellings right. As far as I can see reading the
    transcripts I don't think I actually said in so many
    words, "and I admit these forms as documentary
    evidence", so I think for the sake of good order, and
    so that we have got a complete picture, rather than
    just viva voce exchanges across the Court, right at the
    end what I propose to do is to admit these documents as
    documentary evidence.  I don't propose unless you'
    insist that I read them all out in detail.  I will    ..
C   probably read one so that you know the format in which
    they were. They contain basically name, address,
    occupation, date of birth, a little bit of information
    about the GP which is not actually relevant but when we
    did them we thought we might need that so we thought we
    would get it.
         I am quite certain that these matters will not and
D   cannot actually be disputed, but I don't intend to do
    it now, I will do it right at the end at a convenient
    point, and finally, while I am on documentary evidence,
    because of the way we took the medical evidence, you
    will recollect those of you who were there, that I had
    the pathologists. Normally I get the pathologist to
    produce his PM report and say, "Here it is, I produce
    it", but for some reason I did not use my standard
    formula and again, just as with these forms, certainly
E   in some cases, in fact, probably most, I did not
    actually refer to the typed PM report, and again
    similarly I intend to produce them as a wad, simply so
    that the information forms part and parcel of the
    Inquest proceedings. All the information that is
    relevant was given viva voce and in fact as far as I
    know everybody who has wanted a copy of the PM reports
    has had one anyway, but I take it that will be
    acceptable? I hope it will be acceptable to all of you
    because I will be reluctant to read 95 PM reports in
F
         MR. PAYNE:    Thank you for that information. The
    procedure certainly would be acceptable to us.    I think
    I can speak for everybody.   I don t think anybody will
    dissent from that.

         THE CORONER:   I will probably do it right at the
    end, or at some point when I know that I have got five
G   or ten minutes, when I have got them here.  It is just
    dotting "i's" and crossing "t's", so that the record
    for the future is complete, rather than having little
    gaps in it.




H
                                                                         R.   B.    KING


I am    a s k i n g y o u to l o o k at t h e d e n s i t y o f t h e c r o w d
that    y o u p u s h e d t h r o u g h ? - A. I c a n ' t r e a l l y t e l l y o u
from    l o o k i n g a t t h e p h o t o h o w t h i c k t h e c r o w d is.    All
as .1   k n o w is it w a s p a c k e d .t i g h t .

          THE CORONER:           O k a y , t h a t is f a i r e n o u g h .  What
y o u a r e s a y i n g is t h a t w h e n y o u s t a r t e d y o u r m o v e m e n t
d o w n t o w a r d s the g a t e , y o u have no r e c o l l e c t i o n of
a n y b o d y b e i n g o n t h e p i t c h s i d e of t h e . . . ? - A. No.

F o r g i v e me, I j u s t w a n t to c h e c k t h is.          When you, were
a c t u a l l y out si de , w h e n y ou h ad got t h rou gh , d i d you say
y o u do r e m e m b e r B e a r d s l e y h i t t i n g th e c r o s s b a r o r not,
I c a n ' t r e m e m b e r ? - A. No, I d o n t r e m e m b e r .           I don't .
reinember a n y t h i n g of t h e g a m e .

No, b u t y o u d o r e m e m b e r t h a t t h e g a m e f i n i s h e d a l m o s t
i m m e d i a t e l y a f t e r y o u c a m e out? T h a t is w h a t y o u t o l d
me, a n d I j u s t w a n t :o b e s u r e t h a t w e h a v e g o t that,
r i g h t ? - A. Y e s.

Y o u .are s u r e a b o u t t h a t ?     - A. As f a r as I a m c o n c e r n e d ,
a l l as I s e e n w h e n I g o t         on the p i t c h w a s ' m y two m a t e s
and Bruce Grobbelaar was                   l o o k i n g back.  I p r e s u m e d it
had stopped.

I see.      It is v e r y d i f f i c u l t w i t h t i m e s , I k n o w t h a t .
T h a t is w h y w e l i k e , if p o s s i b l e , to g e t t h e w i t n e s s to
s a y h e s a w t h i s o r t h a t , b e c a u s e it is m u c h e a s i e r , b u t
if y o u d i d n o t s e e it y o u d i d n o t s e e it, t h a t ' s a l l
t h e r e is to it.       O k a y , Mr. K i n g , t h a n k y o u v e r y m u c h
indeed.

        T H E CORONER:      I t h i n k Mr. G l o v e r is r e a d y           to
carry     on, so w e w i l l g o b a c k to Mr. G l o v e r .

                           JOSEPH    GLOVER      Recalled

                      Bv    THE   CORONER       (Continued)

Okay,     Mr.    Glover?      - A.       Yes.

Now, I t h i n k you and Ian w e r e on the te r r a c e , y o u w e r e
t e l l i n g me, a n d I s e e m to r e m e m b e r y o u s a i d t h a t y o u
c o u l d n o t r e a l l y r e m e m b e r w h a t w a s g o i n g on, o n t h e
f i e l d , a t a l l ? - A. No.

 But do you        r e m e m b e r the    little    gate   which     leads     onto
 the field?        - A. Y es .

 Y o u do r e m e m b e r that, and I t h i n k I am r i g h t in s a y i n g
 t h a t y o u m a n a g e d to g e t o u t of t h a t , f o r t u n a t e l y ? - A.
 Yes.
                                              J. GLOVER

Were you able to walk out? Did you walk out through
it? - A. It was more like a scramble.

Do you know whether you were one of £he first people to
get out or not? - A.   No, not the first.

Can you remember it   opening? - A. Yes, it opened, I
think about ten people got out, and closed. Then it
opened again and I got out.

What was the time interval between the two openings,
can you remember? - A. I can’t say, no.

Okay.  I can't remember, as soon as you got out you ■ ■
turned round to look for your brother, didn't you? Is
that right? - A. By the gate, before I got out the gate
I could feel myself   standing on someone. There is like
steps, I got out of   the gate but after standing on
someone. Then I got onto the pitch and just went
straight for my brother because I knew where he was,
then I climbed on the fence, just trying to pull the
fence down or reach over, shouting to him to move. He
was saying he couldn't.
You were actually shouting to him, you were talking to
him? - A. Yes. He was just talking back dead faint.
You could see his eyes just closing in front of me.

Did he speak to you at that point?   Was he speaking to
you? - A. Dead faint.

Pardon? - A. Dead faint.   His voice was sort of like
going, yes.
In fact, you have looked at a lot of photographs and
you have found yourself on a lot, haven't you? - A.
Yes.

Did you start calling to your brother as soon as you
got out or was there a little time while you had to get
your breath and sort yourself out? - A. Just a matter
of seconds.

So almost immediately you .... - A. I knew where he was
straightaway, yes.

Yes, because you had been with him, of course. - A.
Yes. Before I did get out there was a lot of shouting
to the Police at the gate, not the gate, sort of like
the fence, we were shouting for help. He was just
looking and just waiting for something, something to
happen, waiting for an order over his radio or
something.
                                                  J. GLOVER


Q. Sorry? - A. As though he was waiting for an order to
   come to him over the radio, to do something.

Q. Can you speak a little bit slower because I am having
   difficulty hearing. - A. Before I got out of the gate
   there was a lot shouting to the Police Officers, sort
   of like on the track, for help, to do something, but it
   was as though he was waiting for an order to come
   through before he would act.
0. Was it just one Officer who was there or were there
   several Officers at that point? - A. I think there was
   one or two. There weren't many.
Q. There weren't many. Did he have a radio, can you
   remember? - A. I couldn't remember.

Q. You can't remember. Is there anything else you want to
   tell me, at least that you want to tell the Jury, that
   is? - A. As I was on the fence more Police Officers
   came round then. I was just interested in my brother
   and one pulled me off and just dragged me away, told ms
   to get' off the fence.

Q. Mr. Glover, can I say how sorry I am that you lost your
   brother.  It is obviously    a verydistressing time. I
   think you have also been very brave.   I know, because I
   have been told, that this was not going to be an easy
   session for you so you have done well, a credit to
   yourself and to your dad,and of course I am sorry for
   him as well. Thank you very much for coming.

        MR. HUMPHREYS:    Sir, I am sorry ___

        THE CORONER:     Have you got a picture of 15.03?

        MR. HUMPHREYS:   This is PR1/12A - C354.  Perhaps
   Mr. Glover could identify himself on that for the Jury.

        THE CORONER:   Yes. Did he mark a plan, I can't
   remember? We will get him to do thatat the same time.
   What time is that one?

        MR. HUMPHREYS:     The time is 15.02.

        THE CORONER:     The number again?

        MR. HUMPHREYS:     354.

        THE CORONER:   Go ahead, Mr. Humphreys.  Ask him
   what you wish with regard to this photograph?
                                               J. GLOVER

           Cross-Examined by HR. HUMPHREYS

Mr. Glover, could you go up to the   screen? Is that   you
being pointed out now? - A. Yes.

It is.   Thank you.

     MR. HUMPHREYS:   Nothing more, sir, except that
the time of 15.02 should be recorded.

     THE CORONER:   Can you show us where you were with
your brother within the pen, on a plan?  (The Witness
marked his position on Exhibit C402)

     THE CORONER:   Did you say you had a time?    I
can't read it on mine?

      MR. HUMPHREYS:   Sir, I have a schedule of timed
photographs from album    2. I don't know if that is the
list before you or one    compiled by our team.. The time
show;n on the photograph would be 15.03, but the true
time would be 15.02 because the clock was slightly out.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, we have accepted that as being
an accurate representation of time. Mr. Glover, thank
you very much indeed.




          HENRY JOHN CLARK Called
#
RICHARD JONES



1. Richard Jones,           the son       of the    Applicants Leslie             and

     Doreen Jones       was born          cn 5th    October, 1963,            and was
     twenty five        years of age         ^en he died       at Hillsborough

     football ground on 15th April, 1989.



2. He    was    accompanied          to    the     stadium    by    his       sister

     Stephanie       and a        woman named      Tracey Cox.          All      thre’e

     entered     enclosure 3          of the     Lepping Lane           end of     the

     stadium.        Stephanie        Jones became      separated from             her

     brother and Tracey Cox               after a surge and pressure from

     the crowd in       the enclosure forced her               forward towards

     the front of the terracing.



3.   During    the    course        of    inquest the        jury   heard        from

     Professor Usher that in his view the cause of death was

     traumatic asphyxia.            Photographic       evidence showed that

     Richard Jones was standing with Tracey Cox in enclosure

     3 at 2.56       p.m.     The only evidence of            what happened to

     Richard Jones after this time came from Police Sergeant

     John     Killoch       who     disclosed that,      some       time      later,

     Police     Constable         Paul    Bromley      joined       a    group      of

     supporters who          were carrying Richard Jones                across the

     pitch     to the       north     stand on      a makeshift         stretcher.

     Once there       the Constable attempted to               resuscitate him

     but was     unsuccessful.            He then     assisted in          carrying
                                       - 2 -



     Richard into the temporary           mortuary where at 4.00 p.m.
     he was certified dead by Dr. Nicholas Seivwright.



4.   The jury heard no evidence relating to what happened to

     Richard Jones either         between 2.56 p.m. and        the moment

     when he was     carried across the pitch, or             after he had

     been taken into      the mortuary prior to           being certified
     dead.     The   Applicants         are    extremely concerned      that

     nothing in the evidence that was put before the inquest
     discloses that Richard Jones              received any medical care

     whatsoever.      The facts        of his being carried across the

     pitch by supporters alone, and resuscitated by a police

     officer     point    to     the     opposite     conclusion.        The

     Applicants also believe that such a conclusion would be

     reinforced had the evidence              of Dr. Glynn Phillips, Dr.

     John Ashton and      Mr. F. Eccleston, in           particular, been

     put before the jury.          During the course of the resumed

     inquests the Applicants wrote to the Coroner requesting

     that these people be         called as witnesses together with

     a Dr. Burns      (Pathologist), and that their           evidence be

     put before      the jury.         This evidence, a large       part of

     which concerned events taking place after the 3.15 p.m.

     cut-off point,      demonstrated the         woeful inadequacy       cf

     the     organisation and      provision        of emergency    medical

     care.     The Coroner refused the Applicants request.               Eac

     such    evidence     been     placed      before   the     jury,    the

     Applicants      submit that        good grounds    would have      been
     established for a jury        to draw the conclusion that the
     death by    traumatic asphyxiation         of Richard    Jones was

     aggravated by lack of care.


5.   In   addition,   that there      was no    evidence of    medical

     intervention     prior to     4.00    p.m. when    Mr. Jones was

     certified dead, means that           no conclusions can be drawn

     as   to   when   death      actually occurred     and    hence all

     evidence of what happened        to Mr. Jones     after 3.15 p.nf.

     is entirely relevant to the question of how he died.




ANNAAG
   HER   MAJESTY'S    CORONER FOR SO U T H   YORKSHIRE
                     (WEST DI ST RIC T)




          INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                 STADIUM DISASTER

              ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



             INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


                     RICHARD JONES




                         Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , B S , MRCGP

              (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                           At

             The Medico-Legal Centre,
                  Watery Street,
                    Sheffield.

                           On

                     3rd May, 1990.




             TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield Si 2DX


                                                         1 14
           .
           3         jot:?;            ailed

      2v   TTT^ COi’ONTSR                    •   4*   •   «l




POLIO'-: T^r>P;:CTQl? IIT-CK'JCL T.AYTOK Called

           TT'PO C O ^ O N S R ................           .,




                                                               114'
                              3 rd             K-OO


                                               T?T^TT|-y'r!' T'-TTC 'T""rr'
                                                                          . n ^ ;>iTTT op ~>*rCT''-TlD JC'3 3

                                   ]~I„ FRAS'SR: Sir, the evidence that you vil3. now
                              hear relates to Richard Jones.   Richard’s parents arc
                              in Court with social workers and nenbsrs of the fr.n-.ily.
                          B   The parents are represented by a practice which is a.
                              member of ny Group and T. appear on their behalf as agent
                              through the usual Steering Committee arrangement.

                                   Tlr'£ CORGIIUR: Now, I think, Mr. Jones, you were here
                              on the first day, were you not, so you know th 3 general
                              form so I am not going- to go over that ground r.ow and
                              we will start straightaway.
                          C
                                      T h is   is     a   resum ed      Inq uest         w h ich    was     opened       on   th e
                              1 8th   A p ril,      1S’ S 9 »     On   th a t    o cc a sio n      N e il   A n tho ny    P ark in ,
                              A c tin g   C o r o n e r 's      O ffic e r,     said :


                                           "The body which is the subject of this
                                           Inquest has been identified to FC 2220
                                           Dromley of the South Yorkshire Police as
                          D                that of Richard Jones by Leslie Jones,
                                           his father. He was 25 years of age having
                                           been bora on the 5th October, 1$?63 at
                                           Liverpool- He was a sin,Tie man and he
                                           lived at
                                           lie was an ofl'ice vorlcer by occupation.
                                           Tie died at Hillsborough Football Ground
                          E                following an incident there on Saturdo-3^,
                                           1 5 th April, 19S9.  PC Sroivtley caused the
                                           body to be removed to the Medico Legal
                                           Centre and there ho identified it to
                                           Detective Constable Simon Weigold who
                                           subsequently identified the same body to
                                           Prof. Usher. It is the family wish that
                                           the body should be buried."
                          F
                                   And I then adjourned the Inquest and, as was my
                              normal practice, I wrote and chocked whether the information
                              was correct and, in fact, I-Jr. Leslie J o n e s  that is
                              you, I tiii-nk, is it n o t    you signed the form and
                              you confirmed that, in fact, the names, addresses, date
                              and place of birth v&fe correct and I think you have now-
                              told me that, in fact, your son had a BSc which I am
                          G   happy to acknowled.ge but it is not one of the registration
                              criteria which we need for the purposes of the Inquest.

                                   Plood alcohols were estimated in this case as well
                              ay, in fact, nil the others and Dr. Forrest gave the
                              results for these on the first day, in fact, I think you
                              were here the first day so yo\i heard him, and the r e s u l t
                              in the case of Richard was .less than TO mg/100 ml.
                          H

                                                                                                                                       114
J, L. H a r p h a m Ltd
                 /
             /




                                                    r-noF.   m   ,m :                ca.u.cr:

                                                        T:'- ti:: oc^inn:

                              '*1. Alan   ;3;ieX’   is it not? - A, ies,                   t is

                              C;. rrof, of Forensic Kcdicine at Slioffield and iior.’
                                                                                    .e Office
                                  ?'vfc>ologist ? - A. Yos.
                          B
                              Q. And you arc going to tell rr.e ".bout a lad who was -
                                 identified to you as Richard Jones and you also had
                                 an id.en.tification nurfoGr 6 3 , I beliovo? — A. "ics, tliut
                                 is right.
                              0. C.-ui vou tell me tlicn what the pathological findings
                                 arc rc3.ating to this man? - A. Yes, sir, the bod 3' that
                                 T. examined      that of a heavily-built, brown-haired
                                 young ’./hite nan, 1 7 9 cr.is in height, weighing 3? legs.
                                 There were obvious signs of traumatic asphyrcia both
                                 externally and internally. There was very slight
                                 dilatation of the heart and some enlargement. I
                                 thirl' thcit is probably physiological.bccausc he was
                                 not at an age when Irypcrtension is likely to have
                                 caiiscd that. In r.:y view he had an average crrpcctaticii
                          D      of life and w?.s n o r m a l ^ developed. I give the cause
                                 of death as traumatic asplryxia.

                              Q. :sr.d this was another young man who had a tricostate
                                 valve dilated? - A . Yes, I think that may be terminal
                                 really in heart failure right at the end.

                              Q. In fact, both the valves wore marginally dilated but
                                 3'ou would say the same for both - that you think it
                                 is lilcely to have been terminal? - A . Yes.
                              n.   Now-, we have already heard this but loss of
                                   consciousness. T/hat would 3<-ou say with regard to
                                   that? - A. This young man died essentially Decause
                                   he could not move his chest in or out and that meant,
                                   of course, he could not breathe and that meant oxygen
                                   was cut off to his vital organs and, once that chest
                                   was fixed, he would have been unconscious *in a. matter
                                   of seconds, probably between 10 and 20 seconds, and
                                   he would be complete13 ^ unknowing of anything that
                                   happened subsequent to that, though he would take a
                                   matter of minutes, perhaps between U and 6 minutes,
                                   to die.
                              Q. Hut once ho was unconscious he would not know anything
                                 more about it? - A, That is right.

                                                        1W K P .        PTiA S m :

                              Q. prof. Usher, can 3rou help a little about the alcohol
                                 content. It is recorded in this young man as "less
                          H      than 10 mg" , is that
                                                  ■cna'c because
                                                         uucwisu the
                                                                 ^rie ilcvol
                                                                        c y c o . is so snail
                                 that it is difficult to measure it accurately? -
                                 A. Yes, it is.
                                                                                                  1 U
J. L. H a r p h a m Lid                                                       /■
                                                                                                                    •—»
                                                                                                                      ,'{'7T•    '• •     * ’     •\



                                  Thirt younj nan ir.r.y havo hac> no ale oho 3. at "3.1 but ,
                                  t>      t'-'o cv'yarr.ttts that thoy c'° use — I ari not r.
                                  bioc'^c-'iist - it it quite customary to errpreso it
                                  i;i that way.       "Loss than 10” nay rr.can anything up
                                  to in but it r.’   .ay mean none at all.

                           •*>. T'<v.Jc if it v.'ero none at r.ll, p r e sur.ao3.y it vovJ-d show
                                r.5 p. distinct necativs?       T/hat I hrvc in nine! is tlic
                       B        cvidoiico that we Iioard on the first clay about sometimes
                                •
                                ’
                                ..'ivcn somebody loses their life there is alnoct a
                                spontaneous production of alcohol within the body
                                one! could the operation of that produce a reading of
                                a very srjall aJ.cohol level within the body? - A. Yes,
                                I sttppose it could but only a very snail level.

                           0.     And      that cculd be less than 10? - A. Ch, yes.
                       C
                           'I. Than!; yon, i'rof. - A. There is no evidence at all to
                               show that this boy had in him any amount of alcohol
                               that. wouJ.el have affected his judgment or balance or
                               anything like that at all.
                           0., It certainly played no part in his death so far as you
                               p.rc aware? - A. Absolutely right.
                       D
                                                               Further by TTTP, CQRQITT^R;

                           o.     1'rof. Usher, I do want to just clear this up because
                                  Dr. ?orroct dealt with the question of yeast
                                  production of alcohol and in his opinion, xzy recollection
                                  is, because the high alcohol levels were not present
                                  he .said that he was satisfied that indigenous produc­
                       E          tion ofalcohol had not occurred because he could not
                                  find any of the higher alcohols? - A. Yes.
                           o , I'ow, I want to be quite sure - do you disagree with
    #                          })r. Forrest? - A. ITo.
                           Q. Or not, with regard to the possibility .... - A. No,
                       F      I do not disagree with him. lie knows about the higher
                              r.lcohols. I did not know that. I have only been
                              given the figures 'with regard to ethyl alcohol but 1
                              would accopt that argument from him.
                           o. "ould it be right that what you are really saying is
                              that it is true that indigenous production of
                              alcohol can occur in the body? - A. Yes, I agreewith
                       G      that.
                           0,     You      arc       not       say in g       th a t,       in     th is    p a r tic u la r            in sta n c e ,
                                  i t   die',     occur?            -   A.    I 'o ,    I   co u ld    not     say     th a t.

                           '■'
                             V•
                             ;    '.Tnut    you        i'.ro       say in g     is      th a t     m e a su rin g    le s s     th a n          TO
                                  n-.ight       r .i e a n   a n y th in g      fror.i      th e    m in u te st     am ount            up   to
                                  in    b - v . y i c a l l * r?    -   A.    Or       to   n o th in g .
                       H


J. L. H arp h am Ltd                                                                                                                                     1148
                     A                                    .Viytb.irg oXso arising o’
                                                                                   .rt of that?
                                       I    N    o    ,       than’-; you, sir.
                                         TT7. CCRGZriDR:        Thanh you, ?:rof. Usher. Vo will
                                 I'.ocfl " 01 ; r..;."i.-i at about   o'clccl:. —     TharI:yen. sir.
                                            -run-.?
                   :B
                                                       r\if     corcpp:

                              i"!. Yes 7 - A. Police Sergeant J    o  h   n  s-*-r»
                                   Ve.'it Midlands police, X h?.va prol^ousiy talcon the oath.
                                 C--’:: you talce ne through the sumr.:ar^r, pler.se? -
                                 A. At 1-Vl0 hours on Saturday, 1jth April, 1929 »
                         C       Richard Jones left his hone in Sheffield with his
                                 sister, M-iss Stephanie Linda Jones together with
                                 Tracey Nlij'-abeth Co::, The Court lias already/ hoard,
                                 ^ir, that Tracey also lost her life at Hillsborough.
                                 Tt was their intention to attend the Semi Final football
                                 r;:atch x/hich was to bo played at the Hillsborough
                                 Stadium that day. All three persons had ticlccts for
                     D           the terraces at tie Nest Stand.
                                 Cn arrival at the stadium they joined a large crovd
                                 otitsido the Leppings Lane turnstiles. After some
                                 rr.imites they entered, the stadium via Gate C and walked
                                 together olonj the tunnel beneath the 17est Stand and
                                 onto the terraces. Stephanie is tmable to say which
                                 onclosuro,they entered but it has now been establish od
                         E       as Jnc3.osu.ro No. j• Stephanie was with her brother
                                 and Traccy as they entered the terraces and, after a
                                 few seconds, Tracey was subjected to a surge of
                                 prosGv.ro which forced her towards tho front of the
                                 tcrracing, I-n     •5 crush thnt followed she was separated
                                 fror.i both hor brother and Tracey.

                                 Following the severe crushing in the -Jest Stand
                         F       terracing, Police Constable Fatil Bromley wcnt onto
                                 the pitch and assisted a number of injured persons.
                                 The officcr saw that a number of stipporters vcrfi
                                 carrying a nan, now knoim to be Richard, across the
                                 pitch, on a hoarding which was beir.,^ used as a temporary
                                 stretcher. The officer assisted to carry Richard to
                                 the rear of the North Gtand where he attempted
                                 resuscitation-but withou.t success. The officer was
                         G       assisted to carry Richard into the fjjTir.asixi where
                                 a temporary mortuary had been set tip.
                                 At 1600 hotirs Dr. Nicholas Andrew Seivcnwright ....
                               , J. thinh it is actually Seivewright. 1 thinR it is a
                                 typing error. The ,n* should not bo there. - A. Sorry,
                                 sir.
                         H-


J. L. H a rp h a m Ltd
                                                                                                        114   '
                                                                                                                    K T -! T O ' !




                                 . . . .   o :".i:in o d    R ich ard      in    th e     t o r . ’n o r r . r y   H o r tn c r } ’ and
                                 csz’tifr.o-
                                           .’
                                            . lifa           o ritin c t .


                                 At    G 2 ’:-5 21o u r s   o?i   S undry,       loth       A p ril, .19-9              I :r .     Leslie
                                 Jonccj     id o r.tif icd        th e    body     of    h is       son       to    1' o l i c o
                                 C o n sta b le     Z ro n lo y    a t    th e   t a m p o r r ’. r y    '-o rti-a r-.


                                 The officer later cscorted Richard's body to the
                           B     Hef'ico Legal Ccnti'c and confirmed that identi.ficc.tion
                                 to 'Jotoctive Constable "Joigold.
                                 On 17til April, 1 9 8 9 * following the identification by
                                 detective Constable ’.   reigold, Prof. Alan Usher carried.
                                 out an autopsy rjic! submitted a report giving cause of
                                 death.
                                 .Rvidonce is incltided, sir, re carding- the analysis of
                                 tho blood sample taken from Richard v.rhoro tho presence
                                 of ethanol :;as detected. The -witnesses proving
                                 continuity of that sample are Detective Constable Green,
                                 Detective Sergeant Turner and Detective Ser.3 0 r.nt
                                 Fletcher. The analysis was carriod out by Dr.
                                 Alexander Robert Forrest.
                       D         Fo’.md in tho personal effects of Richard were three
                                 full match tickets.     This supports the evidence,
                                 sir, tho-t he entered the stadium via Gate C together
                                 •with. Stephanie and Tracey.
                                      That concludes my evidence, sir.                                             There is visual
                                 evidence.
                                           TITS CORONER:                 No questions from me.                            L'r. Fraser?
                                           f!R. FRASKR:              No, thank you, sir.
                                           I-HZ. J,IMI3:          No, thank you, sir.
                                           HR. CATCIIPOLE:                 No, thank you, sir.
                                                    POLICE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                                                                          Bv THE COROHER:

                               O , Yes? — A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
                                  17est llidlands Folice. Sir, an examination has been
                                  made of video film and photographic evidence and
                                  Richard has been identified alive outside the ground
                                  and also in Enclosure No. 3» and then subsequently
                                  later lying on the pitch.
                                  Sir, a nhotograph referenced ^P.;l,10/3^-A, Richard is
                                  shown, together with his sister, Stephanie, and Tracey
                                  Co;: about to enter tho ground via Gate C and that
                                  photograph is timed at 1 ^5 5 .
                           H
                                  On a BBC video tape, referenced HAP 1, timed at
                                  1^56:31:0^, Richard is shown alive in Enclosure No.
                                  3 and, at this point, he is, tji— ^                                   r.t :      together with            11
J. I . H a r p h a m Ltd
                                                                                         T '.VTp-




                      A                1cc
                                    Sir, there arc three photographs, including a
                                    photograph rcferonced D E 1 / 6 , which show Richard
                                    lying 011 tho pitch being tended to by supporters.

                                    I'r. and Mrs. Jones have, in fact, viewed visual
                                    evidence, sir, and they have been able to assist us
                       B            in confirming that evidence.

                                    FC B r o m l e y lias signed a plan of the pitch indicating
                                    where he first saw Richard and that plan is referenced
                                    r.i/i.
                                    Sir, if X can, first of all, refer you to a plan which
                                    has been given the reference number I^.JJL 1 6 ?.

                                    That will be C22S. - A. And then a further plan,
                                    in.ML 1 1 3 , which is a plan of the terraces.

                               Q. Tliat will be C229. - A. And, sir, P B / 1 , which is PC
                                    B r o m l e y ’s plan.

                               Q. That will be C230. - A. Sir, first of all, in respect
                       D            of tho plan I".:jL 167, regarding tho identification
                                    outside tho ground, referring to this plan, the point
                                    at whic h that photograph is shown is in this location
                                    here, which, as you have already heard, is, in fact,
                                    very close to Gate C.     In respect of the video
                                    identification inside the ground I refer to plan
                                    rr.vJI, 113. This is Enclosure I’o . 3 and the video
                                    identification on BBC tape MAP 1, wo believe, is in
                                    this position h e r e . As I have said, at that time,
                                    Richard is still alive and with Tracey.

                               a.   Bid we use tho same plan in T r a c e y ’s case, do you know'
                                    A. To did not use the same plan, sir ....

                               n    I am sorry, I meant the same video? - A. They are
                                    actually together, yes.      Sir, PC B r o m l e y ’s plan,
                                    p:l/l, the plan of the pitch, the location shown is
                                    in this position h e r e , at the Leppings Lane end but
                                    further down the pitch.

                               Q. And remind me, that is a recollection, is it not? -
                                    A. It is, sir,           yes.  Sir, unfortunately, in respect of
                                    the photograph           where Richard is shown actually being
                                    treated on the           pitch, it is not possible to say from
                                    the photograph           where it is on the pitch.  There is
                                    not sufficient           detail to identify it.

                               in   Vns, there is a photograph showing him but you cannot
                                    locuto it because there arc no landma rks? - A. Ko.

                                             IHi. FRA3MR:        No questions for the Cfficor,      thank
                           H        you.

                                             HR. L I M B :     Mo,   thank you,   sir.
                                                                                                            115
J. L. H a r p h a m ^ td


                                                                                                              i
/




                                           Sir, will you just give me a minute
                        bofox-o you conclude this particular Inquest?

                              t :;:;   ccno:nR:     Yes.

                               I-'':. FIlASIDTl: Sir, there arc two matters _____
                        concern the family which cIo not directly arise from the
                        summaries which have been presented but which they v;ould
                    B   like, if at all possible, you to deal wit.’: to satisfy
                        thorn.

                                       CCHCI^ k :   Thit the first one then.

                              l" l* T^.\D~Z'l: Sir, it is clcui’ from tl:e very
                        detailed report of Lord Justice Tay3.or that his findings
                        vfirc that alcohol played r.o significant part in. the
                        disaster on tho 1 5 th April.    That report has been widely
                        published and this family would like perhc-ps to
                        understand a little more w h y such emphasis seems to
                        have been placed on the alcohol analysis.        Certa5..nly on
                        the opening d£>y of these ....

                               Tin CGTiOirSTJ:    Can I interrupt you?     I think I did
                        say right at the beginning that we were not {join." to
                    D   deal with the question of how and I think it is only fair
                        to say that we have not introduced Lord Justice Taylor's
                        report into this Inquiry and whilst, of course, that
                        report is public property, so to speak, I would not want
                        it to ’0 0 pxit to tho Jury that that is the conclusion of
                        Lord Justice T a y l o r ’s report.   It r.iay be or it may not
                        be.    ’Then the time conies, if it is relevant, we will
                        deal wi t h it r,o I cannot accept as a submission that
                        that is correct.       You m a y put it forward as a view but
                        I am not accepting it as a proposition or as evidence
                        of that fact, that ho concluded this or that about
                        ale olio 1.  I an sorry but I have cot to say that.

                             Your second point, I think I have understood your
                        second point.  If I have not, of course, you will correct
                        me.  The second point is the}'- say w h y are we d^s.ling
                        with the question of alcohol levels.      That is right, is
                        it not?

                             I-Tv. F X I S L R : Perhaps nor:   w h y such emphasis appears
                        to have been placed upon it.

                              TH7, CCRONSIl   The decision as to what evidence to
                        call , of course, is" -mine. I do not think we have placed
                        any undue emphasis on alcohol, on the contrary, I think
                        at this stance we have not because all I am doing is
                        recording the fact, not drawing any conclusions, because
                        that would impinge on the issues of how or why which I,
                        as you know, specifically excluded.     Ferhaps I ought to
                        just say, Hr. Fraser - and forgive me if I say that -
                        that the issue of alcohol has been a matter of great at
                    H   moment to a lot of tho families.     They wanted the figures
                        They wanted to know it.     If I had suppressed tho
                        information I think I would have boon open to very serious
                        criticism and so I do not actually accent the proposition
    > r ph am Ltd                                                                             11
that vo dre .giving it tuvduo or^lir^is but I do accept
that, within each and ..-very eaye-, \:o give the' fi_".:r<;
ijocaiv.'.o that ic part oT the evidoac:. '.l;at ralcv<\j\ce,
if any, it has wo ‘.'ill deal. with w3;a.: ve ccr.e---
••ten I dccido, if vs go tc :uiy further 3ioarin~s, vhat
furth”i’ evidence to call and X will tlic i call whatever
vitnasyos ve hood to deal with that tiuoaticn. i)cns
that :;oi4: you or your clients?
     PI. FVLlSlvl:   I hope so, sir, yes.

      The socoixc: point really relates to the condition
of many of the fans '/ho appear to have died. On the
day thorn i.’orc no n:utilated - if I can use th>’t •.-.rord -
bodies and vo have hoard evidence that the majority of
fans had cone blue disco 1 ouration hut there was no
apparent accurate diagnosis made at the /jrotmcl and
IIicha.vd’s fr i-'ily would like to know why perhaps their
sdn was not token to hospital and just assumed that he
vas dead and resuscitation attempts made at the
hospital.

       T77.2 CC^CirJIi: Ihr. Fraser, I understand their
concern behind tho question but I think that each, and
every fan, as you know, every one of the people v/ho
died, vas certified dead either at the hospital cr at
the ground by a properly qualified medical man. That
is the first point. That has to be appreciated. It
is not a question of people just saying "He's dead".
Ih/ery single one vas looked at medically. Secondly,
one lias to think bad: to tho situation. In an ideal
world it mey be that everybody should finish up in
hospital but, from a practical point of view - I do
not want to deal with, this any further because I do
not thin]-: we can - but fx-om a practical point of view
it is, with all due respect to your clients, an
unrealistic expectation in the. situation in which
everybody found themselves on that da3r and it is no
use mincing words end seeing anything- different. I
thi.nl: that that is the truth of the matter.
      Thirdly, I cannot say what people’s judgments
were at the tine. If that is a relevant point, and it
might bo when we corno to deal with the question of how,
then f'oi.in we will deal with it at that stage but it
is not appropriate to deal with it now. I am concerned,
in a sense, about the question because I think it shows,
with the greatest of-rcspect, a misconception as to
the practicalities of tho situation and also the truth
of the matter. ’<  rc have heard from Prof. Usher and what
he said .about losn of consciousness, duration, length
of time that it might take for somebody to die - even
if they 3rad .gone to hospital half-an-hour or an hour
later it would not have made any difference. I think




                                       (r$)
we .have got to face it. That is the trutli. I nn not
very helpful but I think that that is the best J  . can do.
Anyway we will have to deal with that, if we deal with
it, as part and parcel of tho how,
           I'r, Jones, 7. kno'.' you '.;crc liearc v/hc:i v.ro dealt vitii
    Tracey's death and I appreciated your prosonco then.
    If you 3;o:!crioor J said thc.t and, in fact, that '..’as truo,
    J. also I r-ic.-r that you \:ouid. bo Corbinj a^ain bccause v-e
    hne:-:     *..*ore ';oin~ to ’ir.vc Richardfy cr.ce a little bit
    late:.’. 7. quite, quite understand -..-hat a dreadful bio’./
    this r.ust b e           ’.voll, I keep on saying I quite
    uiK’.orstcvriu         t correct r.'.yci-o.1f - her.-/ can I ponsibly.
B   uitclcrotund vl’at a dreadful blov.r thin lauct be to you.
    The best T. can do is to iraa^ine it wore one of r.:ysons
    and I cat then imagine ~/hat I vrould feel like, so I
    understand, to a certain extent, the pain and the
    concern vhich you are feeling-.
           I          have tried to ansvrer the points    3^011 have
    raised fairly finr.ly really, 7 think, be cans e I think
    v/hat J ~ro.s soyinj lias to be said. I do not see there
    is any point in dcin^- anything else. At least that is
      V juc-./jr.ient. Subject to that, T. feel for you and. for
    tho rr.'ot of your fnnily in the loss thrt you hr.vc
    suffor;':!.
          Ladies and .rjentler.icn, we are coin£ t0 rise. 1
    think ' - t o must have a reasonable time. Shall -wo say
D   ten-past-t-.-.ro? "Jould t■'.at be all ri/j,’
                                                at? Than!: you
    very i.:uch.
                          ( Luncheon   A c l.jo u rn in o n t)




E




G




H

                                                                             115
               m   y

U® osSiatbat! [plaras [pyatslaasQll



    Identified Alive.

    Identified Appareatiy Dead.

    Uiiconfirmed Identification

    Identified Alive and Apparently
    Dead in the Same Location.
                                                                                              p       fou^JlTk:

                                                                   Appendix 1                                       dO
                                                                   Sheffield W e d n e s d a y Ko o i IjmII Club,
                                                                   H illsb o ro u g h G ro u n d .




                                           '/*■L"^Pallet
                                    Fin! AW1       Room
                                    Room

                           NORTH STAND

                                                           CCTV'




S-U
      f      Porta-
      fo*tt /C*bU>




                         CCTV          ccrv
                                SOUTH STAND


                                  ^OMontmira
                      OfllcUl
                            fete »



La J




       CAvA 'tTu ^ w'?) •                 ,
                                          ;   vq
                                     mi
     r*uau. '«*=.vu   Aao
                                                       C230
                                                   ? ? -»'
                       0        5          10 m
                       H*
                       0    V       20   30 ft.
                                                  Pc"2-ULa SZ^v^t_i2




                                                              MORTUARY (not to suit |




SPIOK xcp £K0
                                                                      5




                                                            S . L. JONES
     MR. PAYNE:   Before you resume, sir, the lawyers
present would like to thank you for the courtesy in
arranging transport this morning. Thank you very much.

     THE CORONER:   Before I say anything else I would like
to thank Mr. Catchpole and, through Mr. Catchpole, the Club
for making it available, having everything unlocked, having
people there and being more than helpful.  I am most
grateful to you.  I think, although I have seen it before,
it was helpful to see it again. You must remember that it
has changed a little bit. You will have noticed that. I
do not have to point out to you that there were no
perimeter fences and so on but one learns a lot, does one
not?

     MR. KING:   Before;Miss Jones starts her evidence,
sir, can I tell you something that I have been asked on her
behalf to tell you?
      THE CORONER:      Yes, please.

     MR. KING:   She has identified herself on one of the
photographs which has already been produced to the Inquest
which is C.295.

     THE CORONER:       Yes, we will put it up at a convenient
point.

     MR. KING:   I know she wanted you to know that from
the beginning, sir.

                    STEPHANIE LINDA JONES Sworn

                           Bv THE CORONER:

Q. You are Stephanie Linda Jones, is that right? - A.
   Yes.

Q. ________________________________________________________________
   that is right, is it not? - A. Yes.

Q. Is it mum and dad who are here? - A. Yes.

Q. You are I think a receptionist? - A. Yes.

Q. Or you were at that time? - A. Yes.

Q. You are in fact the sister of Richard Jones, are you
   not, who unfortunately lost his life at Hillsborough?
   - A. Yes.
                                                             6




                                                   S.   L. JONES
   ✓
Q. Of course, technically you were not related to Tracey
   but she was Richard's girlfriend, was she not, and
   she unfortunately lost her life which is very sad
   obviously? - A. Yes.
Q. I want you to tell me as much as you can and as much
   as you feel able. I will ask you questions like I
   did with all the other witnesses and we will see how
   we get on. Okay? - A. Yes.
Q. Richard was a season ticket holder I think? - A. Yes,
   that is correct.
Q. Initially he got two tickets because I think it was
   just him and you who    were going to go to thematch?-
   A. Yes, that is right.
                                                                   I
Q. I think that Tracey decided she would like to come as
   well, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. He got another ticket? - A. Yes.

Q. In fact he asked   you to get a ticket for Tracey? - A.
   Yes.
Q. He was actually living in Sheffield, was he not,
   Richard? - A. Yes.

Q. It was easier for you to go to the club than for him?
   - A. Yes.

Q. You got the £12 ticket I think for Tracey which is
   for the stand? - A. Yes, my father got it from the
   ground.

Q. Somebody in the family went to the ground? - A. Yes.

Q. As it happens your mum came home that day and she had
   another one and so you finished up with four? - A.
   Yes, that is right.

Q. Hers was a £14 ticket for the stands? - A. Yes.

Q. You took them. Did you have all four or did you have
   just these two and Richard have the other two? - A. I
   had three and Richard had his own.

Q. You looked after them and on the 14th‘April, the day
   before the Friday, in the evening you came to
   Sheffield by train? - A. Yes.
                                              S. L. JONES

Because you had somewhere to stay, that is right, is
it not? - A. Yes.
Tracey had also come or she may have been here
already? - A. She lived in Sheffield as well. They
both went to university there.
You all went out that evening. Where did you go as a
matter of interest? - A. The Broom Hill Tavern pub
just at the bottom of the road for just one drink.
You had a nice time? - A. Yes.
Looking forward to the match I expect at that time? -
A. Yes.
In the morning of the 15th you had an extra ticket at
that point, did you not? - A. We had to swap one of
them because otherwise Tracey would not be with us.
You wanted her with you? - A. Yes.

So Richard had his breakfast and he went off and
exchanged the £12 ticket with a friend, is that
right? - A. Yes.

This was really a private arrangement? - A. Yes.    His
friend obviously wanted to sit down.

He was getting a good deal, was he not? - A. The more
expensive ticket.

It seems to me the sensible thing to have done. He
then came back and so you had three tickets for the
terraces? - A. Yes.

What happened to the fourth one? - A. Before we went
to the ground we went and apparently Richard knew
some friend who wanted the other ticket and he was
going to sell them the tickets.

He knew somebody, did he? - A. It was a friend of a
friend.

Again it was a private arrangement? - A. Yes, it was
just to get rid of the ticket rather than sell it at
the ground.

Then I think you had something to each for lunch.
You had a light lunch. - A. Yes.
At about 1.15 or so did you set off for the ground?
A. No, I think we had lunch about that time.
I am sorry? - A. We had lunch at that time.   It was
after that. Just after two some time.
Just after two? - A. Yes.
Did you walk or drive? - A. No, we drove.
Because it was too far? - A. Yes.
How long did it take you to drive to wherever you
narked? - A. We drove to meet somebody at a pub to
. Ive them the tickets which was on the other side of
the ground.
I am sorry? - A. It was to the other side of the
ground, the public house. I am not sure of the name
You do not know which pub it was, do you? - A. No.

Did you then park in that car park of the pub or did
you park somewhere else? - A. No, we parked in the
car park.

When you say the other side of the ground, are you
saying he was at the Nottingham Forest side? - A. No
it was right over the other end of the city really.

It was a long way away? - A. Yes.

Were there supporters in that pub? - A. No, it was
very empty.

Richard's friend's friend was there and you got the
tickets? - A. Yes.

Did you stop for a quick drink? - A. Yes, we had one
drink.

What did Richard have? - A. He had a pint of beer.

That is all he had? - A. That is all.

What time was it when you got to that pub? - A. I am
not really sure. It was only about fifteen minutes
away from the house.

From home and you left about two I think you said? -
A. Yes.
                                               S. L. JONES
✓
So we will say you left about quarter past.  We do
not have to be to the second. Then I think you
stayed at the pub for about another fifteen minutes
or so? - A. Yes.
So in round terms that would be about 2.30, would
that be fair? - A. About.
We are not pinning you down to a minute or two or
anything like.
How did you then get from this pub to the ground? -
A. It was Tracey’s car and she drove to the ground.
She doesn't drink at all really.
How long did it take to drive to the ground would you
say? - A. About fifteen, ten or fifteen minutes.
Then you had to park? - A. Yes, in Far Lane.

Which is quite close to the ground? - A. Yes, not far
away.

You were fortunate then to find a space? - A. Yes.

From where you parked you then walked to the ground,
is that right? - A. Yes, that is true.

That would have taken you how many more minutes? - A.
About ten minutes.

Again if we add it all up we get to about ten to
three? - A. Yes.

Would that be about right? - A. That would seem about
right.

Would you agree? If you do not agree please say
so? - A. Something like that. I am not sure but
something like that.

I am just adding up the times with ten minutes here
and ten minutes there. Did you see lots of fans
first of all on your drive to Farndale Road? - A. No,
not on the way to Far Lane, no.

When you parked and got out? - A. The nearer we got
to the ground the more fans.
                                                          10




                                S. L. JONES

Q.   ' Are you a football supporter yourself, generally
       speaking? - A. Not on a regular basis.  I have only
       been to Anfield maybe 4 or 5 times, and not away at
       all.

Q.    So you are not really an experienced football
      attender? - A. No.
Q.    You had not   been to Hillsborough before, had you? - A.
       No.

Q.    So you were not thera in 1988? - A.     No, Richard had.

Q.    Richard had but you had not? - A.     No.
Q.    As you were walking towards the ground you were
      walking down Leppings Lane, or up Leppings Lane, I am
      told, is that right? - A. Yes.
Q.    Firstly, I want to make sure we have got the right
      road. What is the map number? Is it 284? Yes,
      C.284. Just put it up. I will just make sure I have
      not raisremembered the road - Farndale. - A. Far Lane.

Q. I thought perhaps I was getting it wrong. Do you know
    where it is on that map? - A. I didn't know at the
    time.  It was only afterwards I found out where it
    was.

Q.    It is Far Lane - F-A-R did you say? - A. I think it is
      double RR - F-A-R-R, is it?

Q.    In that case, I was thinking of the wrong road. I was
       thinking of Farndale. I do not know where Far Lane is
       either.  Is it off the map?

            MR. HALE:   I can show it to you, sir.

            THE CORONER: Mr. Hale, thank you very much.   I
       see.  It is what I would call below Wadsley Lane, not
       that far from the ground, you are right, but not the
       one I had in mind anyway.
 Q.    You are saying that you walked from that road all the
       way to the ground? - A. Yes.

 Q.    I do not suppose for a minute you canremember  the
       names of the roads you walked down? - A. No, I cannot.

 Q.    I will have to go over the ground again. Were you on
       your own when you were walking there, or were there
       other supporters walking with you? - A. To begin with
       there wasn't m a n y a t all.
                          S. L. JONES


At one point did you start picking up other
supporters? - A. I don't know. After 5 minutes we
started seeing a few and then it just got more and
more.
They were all walking down towards the ground as far
as you were concerned? - A. Yes.
What was their behaviour like? - A. Happy;   they were
singing.  It was just normal.  I did think there was
an awful lot of people but it was just normal.
Just as a matter of interest, did you see people
carrying any cans? - A. No, I didn't.
None at all? - A.   No, none.
You have told me they were singing and other people
have described that I think as jolly. Would you use
that word or not? - A. Yes.

But you were not frightened in any way? - A. No. I
did think there was an awful lot of people but I
hadn't been to that many matches so I just assumed it
was normal.

Nobody did anything to you. I do not mean in the
sense of hitting you, but did people swear at you, or
anything like that? - A. No, there was no problem at
all.
Good.   Then you approached the ground - right? - A.
Yes.

As you got towards the turnstiles, which-you had not
seen before, this was the first time? - A. I didn't
see them at all.

You did not see them at   all? - A. The whole   time.

Tell me what  you saw? - A.Nothing, just a      mass of
people as they went towards the ground.
I see, so the nearer you got, the thicker the crowd? -
A. Yes.

And right at   the ground it was an absolute mass of
people? - A. Yes.

Did you see any police officers, just as a matter of
interest? - A. I had noticed I had hardly seen any,
and then like once I got near the ground I saw one
officer directing traffic, that was all, and then
nearer the ground, or once we were in the mass, I saw
                         S. L. JONES


one policeman on horseback and then further back there
were two more on horseback amongst the crowd.
So what you are saying is as fiir as you remember, you
saw one officer who was directing traffic?-~ A. Yes.
Was it near a traffic light, a little bit higher up? -
A. Yes.

Then as you got nearer to the ground   your recollection
is of a police officer on horseback?   - A. Yes.
Where was he? - A. That was more when we gotright
into the crowd, right near the gates.
Then a little bit further in there were another two? -
A..No, there were two quite far out, out of the crowd.
Do you mean towards the roadway, that is what I am
trying to find out? - A. On the outside of the crowd,
where the bulk of the crowd was.

I see. When you saw all this crowd of people there
what did you think? - A. I just wondered why there
were so many people there really.

Was the crowd at that point moving, as far as you can
remember? - A. Sort of shuffling. They didn't seem
to be going in any sort of direction.

When happened? Did you, Richard and Tracy join in     at
the back? - A. Yes, there seemed no other place to    go.
Did other people join you behind? - A. Yes.

I think that as the people joined you behind, you
started feeling a push forward, is that right? - A.
The pressure of people, yes.

So there was pressure behind you? - A. Yes.

Which was tending to make you go forward? - A.   Yes.

That presumably meant that you were getting closer and
closer to people ahead of you all the time, is that
right? - A. Yes.

You and Tracy and Richard were trying to hold hands
because you wanted to stay together but people tended
to separate you, is that right? - A. Yes.

How did that happen? Just tell me how that happened.
Did they push between you, or what happened? - A.    It
is just normal. , People are just moving, along. You
                                                              13




                                S. L. JONES

     'can't seem to stay in a whole bunch together.         It is
      just impossible. That always happens.
Q.   When this was happening, can you remember - you may
     not be able to remember - at the ground the outer
     perimeter gates, the sort of blue gates with railings
      on them? Can you remember those at all? - A. No, I
      can't remember going through those. I did go through
      them but I can't remember.

Q. What I am trying to find out is when you are saying
    you were being pushed, do you think that you had gone
    through these outer gates, or had you not reached them
    yet? - A. I think I had probably gone through them by
    then.
Q.    Okay. Were you going through on the right-hand side?
      - A. Yes.
Q.    Was that because Richard said, "That's the turnstiles
      that we need", or what? - A. I didn't see the
      turnstiles at all. It was just the movement. That
      was the only way sort of thing.

Q.    But he had been before so presumably you were relying
      to a certain extent upon his knowledge, were you not?
      - A. I suppose so.

Q.    Yes. At some point I think you saw some blue metal
      gates. Can you remember that? - A. Yes.

Q.    What sort of gates were they? - A.      Large like.

Q.    We have called them concertina gates.      - A.   Yes, that
      is right.

Q.    I will  just show you a picture of one. I am not
      saying this is the gate you saw because we have not
      yet established which gate you saw, but I think it is
      259. I think there are two of them on. No, it has
      only got one of them on. This is probably not the one
      that you went through, but that sort of gate, is that
      right? - A. I would say so, yes.

Q.    If you   look at 261, that is a close-up of this sort of
      gate -   yes? - A. I think so.

Q.    Something of that sort? - A.   Yes.

Q.    I mean  that type of gate. It was not a gate with
      railings or anything like that? - A. There was such a
      mass of a crowd, you couldn't really see.
                                                           14



                               S. L. JONES

Q. ' Okay. At this gate was there a policeman? - A.    Not
     that I saw.

Q.   You did see a policeman on horseback, I think, did you
     not? - A. He was in the middle of the crowd, yes.

Q.   He was not at this gate; he was further away from      you
      then? - A. N o , I think he was towards the second
      gate, yes.

                      Q.   Which second gate
                                                                        15


                                                         S.    L.   JONES




0.
 ‘   '.vnich second^ate are we talking
                                 O     ~ about? -   A.        Gate C.

q. Gate C? - A. Yes.
Q.   That is that gate over there, in fact? - A. Yes.
Q.   what was he trying to do as far as you coul'l tall? - A.
     He was trying to split tae crowd.

0. Was he having any success? - A. No.
Q. Is that because nobody took any notice of hi:.i? - A. ivo,
   it was just the sheer amount of people there was.    i!e
   just had no chance on his own, and there was just
   nobody else around.  It uas just it was an impossible
   task for him to perform.
Q. So the only way he could have succeeded would have been
   if everybody had obeyed himinstantly? - A.    No, I think
   if hehad had more manpower   it would have helped,
   rather than if everyone had obeyed him.

Q. I agree with you there, obviously the more people you
   have the easier a task becomes, but are you saying that
   if people had obeyed him he would still not have had
   any success? - A. I can’t really answer that. I mean,
   I tried to get over to the right because you don't want
   the horse trampling on you, but the sheer amount of
   people you couldn't move that far across anyway.

Q. In fact, did the crowd pressure, if anything, beco.ne
   even stronger at tciat point? - A. Yes, it did.

Q. Did you feel uncocnf or table at that point? - A. Yes.

Q. 'Were you a bit worried about yourself? - A. Yes, I got
   pushed right up against the gate and my a m was
   trapped.

0. So really you were in quite a difficult position then,
   weren't you? - A. Yes.

Q. Tracey was still near you and so was Richard, is that
   right? - A. Yes.

0. And I take it they were in tne same sort of condition
   as you were? - A. Yes.

0. There were another two Police Officers, weren't tnere,
   whom you mentioned?  Where were they? - A. They were
   out of the crowd towards the back, I did notice.

Q. Could you see what they were trying to do? - A. uo, I
   couldn1t see.
                                                             16




                                                S. L. JOi<ES




0. You might not have been able to see because of then
   being too far away or because of the crowd, but you
   just saw them because they were elevated, is that
   right? - A. Yes. I just noticed because this one was,
   the first one, was right in the middle of the melee of
   the crowd, but the other two were right outside where
   the crowd was.
Q. While you were approaching this gate, before you had
   actually got hard onto it, had it opened at all? - A.
   It was opened once. I saw it open once.
Q.   You saw it open once? - A. Yes.
Q. On that opening you didn't get through on that
   occasion, did you? - A. No.
Q. That is presumably because you were too far away from
   it, is that right? - A. Well, yes.

Q. And also was that opening - it didn't last   very long,
   did it? - A. No, only a couple of seconds.

Q. On that occasion, just help me on this because I am
   just trying to fix the openings, did people come
   through, did people actually go through the gate? - A.
   I think three or four, perhaps, people went through -
   not many though.

Q. Some did - it wasn't opened wide at that time? - A. No.

0. And I think having got up against this gate, I think
   Richard said, "If it opens again we are going in?” - A.
   We had no choice, otherwise it would have been a lot
   worse.

Q. In fact, a little while later that is exactly what
   happened, it opened? - A. Yes.

0. But it opened wide out, is that right? - A. It opened
   right across.

0. And you could see that it was a Police:nan wiio was
   opening the gate? - A. Yes.

Q. Certainly it was an official person? - A. Yes.

Q. Did he open it all the way by himself or did he begin
   to open it and did fans then assist to open it
   further?- A. Tne fans helped because everyone nad been
   screaming for him to open it because we could see
   something was .going. to happen outside if he didn't,
   because everyone was screaking for him "to open it.
                                                              17




                                                    S. L. JONES



C. So what you are saying is that the gate began to open
   and you could see it was a Policecian, and then the fans
   started opening it with him? - A. The fans on the
   inside - tnere was fans on the inside.
Q. In fact, what happened then with regard to the tans and
   that gate? - A. They pulled it wide open and we forced
   ourselves sort of to the side and in, and got into the
   clearing, then I think a whole load came right througn
   all together with the force.
Q. There was initially quite a rush in, because people had
   been squashed tight against it, would that be right? -
   A. Yes. It was like taking a cork out of a bottle,
   sort of thing.
Q. Anyway, you managed to get into what is called the
   concourse area and it was a bit better in there, wasn't
   it? - A. Yes, it wasn't packed at all.
0. Because there was a lot of space, relatively speaking?
   - A. Yes.

Q. What happened then? - A. Me and       Richard had both gone
   through together because he had       been just in front of
   roe, and we got through together      and then we just waited
   for Tracey and she came through       just in a matter of
   minutes, and joined us.

Q. Where did you go then? - A. We just - I could only see,
   well, we could all only see the tunnel, and Richard
   said to just go down the tunnel, so we just stood there
   for a minute or so, and I thought everything was okay
   then because it was pretty clear in there, and then we
   just started to walk down the tunnel.

Q. So by the time you went down the tunnel, you are saying
   it was reasonably clear, is that right? - A. Yes, it
   was.

          MISS ADOLEilAN:  Sir, we are having difficulty in
     hearing the witness at this end.

         THE CORONER:        Me or the witness?

          HISS ADLiLE^lAH:     The witness, sir.

0.        THE CORONER:   Can you sit a little bit furtner
     forward? You have got to get quite close to tnese
     pikes. You were saying that when you went into the
     tunnel it was reasonably clear? - A. Yes, it was.

Q. But there were people walking down? - A. Yes, normally.
                                                               18




                                                       L. JJi-.ES




Q. A noraal walk? - A. Yes.
0. In fact, you did actually sea one or two people, not.
   that many, who were passing water down the side of tne
   tunnel, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. That wasn’t something which you would have necessarily
   approved of but you weren't too concerned at that
   point? - A . I wasn't surprised.

Q. Can you remember - you may not be able to remember but
   were you walking down the tunnel in the niddle, the
   left side or the right side? - A. 1 can't really
   rernember. We were probably spread right out. We were
   probably walking together.

Q.   Yes, because there ware three of you? - A. Yes.
0. When you got to the end of the tunnel, the tunnel goes
   along and then it has got a dip, hasn t it, and you can
   see the pitch, when you got just to exit of the tunnel,
   was that part of the tunnel clear of people? - A. Yes,
   it was.

Q. So you were able to get onto the terrace without any
   particular obstruction at that point? - A. Yes.

Q* Tell me, because obviously you were interested in the
   match, what was happening on the field at taat point? -
   A. I didn't look. We were just goin^ to try ana get a
   place and then look. As far as I was concerned the
   match hadn't started.

Q. You don’t think it had started? - A. No.

Q. Can you recollect whether any players were on the
   field? - A. Ho, I didn't look at the pitch.
0. So you don't really know? - A. No.

Q. You then went on the terraces. I think you can't
   actually remember which terrace you went onto, that is
   right, isn’t it? - A. That's right.

Q. But I think I am right in saying   that on the
   photographs you found Richard in Pen 3? - A.Fen       3,
   that's right.

Q. And you can   say that you were with him? - A.Yes.

0. I Kiean, you entered the same pen     as he did,       thatis
   right, isn't it? - A. Yes.
                                                              19




                                                S.   L.   JONES




Q. S o it is a reasonable supposition that that is the pen
   you entered, isn't it? - A. Yes.
Q. You said to me just a moment ago tnat the tunnel was
   clear, the exit of the tunnel was clear, you managed to
   get onto the terrace and you were going into the right
   hand pen. Did you take up a viewing position? - A. No.

Q. So what happened? - A« We just started to walk down and
   then there just seamed like an awful lot of people came
   behind us and we started to get slos.ly moved forward
   then, sort of stumbling down the steps sort of thing.
Q« So when you initially went onto the terrace, it sounds
   to me from what you are saying that at that point you
   were not apprehensive. You were saying, "I want to
   find a viewing position", and you were walking down
   looking for some convenient spot? - A. Yes.

Q. That's right, and at that point how crowded would you
   say it was? Can you say anything about that? - A. Just
   a normal amount really.  I wasn't really worried. fly
   worries had gone after we came off the clearing.

Q. Sorry? - A. My worries had gone when we came out into
   the clear part, and the tunnel, because I was
   frightened outside.
Q. It was outside that you were scared? - A. I was worried
   that it was going to be the same inside but I didn't
   think it was.

0. So once you got on the terrace you were relieved? - A.
   Yes.

0. It looked better than it had been outside the gate,
   that's right? - A. It did.

Q. And then you say -- was there some crowd that came
   from behind and pushed you, a sudden push, or what was
   it? - A. First of all it was a gradual move.nent, sort
   of thing, just moving down as though tnere was a lot o£
   people coming in behind us.




               /C. Behind, yes ....



                            ©
                                      S. L. JONES


Behind, yes. - A. Yes, and then it started to get more
and more surges, sort of thing.
In your statement you have put it a little more
graphically.   You said:                        —
     "Then I was suddenly shoved from behind and I was
     thrown forward down the steps."

I haven't said this to you, but I have said it to one or
two of the witnesses, it doesn’t actually matter what
happened.   All I am trying to find out is as far as you
can remember what happened and you tell me now so the
jury can get the picture of what you can recollect.    Can
we just go over that again?   I am interested to know
whether this was, as you put it, a sudden shove, that you
were shoved from behind, or whether it was just a very
gradual pressure? - A. To begin with it started off
gradually and then a shove came.
How far down the terrace were you moved, if that is the
right word, can you say? - A. I have got no idea really,
probably three-quarters.   I really don't know.

I think this particular surge actually stopped at that
point and there was a little bit of relief is that right?
- A. Yes.   Well, Tracey had fell down behind me and
there was a gap where she had fallen.   A lot of
supporters picked her up but she had lost her shoe.
She had lost her shoe at that point? - A. Her shoe, yes.

Can you remember what was going on on the field at that
point? - A. No, I was turned round looking at her.   I
really hadn't paid any attention.

Did you look at the field at all at around that time? -
A. No.

So you can't help me at   all on that? - A. No.

In fact somebody picked   her shoe up, is that right? - A.
Yes.   I couldn't reach   it so they picked it up.

But Somebody managed to get down and give it to her and
so she was pleased about that at the time? - A. Yes.

Then what happened after that? - A. Really big surges
came.   I didn't see Richard or Tracey aigain after- that.
In fact I don’t even know whether she put her shoe on.

You just managed to get it and then there was another big
surge? - A. Yes.
                                      S. L. JONES

That surge split you from Tracey and Richard, of course?
- A . Y es .
You never saw them again after that until much later   of
course.   Were you pushed against any barriers? - A.   No,
not at all.

Where did you eventually finish up, you yourself? - A.
Right at the very front, turned round facing the back.
Facing the wrong way, so to speak? - A. Facing the wrong
way, yes.
When you got down there can you remember what was
happening with the match?   You may think I am being
cruel in keep asking that, but it is a convenient way of
timing things, you see, that is why I am asking you. - A.
No, I can't because I was turned round the wrong way.    I
have no idea.

So really younever saw anything at   all of what happened
on the pitch?  - A. No.

If you did you can't remember any of it? - A. Well, until
I got out.

At that point you were pretty squashed, is that right? -
A. Yes.

Were you calling out at all?   Were you able to call out?
- A. Yes.

Can you remember more or less what you said? - A. "I've
got to get out."

Was this in a loud voice or in a little -gentle voice? -
A. Yes, I was screaming.

Were you able to repeat it? - A. Yes, a few times.

How did you get out? - A. There is a bit of confusion.    I
am not really sure.    I was faced the wrong way.   I was
literally face to face with another boy, like nose to
nose.    I couldn't see anything.   I thought I was going
to faint and I just heard somebody say at my side, Here
you are, love," and I sort of stepped on to the pitch, or
somebody pulled me.    It is not been found exactly how I
got out.

So your recollection is that you just stepped out? - A.
That is what it felt like to me but I think somebody must
have pulled me.

In fact I think we have seen you on the video? - A. Yes.
                                                            22




                                          S.   L.   JONES


Q. Standing near the perimeter fence.    Do you remember
   seeing this young lady?    Having got out did you look at
   the pitch at all? - A. .Yes, I was f?cing the pitch then.

Q. What was going on at that point? - A. They were playing.

Q. So all this you have described happened before the match,
   and including your exiting out of...   You weren't pulled
   over th« top? - A. No, out of the gates.

Q.   Definitely out of the gates before the match ended, or
     was stopped, rather? - A. Well, it had probably just
     started as I was getting out.
Q. You don't knov that, of course? - A. Well, all I can
   assume is that it had already started because as I got
   out of the gates I turned round and'I was facing the
   television camera and the match was playing.
Q. Was the television camera looking at the match or at the
   stand? - A. No, it was turned round to me.

Q. It was already taking pictures of what was going on? - A.
   I just looked and it was just right on me.

0. That is why we have got it, of course. - A. Yes.

Q. So that shot of you which is on the television was taken
   almost immediately after you got out, is that right? - A.
   Well, immediately, yes.

Q. That shot is timed so we will be able to look at it
   again.   I can't remember what time is on it but we will
   be able to time what time that was, but do you remember
   from your impression how long the game carried on after
   that? - A. Maybe five minutes at the most.

Q. A short period? - A. Yes.

Q. I don't want to go into this in great detail, but when
   you were standing outside did you notice some fans come
   past you and go into another part of the ground? - A.
   Yes, that's right.

Q. Which pen did they go into? - A. The corner one on the
   right.

Q. Is it the one underneath the police control box?    If you
   were standing with your back to t’
                                    rva fence, did they ccrrse
   past you towards the right or towards the left? - A. They
   were walking past me from the right.    I think they c a m e
   out of the gate after me because I think I was...
                                     S. L. JONES

Hi'gh up, and they were coming past you going to the south
stand side, would that be right? - A. Well, I am not sure
of the layout of the ground, but the corner.
Can we put the plan of the ground up for a moment. ' It
is not that important but I am just interested.  (C.274)
Mr. Griffiths could you just point to enclosure 3?   That
is gate 3?    That is the one where you... - A. Came out,
yes.
Then point to pen 4.   That is pen 4. Are you saying
they came from that part and were walking past you
down... Is that right? - A. I don't think they were
coming out of pen 4.
No, but there were people who were walking past you in
that direction? - A. They were coming out just behind me,
out of the gate I came out of.
Oh, I see.    I understand you now.  You are saying there
were people coming out... - A. Yes, because I think I was
the first or second person out of the gate and then a few
more followed and then the police were taking them across
to. the corner.

I just want to go back one moment.   You know the big
gates that opened when you came outside the ground, the
concertina gates.   Can you recollect whether you were
one o£ the first people to come through on that occasion?
- A. Through the gates?

Yes, through that big gate. - A. No, not the first
person.

No, I didn't mean the first.   What I meant was were you
in what I would call the first group of people who came
through do you think? - A. Yes, possibly.

You then waited for a little while because Tracey had to
join you, is that right? - A. Yes.

You don't know how long you waited? - A. It was only a
few seconds really. She just didn't get in with our
surge, sort of thing.

There wasn't any delay.   You didn't go to the loo or
anything like that? - A. No.

As far as you were concerned, we know what time that gate
opened, the big concertina gate, you had a fairly rapid
passage right through that? - A. Yes.
                                         S. L. JONES


In' fact there was a very nice man who came up to you at
some point and comforted you and tried to help and look
after you? - A. Yes.
Are you still in touch with him? - A. Sometimes, yes.
He was a supporter? - A. Yes, a Liverpool supporter.
Shall we give his name, do you think? - A. If you want.

Was he Phil Bickley? - A. Yes.
We are not calling him as a witness but it is nice to
acknowledge what he was doing.   Now what is the number
of . . .
     MR. KING:      C.295, sir.
     THE CORONER:   Can we put C.295 up?   Now this is
the photograph you are on and we will just show it to
you.

     MR. KING:   Sir, if it helps, the time of this
photograph is 14.54.

     THE CORONER:      That does help:
Are you able to see yourself on that projection? - A.
Yes.

Go and show us where you are. - A. That's me, that's
Tracey and that's Richard.
So you are in fact in line.    You have just heard - in
fact you can read the time on the bottom ofit, that is
six minutes to three, or possibly five.

     THE CORONER:      Is it one   minute wrong?   Which way
is the minute?

     MR. KING:   Sir, the actual time is 14.54.        Printed
on the photograph is a minute too long, sir.

     THE CORONER:      So it is 14.54 - six minutes before
the...:

At that point you were still outside, weren't you? - A.
Yes.

The gate I can tell you was opening because people were
coming through and presumably this is when you were
following them in, is that right? - A. It seems so.
                                                         25




                                                  S. L. JONES
   /

Q. If you look at that photograph you can see it. That
   is exactly the same photograph and it saves you
   turning round every few moments.  That gate I will
   tell you had been opened at 14:48 for a moment or two
   for just a short moment and then it had been
   closed? - A. Yes.
Q. Then it had been fully opened at 14:52. That is two
   minutes before this photograph is taken. The
   question ‘I want to ask you is this; looking at that
   photograph and thinking about what you told me you
   said that you were pushed hard up against the gate
   when it was shut. You are sure about that, are
   you? - A. Yes, I was sure.
Q. There wars another opening of this gate. This gate
   was shut at three minutes to three. Do you remember
   we had a schedule. 14:57:40. -At 14:57 this gate was
   shut again and then it was re-opened at about 14:59,
   in other words just a minute or so before kick-off.
   What I want to establish is which opening you went
   through? - A. Yes.

Q. Because if that is where you are on that photograph
   you could not have been right up against the gate at
   14:52 because you did not walk back, did you? - A.
   No. That is right, yes.

Q. So in fact your movement throughout was forward, is
   that right? - A. Yes.
Q. It was not that you got up against the gate, didn't
   like it, walked away and then re-approached it. I
   just want to be quite clear? - A. We carried on
   forward, yes.

Q. It was opened for the last time at 14:59:12
   approximately. Of course you did not look at your
   watch? - A. No.

Q. The reason I ask you this is that by the time you got
   out of the gate at the front the match was still in
   progress? - A. That is right.

Q. If you in fact came through   at 14:59, which you might
   have done because you might   have come through the
   last occasion from what you   tell me, your progress
   would have been even faster   than I would have
   expected? - A. I would have   thought, yes.

Q. Did you get the impression you went through the
   ground, if I can put it like this, in minutes or did
                                                              S. L. J O N E S

  you have the impression that it took any length of
  time? ~ A. It seemed like forever but I think it was
  fast.
     MR. MAXWELL: I have not got any questions, sir, but
on behalf of all of us, that is all the parties and all
those concerned in investigating this appalling tragedy, I
express our sympathy.
     THE CORONER:     Thank you very much indeed.             That is
very kind of you.
                C r o s s - E x a m i n e d bv MR.   PAYNE:

Q. Stephanie, can I just follow up the questions which
   the Coroner was asking you about the timing of this
   photograph to see if we can get any further? You see
   in th:*. bottom right hand corner of the photograph in
   red there is the time printed at which it is said
   that photograph was taken which reads 55 and we are
   told that is one minute wrong and it should be 54? -
   A. Right.

Q. We are also told that the gate which on the
   photograph is just off to the right where the people
   seem to be heading as they go off the photograph do
   you see that? - A. Yes.

Q. We are told that gate was opened at 14:52:06 which is
   just two minutes before the time of the photograph,
   do you see that? - A. Yes.

Q. We are told that that gate was then kept open until
   14:57, that is to say another three minutes after
   that photograph was taken? - A. Right.

Q. So it appears those are the times.  I am not
   criticising you at all? - A. I can only presume that
   I went through when it was opened the next time at 59
   because I know I definitely went through and it was
   closed at first and I was pushed against it. So it
   must have been the 59 time that I went through at.
   It is not a great deal of time in between, is it? It
   is only four or five minutes?

Q. Yes, but it would not take you three minutes to walk
   from where you are in the photograph to the gate? -
   A. I know, but there was a huge amount of supporters
   there and it took some time to get to the gate.

     MR. PAYNE:    Sir, I do not honestly think that can be
taken any further.
                                                           27




                                                    S. L. JONES

     THE CORONER:   Perhaps Mr. King will be able to take
it further but I do not know whether he will or not.
     MR. PAYNE:      Mr. King may have some ingenious method
of doing i t .

     MR. KING:   Sir, I have a theory which I will put to
the test in a moment.

      THE CORONER:     It is an interesting matter, is it not?
Q.        MR. PAYNE: While that photograph is on the
     screen, you have told the Coroner from what you saw
     you actually only saw a total of three mounted
     Policemen, did you? -'“A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. There is obviously a lot more to be seen on that
   photograph? - A. That is right.

Q. But you did not see them? - A. No.

Q. I want you to look at another document please, and
   that is the map, 284, and I think you will find it
   further on in your bundle.  I appreciate you do not
   probably know the roads and so on yourself but I just
   want to see how far we can get. First of all, can
   you find Far Lane where you parked the car and if you
   can find No. 2 which is in the black circle? - A.
   Yes.

Q. You parked your car there and then you walked from
   there in the direction of the ground, did you? - A.
   Yes, that is correct.

Q. On the map that would take you down to the junction
   of what we can see is Wadsley Lane? - A. I have got
   it.

Q. That is going in the direction of the ground and so
   that is probably the way you walked, is it? - A. I
   cannot honestly say. I have got no idea.

Q. Whichever way you went it would then take you on to
   Middlewood Road, that is the big road with the black
   writing, above the No. 2 I have pointed out? - A.
   Yes.

Q* A little way down Middlewood Road you then cross over
   Catch Bar Lane? - A. Yes.
                                                                       28

     A

                                                               S. L. JONES   *
               ✓
          Q. Then you are into Leppings Lane and over the bridge.
             You can see the river just passing under the e of
             Leppings Lane, do you see that? - A. Yes.
     T*
     S3
          Q. And turn right into the ground. Do you think you
             probably did go down Middlewood Road and over Catch
             Bar Lane? - A. I really wouldn’t like to say.  I am
             absolutely hopeless at directions and I have got no
             idea.

          Q. I am just trying to put you on the map before I ask
             you about the. crowds because you have said you
     C       thought there were an awful lot of people? - A. Yes.

XV        Q. What I want you to help the Jury about is this;
             about how far back from the ground was it when you
             first started to notice? I am not asking you to be
             exact but just give us an idea of about how far away
             you were from the ground? - A. Maybe two roads away,
             one road.

          Q.   That was  an awful lot of people all walking in the
     D         same direction as you? - A. Yes.

          Q-        THE   CORONER:   I am sorry, I missed theanswer.
               What did   you say?- A. About two roads away.

          Q.         MR. PAYNE: For instance, when you cross over
               Catch Bar Lane that is quite a big junction.  You
               must have crossed over somewhere about there from the
               dir action you came. So when you crossed over what
     E         was the scene like? Put the Jury in the picture as
               to what the scene was like as you crossed over that
               big road? - A. There was just a mass of people at the
               ground. You could not see the turnstiles or anything
               like that.

          Q. I am trying to get you a little bit further back from
             the ground. Were there people walking on the
             pavement as you approached the ground? - A. Yes.
     F
          Q. Were they walking in the roads as well? - A. I can't
             recall.

          Q. That is as far as I can take that.  The next thing
             was that when you got into the ground and were going
             down the tunnel there were some people passing water
             on the sides of the tunnel? - A. Yes.
     G    Q. You said you were not surprised at that? - A. No.
                                                            29




                                                      S. L. JONES
     ✓
Q. Why is that? - A- Because I have been to Anfield
   Football Ground before and it happens all the time.
Q. There.was nothing special about the occasion? - A.'Oh
   no. ¥ou just don't look. You just look away.




                 Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING:
Q. I have got a theory too. I wonder if we can look
   back at the photograph we had up before, C295, and I
   wonder whether the gates that you remember being
   pressed up against were the blue gates? If you look
   behind you there are two or three chaps have got red
   sweaters or shirts o n - Y o u can see some blue gates
   behind them. I wonder if those were the gates you
   were pressed up against? - A. I don't think so.

Q. You do not think so? - A. No.

Q. Having got through there your way was free to come
   through this gate when it was open? - A. No.

Q. Theory exploded! Let me take you back to the
   beginning.- You say you have been to Anfield and
   obviously you are used to large crowds at football
   matches? - A. Fairly used to them, yes.

Q.    This was to be a very large crowd.   I think   you knew
     it was an all-ticket match? - A. Yes.

Q. I do not think there is any secret about the fact
   that a lot more people would have liked to have gone
   to the match than there were tickets available? - A.
   Probably.

Q. Were you not a little concerned about the time you
   were actually going to be arriving at the ground? -
   A. Richard didn't seemed concerned and so I wasn’t.

Q. Did it not seem to you to be cutting it fine to be
   getting there at ten to three or five to three or
   thereabouts? - A. I really don't know.

Q.    But you were surprised by the numbers of people who
     were still outside the ground at that time?- A. Yes.

Q. Were you aware at all of a Police Land Rover parked
   outside the ground? - A. No.
                                                           30




                                                 S. L. JONES
   /


Q. Did you hear any announcements on a PA system of
   somebody saying not to push because everybody would
   get in? - A. No, I didn't.
Q. Did any of the Police Officers that you saw try to
   indicate either by what they were saying or by what
   they were doing that they did not want people to
   push? - A. Not really. The only thing was the one
   Police Officer on horseback who was telling everyone
   to get to the right and that was it.
Q . That was some effort although you thought that was
   'doomed to failure because there was only one of them?
    - A. Yes.
Q. I do not imagine for a moment at all that you were
   doing any pushing? - A. Probably the person in front
   of me thought I was pushing but I wasn't.  It was
   just the sheer pressure.

Q. Because you were being pressed from behind? - A. Yes.

Q. When you came up on to the back of the queue there
   was a moment when, if you like, you were the last
   person in the queue? - A. I don't think so. There
   was always someone behind me.

Q. Was there a moment that you stopped and thought,
   "That is as far as we can go at the moment" as the
   shuffling forward continued? - A. Yes, sometimes you
   were just in a bunch and it wasn't moving but there
   was always people all around you, behind you, in
   front of you.

Q. The pressure at that time was coming from behind you?
   - A. Yes.

Q. That was the pressure of people trying to get closer
   to the entrance points? - A. I presume so.

Q. After that when you got into the ground itself from
   thereon into the tunnel, through the tunnel and on to
   the terrace, all of that is something that you would
   put under the word "normal". What you saw in the
   tunnel, although it is pretty despicable, was
   something you had seen before at football matches? -
   A. I wouldn't call it despicable really.
                           S. L. JONES

,You have seen it before and you were notsurprised   to
 see it again? - A. No.

 When you got onto the terrace itself, it seemed to you
 that that was a normal scene that you were seeing in
 front of you? - A. To begin with.
 Until the pushing started? - A. Well, until the crowd
 came up.

            Cross-Examined by MR. KING
 Miss Jones, I was interested in your answer that the
 person in front of you might have thought you were
 pushing, but you weren't;  it was because of the
 pressure behind you? - A. Yes.
 I want you, if you can, to give some idea to the Jury
 of what it is like being in a crowd.  I am sure we
 have all had that experience, but you had that
 particular experience that day. Do you know what I
 mean by an involuntary movement? I will explain what
 I mean by that. That is a movement of somebody who
 hasn't said to himself, 'I'm going to make a
 movement', but somebody who is carried along by the
 momentum of everyone else around them. Do you
 understand? - A. Yes.

 Is that what you were trying to explain to us of being
 in that crowd, that that crowd had a momentum and you
 were being carried along with it? - A. That is right.
 You have got no choice of where you are going. It is
 just the way the movement carries you.   If you want to
 go one way and the crowd is going the other way, you
 have got no chance of going that way.

 If somebody had put the finger on you and said, "Miss
 Jones, wait a minute, what do you think you are doing
 pushing forward?" what would you have said to them? -
 A. "I'm not pushing".

 What was happening to you? - A. It is just everyone
 behind me, and it is just the sheer pressure of the
 amount of people.

 You described the police officer on the horseback, and
 you were asked very properly by the Coroner about
 obeying what he was trying to do, and.you gave this
 answer, that you yourself tried to get over to the
 right, but couldn't. Why was it that you couldn't? -
 A. Because of all the people on the right and all the
 people on the left, and just can't move like that.
 You would very much like to if it means getting out of
 the way, and also the horses coming near you. You
                                                          32




     ' don't want to be trampled on but you haven't got much
       choice.
Q.    At that stage when the man on the horseback was there,
      what was the depth of the crowd around the horse?
      What was it like around the horse? - A. There was
      just no room at all. The horse was just enveloped.

Q.    Have you been yourself to a football match, perhaps at
      Anfield, when you have seen a mounted police officer
      putting people into queues? - A. Yes, there are
       always mounted police at Anfield.
Q.    On those occasions is there space for the people to
      move into? - A. Yes, the queues.
Q.    So on this occasion - I am not criticising the
       officer, he was doing his best, I am sure   that
       officer on that horse was in the middle of a mass of
       people? ~ A. Yes.

Q.    Do you think that one police officer on that horse
       could really do anything about what was happening
      around him? - A. No, he couldn't have done anything,
      he couldn't .

Q.    At that stage when you were there, you are in this
       crowd with its momentum.  I just want to pursue the
       same theory as Mr. Manning about the gates. I just .
       want to show you, if I may, 258 which is in the
      bundle, C258.

Q»          THE CORONER:   Can you find it? - A.   Yes, I have
      it.

Q-         MR. KING:  Do you see, Stephanie, that before you
      get into the area in front of the turnstiles you have
      to go through what we call blue perimeter gates, do
      you see that? - A. Yes.

Q.    Do you   seethey have gateposts? - A. That is right.

Q.    Do you see there is a sort of wall or fence on the
       left which seems to cut the turnstile area into two,
       do you see that? - A. Yes.

Q.    When you were describing before - and I know you have
      described on another occasion what was happening to
      you at the time, and this is the statement which you
      gaveto the Police not long afterwards and, in facts
      you have been very good, you know, you have said
      almost word for word what was in your statement so t
      is not a question of anybody saying that you have net
      been getting it right, you have been doing very well
                          S. L. JONES

indeed after this length of time. But I was
interested in something you said you could see.
     MR. KING: Can I just remind you, sir, it is on
page 3 of her statement.
This is before you had got through the blue gates, and
you say this:

     "I could see some fans sitting on top of the wall
     behind the gates inside the ground."
Do you remember seeing fans sitting on the wall inside
the ground? - A. Yes.
Which wall do you think you were referring to? - A. I
really don't know.

If you go back to the photograph which is up and have
a look at that, and then let us go back to the one
which has you on it, C.295, do you see that behind you
are those blue gates I have been pointing out to you?
- A. Yes.

People are coming through, and do you see to the
right, as you look at the photograph, a lot of people
sitting on that dividing wall or fence which is
between the two halves of the turnstile area, the one
I pointed out to you when we were outside the
perimeter gates on that first photograph? Do you
think those are the fans you could see inside the
ground sitting on the wall? - A. Possibly.

To help you, there is no mystery, so that the Coroner
knows, there was a time on the evidence when those
perimeter gates were also closed for a short time.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, we know that.

     MR. KING: Then they were opened and people came
through.
I wondered whether you were one of those who was in
that group immediately pressed against the perimeter
gates which had been closed at a certain stage and
then you had got through? - A. But the tunnel is not
right in front of those perimeter gates, is it?

No. - A. That is why I am sure it must be the other
gate, because when we came out of the'other gates the
tunnel was right in front. That is the only way I can
think of it because I am not sure of the layout.

     THE CORONER: So be it, that is right. It is very
firm in her recollection.
                         S. L. JONES

     MR. KING: Indeed.
Let me just go back slightly in time, so again we can
get the picture when you arrive, because you are
talking about choices the whole time, about the choice
of someone arriving at the ground.  In your original
description, again I say it is so very close to what
you have told us today, you have said this on the
second page:

      "We got to the ground together and I think the
      ground was on our right-hand side."
That would be correct because you were coming from the
direction Mr. Payne was talking about. You said:
      "We turned into the entrance to the ground and I
      was quite surprised to see such a large crowd of
      people standing at the front of the ground".
A.   Yes.
Was that the impression you had, that you were coming
so that the ground was on your right and you turned
into the entrance? - A. Yes.

Because if we look on our model, you would be coming,
with the help of our friend with the pointer, not from
Leppings Lane, but from the opposite direction. The
ground would be on your right and you would turn into
the entrance, would you not? - A. Yes.

You probably came over a bridge but you probably would
not remember that. - A. Right.

Because, as the Jury will know, you could come from
two directions. There were people coming down
Leppings Lane from one direction and people were
coming from your direction and everybody converging
from two directions to the entrance to the turnstiles,
do you see? - A. Yes.

When you arrived, was the picture of a great mass of
people? - A. Yes, just as we came down, yes.

The moment you joined it, from that moment onwards did
you really find that events had really taken over from
you after that? - A. Yes, because we didn't give our
tickets in, we didn't go through any turnstiles.

No, and you have already described the police officers
you had seen, which to you were few in number at that
stage? - A. Yes.
                            S. L. JONES

Now let me take you through onto the concourse, and
you got through the big gate and you are relieved and
you see the tunnel? - A. Yes.
Did you on that concourse area, that is the large area
behind the turnstiles when you got through, see
anybody; be it a policeman or a steward, directing you
in any way? - A. No, I didn't see anyone of that
nature.
Did you see any signs indicating where you should go?
- A . No.
So you made for the tunnel as the natural way to go?    -
A. That was the only way I could see.
I am just finally interested in this. When you got
through the tunnel, and you are someone who has been
to many crowds by the sound of it, were those terraces
to you empty-looking, the terraces you were going
into? - A. No, they weren't empty-looking.   They just
looked as they normally do.

In a normal crowd we have heard that there is swaying.
You know what I mean by swaying, don't you? - A. Yes.

You go back and you go forward, back and forward? - A.
Yes.

You have described to us a number of what you have
described as surges? - A. Yes.

Am I right in saying that that is not a sway? A surge
is when the crowd goes forward and does not go back
again? - A. Just gradually forward all the time.

Because you talked about first it was a gradual
movement of people coming on from behind, and then
more and more surges? - A. Yes.

And the surges are the movement of people forward and
then stopping? - A. Yes.

And you were being propelled forward from the pressure
from behind, and that is what was happening more and
more to you as you were on the terraces? - A. That is
right, yes.

       MR. KING:   I have no further questions, thank
you.

          Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE
                              S. L." JONES

Q.' Miss Jones, please understand I am not at all
    suggesting there is anything wrong with your evidence.
    1 think I speak for all of us that we are
    exceptionally impressed v/ith the way you have given
    your evidence today. I just want to focus on that
    photograph that is behind you.
          THE CORONER:   It is the one, I think, in front of
     you as well.

Q.        MR. CATCHPOLE: Do you remember that there was a
     Preliminary Inquest into Richard and Tracy's death,
     and I believe the family may have viewed some video
     evidence and come photographic evidence, and you
     identified yourself on that photograph, and then
     Richard was identified inside the ground on a video?
     Do you have any recollection of that? - A. No. I am
     not quite sure which one you are talking about. We
     saw that many photographs and videos looking for them.

Q.   If I could just read you a passage from the evidence
     that was given by Inspector Layton at Richard's
     Inquest. For your note, sir, it is page 1,150, and it
     just says:

          "On a BBC video tape, reference MAPI, timed at
          14.56, 3104, Richard was shown alive in Enclosure
          No.3", that is inside the ground at 4 minutes to
          3.

     Do you have any recollection of that? - A.    Not
     really, no.

Q.   It does not matter, but if that is right, you would
     agree with me, I presume that whatever gate you were
     up against, it looks likely that you were in the
     ground along with Richard at 4 minutes to 3, if that
     video reference is right, do you agree? - A. I don't
     think it can b e , because we were seen outside at 4
     minutes to 3, weren’t we?

Q.   No, that is 6 minutes to 3. So it looks as if it took
     2 minutes from when we see you on that photograph for
     you to get down into the tunnel onto the terraces, or
     at least it took Richard that long, and we presume
     that you were with him throughout that time? - A.
     Well, I would presume so.

                               Q.   Please understand
Please understand, everyone here has seen enough
witnesses to know that things get very confused,
particularly when you go through something like that.
There is -absolutely no criticism'at all - we all know
you are trying to help us as best you can, but it does
seen-tnat Richard was inside the ground, and I am right
in understanding that as far as you remember you were
with him right the way into the terraces? - A. Yes.

Thank you. Just one other small point tnat I should
raise with you. Can I remind you of the evidence you
gava in answer to the Coroner on the question of once
you were inside the ground? You actually said you
could only see the tunnel, and that Richard said, "Just
go down the tunnel", and you went down and it was
reasonably clear. Is that, in fact, what happened? -
A. Yes.

Thank you very much.

           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN
Stephanie, I an trying to unravel this mystery about
when you actually went in there, and this is how I see
it. You say when you were in the crowd, wnen there
were a lot of people around you, that you did see a
large metal gate, a concertina gate? - A. Yes.

So there is no confusion about the perimeter gates and
that gate, that does seem to be the concertina gate,
now, when you were tnere you saw it opening once, you
said, and you were too far away at the time to go
through it, but you did mention that it wasn't opened
very wide at the time? - A. No, it wasn't.

Just a few feet? - A. Just a few incaes really.

     HRS. McBRIEH:   From evidence tnat we have it
seems to me that it was the 2.48 opening, tnat, because
I don't think the other openings, it was opened wide
the next time, yasn't it, sir?

     THE COROiJER:  You are quite right. 2.A3 was a
partial opening, more than a few inches but it wasn't
opened very wide, and then at 2.52 it was opened
widely. You are quite correct in your recollection.

     HRS. McBRIEli;  So it seems to me that tnat was
the first opening that you sat;. Mow, when you saw that
you said^tnat Richard said, "If it opens again we're
going in", that is correct, isn't it? - A. Yes.

And of course it was opened like you said, and you do
remember going through it with the crowd.  From what I
                                                                33


                                                  S. L. JONES




     can work out it seems that you went through on the
     second opening, and i.iaybe the photograph has got the .
     wrong time on it.

          MRS. Hc3RIEN:   That is the only thing I can think
     of, if you don't mind ray saying so. I think Stephanie
     has given very good evidence, absolutely -- it is so
     clear, and yet we have got this mystery here. That is
     the only way I can work it out.
          THE CORONER:   Well, Stephanie can't answer that
     question.  In fact, I can't answer it either.
          MRS. McBRIEN:   It is just a real puzzle.
     Everything seemed so clear, sir, apart from that.
          THE CORONER:   It is highly unlikely actually tnat
     the times are wrong except for this minute, because
     there is a photograph, and that is why one knows the
     tine, where the time is printed on it and the clock is
     on it as well, so you can time it twice by the nu:r.ber
     printed and by tne clock face, and it is a minute out,
     that is where this minute is coming from.  It is an
     interesting thought, I agree, but I don't think it
     works.

          MRS. McBRIEN:    I think it is a mystery because
     Stephanie did say that when she went down the tunnel
     and got to the terrace end of the tunnel it wasn't
     crowded.   If she had gone in the final ti:ne it would
     have been.   It is not really adding up properly.

       THE CORONER:   I think that we can't take it any
 -further.  I can see tnat there is a problem here.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you very much, Stephanie.

           THE CORONER:    Yes, Mr. Hale.

           MR. ILALE:  I am sorry, a crucial point, which
      this witness has to bear because it has been put to
      her, and I would like to ask her about the crowd
      pressure.

               Further Cross-Examined by MR. HALE
0 . It has been put to you that with crowd pressure you had
      no choice, that is right, isn't it? - A. That is riq,ht.

0. But is it right that a crowd like tnat is not like a
   river, is' it? A.river only goes one way, doesn't it?
   If you were in a river in those circumstances, a strong
   current, you could only go the way tne river takes you,
   tnat is right, isn't it?'     Yes.
->»   ■                                                                       39


                                                                S. L. JONES




              Q. But that crowd was made up of individuals like
                 yourself, that is right? - A. Yes.
          B   Q. .All "having a thinking brain, is that right? - A. Yes.
              Q. Suppose fire had suddenly broken out in front of you,
                 which way do you think the crowd would have gone then?
                 - A. It is difficult to say, because the people at the
                 front who are by the fire are going to- want to go back,
                 but the people at the back who maybe can't see the fire
                   •   • «   •



               , No, the people at the back can see the fire, see the
                 danger. - A. Well, you are ail going to go the other
                 way if everyone can see the fire.
               . You are all going to go'the other way, that's right.
                 So the way in which a crowd moves dependsupon the
                 individual will of the people who raake it up? - A. It
                 depends on everyone if it is a large crowd.
          D   Q. That's right, but if everybody in the crowd          - A.
                 You can't have half and half though.

               . Well if you had half and half you night have a
                 stalemate, neither going forward nor going backward? -
                 A. Exactly.

              Q.   That is right. - A. And with the large amount   of people
                   you find you are having problems.

              Q. In the circurastances there were more people wanting to
                 continue pressing forward than there were who were
                 afraid for their lives like you, and would have liked
                 to stand still or hold back a bit, is that right? - A.
                 Everyone was there for the one reason, to go and see a
                 match, so everyone wants to go forward.
              Q. Yes, but some of you were getting rather concerned ....
                 - A. At tnat tirae I was slightly worried but I didn't
                 think that anyone was going to get killed.

              Q. Yes. We have heard from other witnesses who would have
                 liked to have stopped and to have got out but they
                 couldn't. - A. Yes.

              Q. That is because there were more wanting to     go forward
                 tnan were wanting to stop and co.-se back? -   A. Yes.

                                  Further by THE CONQUER

               0. The problem it is not that anybody is disbelieving you
                  - on the contrary everybody is believing you. - A. It's
                  okay.

                                             w
But everybody is fitting the account to the tines.    You
can see wnat I am saying? - A . Yes.
because if   it is right that Richardwas seen on the
terrace at   14.5u then it is impossible for you to have
entered at   14.59, isn't it, because that is three
minutes earlier? - A. I think that must be wrong, the
picture, to be honest with you. I think the picture
must be wrorg„
Which picture? - A. Of Richard on the terraces.
     THE CORONER:   That is something that I think --
we will have to get the family to review that bit of
evidence because it would obviously be helpful. Ladies
and gentlemen, Mr. Catchpole knows this becausa he was
there, and indeed Mrs. HcBrien was - the problem of
identification is a very major problem.  It isn't half
as easy as we think and I know that many families spent
hours and hours and hours trying to do it, and
sometimes they succeeded, sometimes they have done an
identification and then sometimes they have reviewed it
at a later date. In fact, I think Mr. Traynor was
mentioned on the first day - we haven't yet corrected
that - so it is a difficult problem.

Don't worry. The fact that one has to look at it again
is neither here nor there, all I am concerned about and
interested in, if you like, is to try and get the facts
as near as we can. Uhat you are saying is you are sure
that you were pressed against the concertina gate,
right? - A. Well, yes.

And you based it, because you know that once you got
through that gate you were in the concourse area? - A.
Yes, the tunnel was in front.

The tunnel was in front of you, and not 20 or 30 yards
away and negotiate another huge crowd, that is rignt,
isn t it? - A. Yes. I agree about the fans on the
wall, it may have been by the perimeter gate, but I can
only assume that I meant that before, about seeing the
fans on the wall.

That was, in fact, how I read your statement, that
there was pressure before, tnat you saw the fans, that
you then moved in - and in fact, I asked you this, "Did
you see the gate open", and Richard then said, "Hext
time it opens we are going in”? - A. Yes.

 And.you gradually got nearer to the gate and then it
 opened and you went through, that is rignt, isn't it? -
 A. Yes.
O.   Sorry, I    haven't quite finished. There is something
     else I wanted to ask. Mr. Hale to a certain extent has
     dealt with the point, but it is right, isn't it,
     Stephanie, you have explained to cue that you couldn't
     do anything about it because people were pressing
     behind? - A. No, you couldn't.

i}. That is right, but you would accept, wouldn't you, that
    a crowd is made up of individuals, isn't it? - A. Yes.
     And if each individual person had stood still - if, I
     ara not saying that they did - if they had stood still
     outside the gates, you too would not have been pushed
     forward, that is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, but that is
     just not going to happen, is it?
3. Okay, that is fair enough, but I an just asking you
   whether that is correct? - A. Yes.
Q. This is a question which we haven't broached yet and I
   just want to ask you this, did you know, and would it
   have made any difference to you if you had known, that
   the ground had a licence to hold football matches? - A.
   Had a ... ?

Q. A licence, that it had been licensed for football
   matches. - A. It wouldn't have made any difference.

0. You didn't know it? - A. What do you mean?

Q. That is all right, you have answered my question. I am
   trying to find out - this ground was licensed, there is
   a procedure for licensing football grounds, and what I
   am trying to find out from a few of the fans is whether
   the fans knew this, and I haven't found one yet who
   did, and you didn't know it either? - A. No.

          THE CORONER:      Mr. King, yes.

           MR. KING:     Might I ask a question arising out of
      your question?

           THE CORONER:   Which one, the momentum one? Yes.
      I am not trying to undermine you, Mr. King, at all:

           MR. KING:    No, no. It is an important, not only
      interesting but an important point on crowd behaviour
      and expectations.

               Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING

 0 . Stephanie, you were-asked "If everybody had stood
      still, clearly the crowd would have stopped", and the
      answer to that nas to be yes, but then you gave this
                                                                  4 2




                                               .S « L .   JONES




   answer, "It is just not going to happen". Could you
   explain why you say that? - A. When you want to go
   somewhere you are not going to get anywhere if you
   stand still, are you?

0.. Yes. You have been to many football matches. How
    realistic is it, from your experience, to put forward
    the proposition that a football crowd going into a
    game, shortly before kick-off, it is all suddenly going
    to stop still? llow realistic does that seem to you? -
    A. It is stupi.d. It is riot going to happen.
        THE C0R0HER:   Mr. King, I will just follow it up
   with another one and I will give you an opportunity
   because it is actually very convenient because
   Stephanie is (a) a good witness, if I may say so, (b) a
   relative.

                  Further by THE C0R0HER
Q. I think as you are so helpful and kind we are taking
   advantage. Have you been to the theatre? Do youever
   go to the theatre? - A.   Yes.

Q. Or the cinema? - A. I go to the cinema all the time.
Q. You do? - A. Yes.

0. And do crowds go into those areas as well? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you find that the behaviour of those crowds is any
   different to the behaviour of a football crowd? - A. I
   wouldn't say the behaviour.  I go to the match more for
   the atmosphere, because of the great atmosphere in the
   Kop, and that is why I go to the match, so it is
   different in that way, I would say.

Q. But for example, you would be surprised if you went
   down the corridor in the cinema complex and people were
   urinating against tae walls there? You would think
   that that was a little unusual? - A. There is plenty of
   toilets there.

Q. Yes. Have you found that people when they want to go
   in and see a film are also pressing forward in the sane
   sort of way as you have described the pressure which
   you were experiencing? - A. Wot really. You don’t get
   that sort of people, amount of people going to the
   theatre.

Q. You don't get as many, of course, I agree, I accept
   that, but of course you have got a smaller space as
   well because the stadium seats 55,000 and the cinena
   might seat 500, I don't know, so obviously you are
A                                               S.   L-   JONES




    going to have different proportions, I agree. - A. They
    have a queuing system at the cinema so it is different
    totally.




D




F



                 Further Cross-Examined
                                        S. L. JONES



          Further   Cross-Examined by HR.   KING:

This is probably unfair, but if you had been in charge
yourself, given the task of preparing for a big fop tball
match and you were having to say to yourself, What can I
expect?" - you haven't been yet and you have got to try
and think what it is going to be like.     Do you think it
would be sensible to go to the cinema and say to
yours elf, "Wall, I will go to the local cinema.    If I
was in London I would go to Covent Garden, because we are
going to find a situation which is roughly the same as a
football match."    In other words, from your experience
is it a fair comparison - a football crowd and a footba 11
match on the one hand and a queue of people waiting to go
into the cinema - is it the same thing? - A. No, it
isn't.    It's not a comparison at all, I don't think,
sorry.

Let me explore this slightly. At a cinema, is it right
you have a queue, often just one queue cornin’ out of the
cinema going along the pavement? - A. Yes, normally.

Have you ever known in a cinema 4,000 or 5,000 people all
being asked to go through the same small number of
entrances? - A. No.

     MR. KING:      I could develop it, but I won't:

The point being made - and I am not being rude to the
learned Coroner, it is an important point - is is it
sensible to view matters by reference to a cinema crowd
or a football crowd? - A. No, it isn't.

     THE CORONER:      I think we will leave this point.

          Further Cross-Examined by MR. HALE:

What if the Rolling Stones were performing at the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground? - A. I really don't
know.   I wouldn't go and see them anyway!

But that would be a more apt comparison, wouldn't it? -
A. Perhaps.   I don't know how many fans they have.   Not
as many as Liverpool Football Club have.

     THE CORONER:   This is a very difficult problem, Mr.
King, because the problem is sorting out whether football
crowds are intrinsically different.   You know, are they
made up of a different category of person from other
humans beings and, of course, there are implications
whichever way you answer that.

     MR. .KING:     It i.s very important when one...
                                                             45




                                           S.   L.   JONES


           THE CORONER:   This is what I was trying...   I took
     th'e opportunity because we had a charming witness and I
     thought we would just explore it a little bit.
          MR. KING:   I agree, sir, because it goes very
     importantly to matters as to what one should expect,' what
     one should anticipate,
          MR. PAYNE:   I am not going to intervene in this
     discussion, but if that kind of illustration is going to
     be put to witnesses, then it ought not to be confined to
     cinemas, but it could be applied, for example, to rugby
     league matches or to rugby union matches.
          THE CORONER:   Indeed, we could go on, and I suppose
     you could criticise me for having put it to the witness
     and it may not have been entirely fair, but she has given
     quite a good account of herself on it.
            Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:
Q. Mr. Hale mentioned that if you had known there was a fire
   in front of you, or the crowd with you that day had seen
   a fire, they would have done something about it.   Now,
   Stephanie, you would not think there was danger ahead,
   would you, that day? - A. Well, if you could not have
   seen it.   He said I could though.

Q.    There was only a hidden danger ahead, wasn'tthere?     A
     hidden one? - A. I suppose so.

Q. There has been a lot said about the behaviour of the fans
   waiting to go into the football ground.   Now it was
   close to kick-off time, wasn't it? - A. Yes.

Q.   And it was a semi-final match?- A. Yes.

Q.   It could not be compared with a queue at acinema, could
     it?    It was a different thing altogether?   A big
     occasion? - A. Yes.
0. Now the crowd as far as I can make out were not doing
   anything unusual really, they just wanted to get in to
   see the match.   Would it have made a difference to the
   crowd if someone had announced that, the game was going to
   be delayed? - A. I don't think so.     I mean, it wouldn't
   have mattered really.    It would have given everyone a
   lot more time to get in.

Q. You still think they would have pushed forward even
   though they had half an hour, for instance, to wait? - A.
   Well, no.
                                       S.   L.   JONES


If you had more time - I was thinking maybe the fans were
anxious to get in because they were running out of time.
That was the reason for their behaviour, not just because
they wanted to push each other?   Do you agree? - A .
Well, yes.   It s a difficult question to answer.    I
mean, if the match had been put back a bit more it would
have given more time to filter people off to different
sections perhaps. As it was the bulk of the crowd went
in all at once and that just was no good, was it?

So all they needed was time really? - A. Well, more time
would have helped a great deal I should imagine.
                  Further by THE CORONER;
Stephanie, I need to ask you this.   You have already
told me but I need to be absolutely sure about this.
You did not hear any announcements made? - A. No.
You didn't see a loud speaker van or anything like, or a
Land Rover? - A. No.

You heard nothing? - A. Definitely not.

Definitely not.     You are absolutely sure? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you very much.    Now then,
Stephanie, you have already been complimented up and down
dale, and I am very very grateful to you for coming and
for being here and for yesterday as well.    I am sorry
about that. I think you have quitted yoursalf well.
You are a credit to your mum and dad.    I am sure they
were proud of you this afternoon.

     I think we will arrange for this video to be re­
viewed, if you and the family are happy, to see whether
the identification on the terrace is confirmed. We will
just have a think about it.   OK?

     THE WITNESS:     OK.

     THE CORONER:   It is up to you, of course, and your
mum and dad.   It is not for me to say that they must.
It is just a matter of trying to sort it out:

Oh, Stephanie, we want you to put a cross on the little
plan.    Show Stephanie which is enclosure 3.   I want you
to put a cross where you first exited on to the terrace
where in fact you were, and you were in. fact aiming to go
forward?    In other words, before you felt the - I think
we have used the word "shove" - from behind.    Can you
put a cross there? - A. I can't honestly say.
                                       S.    L.   JONES


Can you remember where you finished up after the first
birg shove? - A. No.  The only time I can remember, it
was just a constant shove right the way down. I didn't
really stop.
-You really only remember yourself at the gate, is that
 right?   I'm sorry, what were you going to say? - A. The
 only time I really know is when I was at the bottom by
 the gate before I got out.
Put your cross down there.   So just inside by the gate,
is that right? - A. Yes, when I came out of the gate I
came out to the right of the goal post.
Yes, that is right, I remember that.        Thank you.    We
will give it a C" .umber.    (C.302)
     THE CORONER:    Stephanie, thank you very much.           We
have finished.
     Ladies and gentlemen, we have finished today.
Before I let you go we have been thinking about the times
for starting and stopping on Monday and Fridays, not the
other days.    If I were   to say to you that we would start
on Monday at 10.30 instead of 10.00 and on Friday we will
start at 9.30 and aim to finish at 3.30 - you will
realise that "aim" is not quite the same thing as
achievement - but aim to finish at 3.30, would that sound
acceptable to you?    If   it sounds acceptable to you, then
I will sort out whether   it sounds acceptable to the
lawyers.    We think it might be easier because a lot of
people have to travel, including me as well.      You
wouldn't mind if I made those changes.

             (In the absence of the jury)

     THE CORONER:   You heard what I said to the jury.
We thought that might be a bit easier if we start on
Monday at 10.30.

     MR. KING:   I have not canvassed it yet with my
colleagues, but certainly I would have thought that was a
sensible idea.

     THE CORONER:   Is there anybody who feels very
strongly that would be jolly inconvenient?   If we start
at 10.00 on Friday and finish at 3.30 we have actually
lost a whole hour and I thought if we started at 9.30 on
Friday we are only sacrificing half an hour, and aim to
finish at 3.30 rather than 4.00.   Whether we make it is
another matter.    Are you happy with that 33 well?

     MR. KING:   Sir, I haven't consulted any of my
friends on this idea which I am merely floating, sir.
M tC H ftek DAVID   K6UL.Y
MICHAEL DAVID KELLY



        Michael        David    Kelly        the    brother     of    the     Applicant         Joan

        Sinclair       was     born     on     1st March 1951, and was 38 years old
        when he died at Hillsborough football ground                          on    15th       April
        1989.



2   .   At the mini inquest the jury heard from Dr John Clark that in

        his view the cause of death was                    crush     asphyxia.        This      was

        based     on    finding signs of asphyxia in Mr Kelly's face which

        was rather congested and               had     a   bluish      discoloration.             Dr

        Clark      stated       that     these        changes      were      fairly      mild     in

        comparison to a lot of the other victims.                         He further          stated

        that    one of the other features of asphyxia is to find little

        haemorrhages on the skin.                  He remarked       that    these       in     fact

        were not present.         Mr Kelly had not. inhaled vomit and had not

        suffered any internal or severe injuries                       and    there      was     no

        natural disease to account for his death.                         Dr Clark said that

        he still thought Mr Kelly died of crush asphyxia and for some

        reason the signs of this were rather mild.                        He suggested that

        it may have been the case that Mr Kelly's heart                            stopped      for

        some particular reason very very quickly and he died but that

        this is something which is impossible to prove.



        Dr Clark's evidence was followed by the                      evidence       of     Police

        Inspector Matthew Robert Sawers who stated that at about 3.35

        pm Police Constable Willmott made his way on to the Spion Kop
end    of the ground.                There ha sax* Mr Kelly lying on the pitch

on his back.       Michael appeared                     to be     unconscious.     Together

with    Police     Constable                Lally he checked for vital              signs of

life but could not find any,                      Mr Kelly        was    carried      to     the

temporary       mortuary.              At       about     3.'59   pm    Dr   Andrew        Byrne

certified Michael David Kelly dead.


At the mxni-inquest visual evidence was produced by Detective

Inspector       Michael          Layton,          of     the West Midland Police             who

showed a photograph timed at 3.08 pm which appeared                                 to      show

Mr     Kelly    alive           in    Enclosure 3.          When asked by the Coroner

whether he could say at that point if Mr Kelly was conscious,

unconscious,           alive          or    dead,        Detective      Inspector        Layton

replied that       Mr Kelly was probably still alive butcertainly

in distress.       The Applicant is concerned that such a question

was     directed       at        a    police       officer        and   feels    that        the

information sought by the Coroner ought to have been obtained

from a medical expert.



Inspector Layton also stated that a P C Maughan had attempted

to     resuscitate          a        man at the Leppings Lane end of the pitch

but without success.                  P     C    Maughan        assisted     spectators       to

carry     the    man        to the Spion Kop end of the ground, where he

left him with a St John's Ambulance officer who has not                                     been

identified.        He further stated that P C Maughan had met with

the Applicant and both are satisfied that it was actually                                     Mr

Kelly that P C Maughan had attempted to assist.
At     the    main inquest the jury heard from Police Officer John

Raymond Maughan that on the day he got                                 on   to    the     Leppings

Lane     end       of     the    pitch        at     about        3.04 pm.        Three or four

minutes later he approached a man who was laid on his side by

the     goalposts          on    the grassed area behind the bye line.                                He

identified          the          man as            MrKelly.        The man did not                    appear to

breathing           and     with the help of some civilians he turned                                 Mr

Kelly over          and          worked            onhim for a few minutes. He                    appeared

to     start        to breathe.               Police Officer Maughan continued                        to

breathe for the man for a while.                           Mr Kelly then            appeared          to *■
slip     unconscious             but     he     was        breathing.            Police        Officer

Maughan was clearly confident in                            his        recollection        that       he

appeared           to     have    won     through and used the expression, "We

have won that one".                With the help of supporters                       he        carried

Mr     Kelly        towards       a     grassed        area on the pitch near to the

gymnasium where the first aid people had set up                                     a     reception

area     in        the     corner.        They        left        Mr     Kelly in the care of

ambulancemen and went back to help at the                                   other       end.      P    C

Maughan        was confident that Mr Kelly was still breathing when

he put him into the care of the St John's Ambulanceman.



In a meeting with the applicant P C Maughan stated that after

he     had     left       Mr     Kelly        with     the        ambulancemen he ran back

towards the Leppings Lane end                         to     assist         other    spectators.

Before        he        reached Leppings Lane he received a radio message

to form part of a cordon on the half way line which                                        he     duly
did.         The     Applicant     asked him why he did this when he knew

people were dying.              He replied that he had to as             it    was     an

instruction, things were utterly chaotic and nobody knew what

they were doing.             This evidence was not put before the                jury.

Such     evidence        was     highly    relevant to the issue         of whether

death was due to or              aggravated by    lack of care,           an     issue
which was not left to the jury.



The Applicant is concerned that Mr Kelly was eventually found

lying on his back              without    apparently    having      received          any

treatment           from the      emergency services. She contends that he

ought to have been laid in the recovery                  position.            Further,

because        of    the absence of any obvious signs of crush injury

on Mr Kelly's body she feels that he would have survived                              had

he     received       prompt     medical    treatment        once   he    had        been

resuscitated by P C Maugham, and thereafter left in the                              care

of     the     St John Ambulance Service.          Finally the applicant is

concerned that the evidence shows that                  Mr     Kelly     was     alive

beyond        the     3.15     pm cut off time imposed by the Coroner and

that the facts of the case present sufficient material for                              a

jury     to     consider whether to return a verdict that the death

of Michael David Kelly was due to or aggravated                     by        lack     of
care.
                                                       J   ’

                                                                                                     ' :?■-
                                                                                                       ■*I'J >_ I




       ( j P P.    M A J E S T Y ' S C O R O N E R FOR S O U T H              YORKSHIRE
                           ~~       ("WEST D I S T R I C T )




                    INGUESTS INTO -THE DEATHS OF THE

            VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                                 STADIUM DISASTER

                             ON THE 15TH APRIL,                        1989



                            IMuUiS.i ‘IMi.0 THi DEATH OF

                               MICHAEL DAVID KELLY
A
h J



                                           Bef ore

 DR.       S.L.          F'Jr?iLp.. L L .E . a. M E D . S c i.            EM,    S ~ . MRuLr.-
                                                                                                 1

                              (H=r   Majesty's                 Coroner)




                                               At

                                  Medico-lenal                     C

                                       S h 0 i~ ?i.   ——       .



                                      st    Hay       1S90




                            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




                  From    t h e N o t e s cf J. L. H a r p n a m . L i d
                          Official Shorthand Writers,
                   £5.    O u e = n S t r e e t . S h e f f i e l d bl 2 E»a

                                                                                                                ¥
                                            INDEX


DR.    JOHN CL AR K - Called-

  Ey    THE   CORONER    ......................................


POLICE    INSPEC TO R R OB ER T M AT TH EW S A WE RS - C a l l e d

  3 y T H E C O R O N E R ......................................
  C r o s s - E x a m i tied b y MR. F R A S E R .....................
  C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by HR. L I M B ......................


DETECTIVE      INSPECTOR M I C H A E L L AY TON - Called
                                                                                                                •,*,?tv.




    1sr     f!av    1990

                      INQUEST         INTO   THE    DEATH     OF   MICHAEL      DAVID     KELLY

                    MR. F R A S E R :   .Sir, the next e v i d e n c e y o u will h e a r
          r e l a t e s to Mi chael D a v i d Kelly.               M i c h a e l ' s b r o t h e r and
          s i s t e r a n d t h e i r s p o u s e s a r e p r e s e n t in C o u r t t h i s m o r n i n g
B         w i t h the h e l p of social workers.                     I a p p e a r in a p e r s o n a l
          c a p a c i t y f o r t h e f a m i l y but o b v i o u s l y f o r t o d a y I a p p e a r as
          a m e m b e r o f t h e S t e e r i n g C o m m i t t e e , in f a c t , a s a g e n t f o r
          myself I suppose.

                    THE    CORONER:            Yes.      Is   it   brother      and   sister,       did   you
          say?

                    MR.    r n A S t R :     Yes. sir■

                 THE CORONER:             Whi'ch a r e t h e b r o t h e r a n d s i s t e r ?        Yes,
      thank; y o u . ’ G o o d a f t e r n o o n .         L e t m e b r i e f l y d e s c r i b e t o -you
      t h e g e n e r a l f o r m a t o f the Inq ue st so t h a t y o u c a n f ol l o w
      w h a t is g o i n g t o h a p p e n .           I a m g o i n g t o r e a d t o y o u in a
      m o m e n t t h e e v i d e n c e I t o o k on 1 8 t h A p r i l 1 ? 8 9 .           T h e r e are
      o n e or two m i n o r e r r o r s which I will c o r r e c t w hen I have
D     r e a d it.        T h e n I a m g o i n g t o t e l l y o u w h a t Dr. F o r r e s t s a i d
      w i t h r e g a r d t o t h e b l o o d a l c o h o l a n d t h e n Dr. C l a r k is g o i n g
      t o c o m e , t h a t is t h e P a t h o l o g i s t , a n d h e w i l l t e l l u s t h e
      relevant parts of the pathological findings.                                     W h e n he h a s
      c o m p l e t e d h i s e v i d e n c e the West M i d l a n d s P o l i c e O f f i c e r will
      p r e s e n t t h e s u m m a r y a n d I n s p e c t o r 'L a y t o n w i l l d e a l w i t h t h e
      visual sid e of the evidence.                          As I s ai d, t h e J u r y must be
      g e t t i n g t i r e d o f t h i s b e c a u s e I s a y t h i s in n e a r l y e v e r y
      case.         T h e v i s u a l e v i d e n c e w h e n it is f i r s t p r e s e n t e d is
      v e r y c o n f u s i n g b e c a u s e it r e f e r s t o p l a n s a n d n u m b e r s a n d
      t h i n g s , b u t h o l d o n b e c a u s e h e i s c o m i n g r o u n d h e r e in a
                                                                                                                   i
      m o m e n t a n d he will d e m o n s t r a t e to yo u o n t h e b i g p l a n s what
      h e is t a l k i n g a b o u t a n d t h e n t h e w h o l e t h i n g b e c o m e s v e r y
      very much clearer.                  S o d o n ' t d e s p a i r w h e n y o u h e a r all t h e
      numbers.           We n e e d t h e m for the r e c o r d so th a t we can find
      o u r w a y a r o u n d t h e p a p e r w o r k l a t e r o n i f w e s h o u l d h a v e to
      d o it.         Is t h a t c l e a r ?      T h e n w h e n I h a v e c o n e t h a t we w il l
      t a k e n o f u r t h e r e v i d e n c e at t h i s p o i n t .

            This then                 is t h e r e s u m e d I n q u e s t w h i c h w a s o p e n e d   on
      th e 18th April                 1989 a n d on that o c c a s i o n N e i l A n t h o n y
      Parkin, Acting                  C o r o n e r ' s O f f i c e r said:

                   " T h e b o d y w h i c h is t h e s u b j e c t o f t h i s I n q u e s t h a s b e e n
                   i d e n t i f i e d t o DI T i m m s o f t h e S o u t h Y o r k s n i r e P o l i c e as
                   t h a t o f M i c h a e l D a v i d K e l l y by S t e p h e n P a u l K e l l y , h i s
                   brother.           H e w a s 38 y e a r s o f a g e h a v i n g b e e n b o r n o n
                   1st M a r c h 1951 at L i v e r p o o l .          He w a s a d i v o r c e d ma n and
                   h e l i v e d at '                                                                    He
                   w a s a w a r e h o u s e m a n by o c c u p a t i o n .  He died a
                   H i l l s borough Football Ground fo l l o w i n g
H
          t h e r e o n S a t u r d a y , 15t.lT A p r i l 1 9 8 9 .   P C 1791 luilmott
          d a u s e d t h e b o d y to be r e m o v e d to t h e M e d i c o Legal
          C e n t r e a n d t h e r e h e i d e n t i f i e d it t o D e t e c t i v e
          C o n s t a b l e S i m o n W-eigold w h o s u b s e q u e n t l y . i d e n t i f i e d t h e
          s a m e b o d y t o P r o f . U s h e r a n d DI T i m m s .       It is t h e
          family wish that the body s h o u l d be c r e m a t e d . "

 Just b e a r w i t h me for o ne m om en t .             S i m o n W e i g o l d did not as
 s u c h i d e n t i f y t h e b o d y t o DI Timrns.         I think they were
 p r o b a b l y t o g e t h e r at t h e s a m e t i m e b u t t h a t is n o t s t r i c t l y
 r i g h t a s I h a v e r e a d it o ut t o y o u -          In f a c t , Dr- C l a r k , w h o
 is'the Pathologist, was present whe n Prof. Us h e r was there
 a n a Dr. C l a r k , p e r h a p s y o u w i l l d e a l w i t h t h e i d e n t i f i c a t i o n .-!Q||
 in a l i t t l e b i t m o r e d e t a i l o n t h i s o c c a s i o n ■                        '" r': '%'?!

          I wr ote to S t e p h e n Paul Ke lly.              Is t h a t y o u ?
( ind ic at in g agreement.) On 13th M a y yo u s i g n e d a form w h i c h                               v |vi|
I s e n t t o y o u a n d , in f a c t , y o u c o n f i r m e d t h a t t h e
i n f o r m a t i o n t h a t we h a d w a s c o r r e c t w i t h r e g a r d t o n a m e ,
a d d r es s, age, d a t e o f birth, o c c u p a t i o n a n d that i s * s t i l l
so, i s n ’t it?            Dr. F o r r e s t d i d t h e b l o o d a l c o h o l l e v e l s in
the case of M ic ha el and gave us t h e e v i d e n c e on the first
d a y, o n t h e W e d n e s d a y , a n d in f a c t in t h e c a s e o f M i c h a e l
none was detected.                It w a s n e g a t i v e .    Dr. Cl a rk .

          MR. F R A S E R : ,   J u s t b e f o r e y o u c a l l Dr. C l a r k t h e r e is           a
q u e s t i o n w h i c h m a y not m a t t e r f o r y o u r r e c o r d s but the
f a m i l y a r e k e e n t o c l a r i f y it a n d t h a t is t h e q u e s t i o n o f
t h e legal n e x t o f kin.

           THE CORONER:           Yes, w e s e n t y o u a c o p y o f t h a t s h e e t
b u t we a r e n ' t u s i n g it.          It is r e a l l y a s u m m a r y s h e e t f o r       me
b u t I u n d e r s t a n d t e c h n i c a l l y t h e n e x t o f k i n is J o a n n e
K e l l y , i s n ' t it, t h e d a u g h t e r ?
                                                                                                               St:
          MR. F R A S E R : Michael's daughter.                    Strictly speaking,                          p
y e s- S h e is a m i n o r b u t s h e is t h e l e g a l         n e x t o f kin.                            “

         THE CORONER:            I quit e accept that-            It i s n ' t r e l e v a n t                 7.
t o my   proceedings              b u t I d o k n o w if t h e r e w a s a c h i l d s h e
          t a k e p r e c e d e n c e o v e r th

         f:R. F R A S E R :    Thank       you.

         THE C O R O N E R :   You    are    happy       for     me    to r e c o r d that,
a r e n 't y o u ?

         MR.   FRASER:         Yes.

     THE CORONER:              I believe            you r e p r esent     that f i r m      on    an
agency basis?

         MR.   FRASER:          It    is   a bi t   complicated          but,     ves.
                                                                                  D R .   JOHN     CLARK




               THc. C O R O K t R :         Right: .       Are    you    happy    now     it w e   go   on    to
      Dr.     Clark?

               MR.     FRASER:          Yes,      s ir -

                                      DR.    JOHN    CLARK        - Called

                                             By   THE      CORONER:

Q.    Y es . - A. Dr.         John      Clark,       Forensic           Pathologist,        University
      of Glasgow.

Q.    Dr. C l a r k , c a n y o u j u s t t e l l m e h o w t h i s l a d w a s i d e n t i f i e d ?
      W e l l , h e i s n ' t a l a d h e w a s 39-        We will call h i m g e n t l e m a n
      I t h i n k ? - A . As I r e c a l l h e w a s i d e n t i f i e d t o m e b y P o l i c e
      Officers of South Yorkshire Police whose names I don't know
      at t h e m o m e n t b u t a l s o w i t h c e r t a i n i n f o r m a t i o n w h i c h w a s . .
      with th e body, a n a m e with the b o d y a n d a number. _

Q.    In    f ac t ,   the   serial         number      was      72   I believe?        - A-     Yes,   72.

Q.    You are q u i t e s a t i s f i e d you are t e l l i n g              me   about        Michael
      D a v i d K e l l y , a r e n ' t y o u ? - A. Y e s .

Q.   On that b a s i s can y ou tell me what y o u r f i n d i n g s w e r e ? -
A.   Cause of death was crush asphyxia.                         T h i s w a s b a s e d on
     f i n d i n g s i g n s o f a s p h y x i a in h i s f a c e -     His face was r a t h e r
     congested and had a bluish discoloration.                                These changes, I
     h a v e t o s ay , w e r e f a i r l y m i l d in c o m p a r i s o n t o a lot o f t h e
     o t h e r p e o p l e a n d o n e o f t h e o t h e r f e a t u r e s o f a s p h y x i a is t o
     find little h a e m o r r h a g e s on the skin.                 T h e s e w e r e n ’t in f a c t
     present -

Q.   W e r e n o t p r e s e n t ? - A. W e r e n o t p r e s e n t o n t h e s k i n .       They
     were present internally.                     S o r e a l l y w h a t I a m s a y i n g is t h a t
     t h e r e w e r e s i g n s o f a s p h y x i a b u t it w a s r e a l l y r e l a t i v e l y
     m i l d in c o m p a r i s o n t o o t h e r p e o p l e b u t it w o u l d n e v e r t h e l e s s
     be c o n s i s t e n t w i t h p r e s s u r e on h i s c h e s t p r e v e n t i n g h im
     b r e a t h i n g and t h e r e b y b e i n g a b l e to get ai r into the b o d y -
     T he re w a s no .other o b v i o u s c a u s e o f death-               He h a d n ' t
     i n h a l e d vornit a n d h e h a d n o t s u f f e r e d a n y i n t e r n a l o r s e v e r e
     i nj ur ie s and t h e r e was no na tur al d i s e a s e to a cc ou nt for hi s
     dea th an d so I s ti ll th ink he d i e d of c r u s h a s p h y x i a and f o r
     s o m e r e a s o n t h e s i g n s of th at w e r e r a t h e r mild.

               It m a y b e w i t h s o m e p e o p l e w h o d i e a n a s p h y x i a ! d e a t h
     t h e r e is a n a d d i t i o n a l e l e m e n t in t h a t t h e r e c a n b e p r e s s u r e
     o n n e r v e s , p a r t i c u l a r l y in t h e n e c k , w h i c h c a n s t o p t h e
     h e a r t v e r y q u i c k l y a n d it m a y b e a n e l e m e n t .       It is
     s o m e t h i n g w h i c h is i m p o s s i b l e t o prove' b u t it m a y b e h i s
     heart s t o p p e d for s o m e p a r t i c u l a r r e a s o n v e r y v e r y q u i c k l y
     a n d he d i e d .        In a n y e v e n t t h e r e w a s n o t h i n g t o i n d i c a t e h e
     s u f f e r e d for any great length o f time.                     H e p r o b a b l y lost
     c o n s c i o u s n e s s w i t h i n a short p e r i o d o f time, ten or f i f t e e n
                                                                         DR.   JOHN     C L A RK '




  s e c o n d s ’o r   so, a n d then, k n e w n o t h i n g a b o u t    it a f t e r t h a t .
  As I said,           there wasn't any major injuries                    internally.

            He d i d ha ve a n u m b e r of g r a z e s a n d b r u i s e s on his body,
  h i s face, h i s a r m s a n d h i s l e g s , s o m e c a u s e d b y f i n g e r s , b y
  p e o p l e g r i p p i n g h i s a r m s , a n d t h e o t h e r is p r o b a b l y c a u s e d
  by p r e s s u r e agains t ot he r p e o p l e or s o m e s u r f a c e like the
  ground.         A g a i n t h e s e m a y w e l l h a v e o c c u r r e d a f t e r h e lost
  consciousness.              So t h e c a u s e o f d e a t h , a s 1 s a i d , w a s c r u s h
- asphyxia.

            The onl y other finding was e v i d e n c e of a past
  operation, p r o b a b l y an u l c e r o p e r a t i o n on his stomach.                      I
  d o n ' t k n o w bur. I s u s p e c t t h a t is w h a t it w a s . That had                  no
  b e a r i n g at a l 1 o n h i s d e a t h .

       MR.        FRASER:         The    family    have     no   questions.            Th£^nk    you,
  Doctor.

           THE CORONER:            I' b e l i e v e t h i s is, in       f a c t , t h e last
 I n q u e s t y o u a r e g i v i n g e v i d e n c e at, i s n ’t      i t ? - A. T h a t is
 right..

 It is r i g h t y o u h a v e g i v e n      e v i d e n c e at 2 0 I n q u e s t s    and     have
 d o n e 2 0 p o s t morterns? - A.           Y e s , t h a t is r i g h t .

 I k n o w a n d w e all k n o w t h a t y o u c o m e f r o m G l a s g o w .   People
 might w o n d e r why you were           h e r e but, in f a c t , y o u w e r e o n &■
 p r i v a t e v i s i t last A p r i l ? - A. T h a t w e e k e n d , yes.

 You v e r y k i n d l y a g r e e d to         h e l p and,     in f act, y o u d i d a g r e a t
 deal o f w o r k a nd if I may                 say so you have given your
 e v i d e n c e in a m o s t a d m i r a b l e m a n n e r , c l e a r l y u n d e r s t o o d b y
 the Jury and also by the f a m i l i e s and a l s o I b e l i e v e you
 have;- d o n e it in a c o m p a s s i o n a t e a n d h e l p f u l w a y .          I would
 like to t h a n k you v e r y m uch i n d e e d b o t h f o r y o u r a s s i s t a n c e
 at t h e t i m e a n d s i n c e , a n d in p a r t i c u l a r at t h e s e I n q u e s t s .
 T h a n k y o u v e r y m u c h i n d e e d . - A. C a n I s a y in t u r n as
 s o m e o n e d e a l i n g w i t h t h i s s o r t o f w o r k a n d i n v e s t i g a t :o n o f
 d e a t h v e r y r e g u l a r l y how i m p r e s s e d I h a v e b e e n w it h the
 p r o f e s s i o n a 1 ism a n d s e n s i t i v i t y w i t h w h i c h the p r o c e e d i n g s
 h a v e b e e n c a r r i e d o u t h e r e , in p a r t i c u l a r y o u r h a n c i i n g a n d
 e x p l a n a t i o n s to t h e r e l a t i v e s o f t h e b e r e a v e d p e o p le .     I
 t h i n k it h a s g i v e n c o m f o r t t o e v e r y o n e w h o h a s w o r k e d h e r e
 a n d I f e l t it a v e r y a p p r o D r i a t e a t m o s p h e r e .

           HR. F R A S E R :    C o u l d I a d d m y t h a n k s o n b e h a l f of my
 C o m m i t t e e a n d my c l i e n t s f o r t h o s e w o r d s y o u h a v e e x p r e s s e d
 t o Dr. C l a r k .        I have certainly spok e n to many families who
 h a v e s p o k e n t o Dr. C l a r k a n d t h e y h a v e v e r y m u c h a p p r e c i a t e d
 the time he has sp en t with t h e m p e r s o n a l l y .               It is v e r y m u c h
 a p p r e c ia t e d .

         THE     WITNESS:          Thank    you    very    much
                                                       P . I.    M A T T H E W ''ROBERT   SAUERS




         THE CORONER:                Mr. Fraser-,      is   it    likely      the   family    will
'want    t o s p e a k t o Dr.       Clark?

         KR • F R A S E R :         T h e y rnay do,   sir.

          THE CORONER:             Dr. C l a r k , w i l l y o u s t a y ?  Once you have
s p o k e n t o t h e f a m i l y , s h o u l d t h e y w i s h t o d o so, t h e n o f
c o u r s e f e el e n t i r e l y f r e e t o l e a v e us.      Th a n k you again.   I
t a k e it n o n e o f y o u h a v e q u e s t i o n s o f Dr. C l a r k .

         MR.    CATCHPOLE:             No,   sir.

         MR.    LIMB:         No,    sir.

         POLICE      INSPECTOR         MATTHEW      ROBERT       SAUERS      - Called

                                     B v 'THE C O R O N E R :

Y es , Mr.     Sawers.        - A- M a t t h e w R o b e r t S a w e r s ,    Inspector,      "West
Midlands       Police.         I a m a l r e a d y s w o r n , sir-

W o u l d y o u t a k e me t h r o u g h t h e s u m m a r y p l e a s e w h e n y o u a r e
r e a d y ? - A. O n S a t u r d a y , 1 5 t h A p r i l 1989, M i c h a e l D a v i d
K e l l y t r a v e l l e d to S h e f f i e l d o n t h e A v o n , S o u t h W e s t ^ a n d
South Wa l e s L i v e r p o o l S u p p o r t e r s Club coach.             He m e t D e a n
W i l l i a m M a c e y and a n u m b e r of o t h e r s u p p o r t e r s on the coach.
It w a s t h e i r i n t e n t i o n to w a t c h t h e F A C u p S e m i F i n a l
f o o t b a l l m a t c h at t h e H i l l s b o r o u g h S t a d i u m .

          T h e c o a c h p a r t y a r r i v e d in S h e f f i e l d at a b o u t 1 4 0 0
hours.          Michael made his way towards the g round toge t h e r
w i t h Alan Warden, Karl Th omas an d Dea n Kacey.                           W i t h the
e x c e p t i o n o f M i c h a e l t h e o t h e r s s t o p p e d at a s h o p a n d
M i c h a e l c o n t i n u e d to t he g r o u n d alone.

          Paul Kelly, a L iverpool supporter, e n t e r e d the
H i l l s b o r o u g h f o o t b a l l g r o u n d t h r o u g h G a t e C- H e s t o o d in
t he c o n c o u r s e w a i t i n g to meet f r i e n d s a n d w h i l s t s t a n d i n g
t h e r e s aw M i c h a e l , w h o m he knew, a nd he s a w h i m e n t e r the
ground through a turnstile.                         The two m en s p o k e b r i e f l y a n d
M i c h a e l s t a t e d h e w a s g o i n g to t h e t e r r a c i n g .

         At a b o u t 1 5 3 5 h o u r s P o l i c e C o n s t a b l e W i l m o t t m a c e h i s
w a y o n to t h e S p i o n K o p e n d o f t h e g r o u n d .             There he saw a
m a n w h o m h e n o w k n o w s to be M i c h a e l Joying o n t h e p i t c h o n
h i s back.        M i c h a e l a p p e a r e d to be u n c o n s c i o u s .    Together
w i t h P o l i c e C o n s t a b l e L a l l y the O f f i c e r c h e c k e d f or vital
s i g n s o f l i f e but c o u l d not f i n d any.             Michael was p i a c e c on
to a t e m p o r a r y s t r e t c h e r a n d c a r r i e d to t h e g y m n a s i u m w h e r e
a t e m p o r a r y m o r t u a r y h a d b e e n set up.        Police Constable
Wilmott r e m a i n e d w ith Michael.

       At a b o u t 1 5 5 9 h o u r s ,      Dr-   Andrew Byrne exam i n e d Michael
in   the t e m p o r a r y m o r t u a r y   and   c e r t i f i e d life ex ti nc t.


                                               5
                                                                   p .I      MATTHEW        ROBERT      S AW E fr S ^




                At -about 0 5 3 0 h o u r s o n S u n d a y , 1 6 t h A p r i l , Po ice
      C o n s t a b l e W i l m o t t e s c o r t e d M i c h a e l ' s b o d y h e r e t o - v-, -
      Legal C e n t r e w h e r e h e c o n f i r m e d t h e i d e n t i f i c a t i o n by
      reference to Detective Constable Weigold.                                   At t h i s t i m e
      M i c h a e l h a d n o t b e e n i d e n t i f i e d by n a m e .

                At a b o u t 2 1 1 0 h o u r s o n S u n d a y , 1 6 t h A p r i l ,           St e p h e n Paul
      K e l l y a t t e n d e d at t h e M e d i c o L e g a l C e n t r e w h e r e           he
      i d e n t i f i e d t h e b o d y of his b r o t h e r to D e t e c t i v e              Inspector \
     •Tiirons.                                                                                                  '"
               O n M o n d a y , 1 7 t h A p r i l 198 9, f o l l o w i n g i d e n t i f i c a t i o n             :by
     D C W e i g o l d , Dr. J o h n C l a r k c a r r i e d o u t a n a u t o p s y a n d
     s u b m i t t e d a r e p o r t “ i vi n a c a u s e of d e a t h .                                            -V'Vjfj
                                                                                                                -
                                                                                                             •r•jtf. *•••JJI
               No m a t c h t i c k e t w ;        f o u n d in M i c h a e l ' s p
                                                                                  •‘
                                                                                     e r s o n a l e f f e c t s- V
     but Paul K e l l y s aw h i m e n t e r v i a a t u r n s t i l e .                 F u r t h e r , sir
     I wo ul d add that M i c h a e l ' s jacket has n e v e r be en Sound
     d e s p i t e e x h a u s t i v e e n q u i r i e s t o t r a c e it and, o f c o u r s e , it
     is p o s s i b l e t h a t t h e m a t c h t i c k e t c o u l d h a v e b e e n c o n t a i n e d
     in that j a c k e t .

Q    A s we h a v e a l r e a d y s a i d o n m a n y o c c a s i o n s in c i r c u m s t a n c e s
     like this the p r e s e n c e or a b s e n c e of t he ticket itseir
     d o e s n ' t p r o v e - w e l l , it m a y h e l p in c e r t a i n c a s e s b u t y o u
     c a n ' t d r a w t o o m a n y c o n c l u s i o n s f r o m it, p a r t i c u l a r l y in a
     case like this.              N o w , P a ul K e l l y w h o m w e a r e t a l k i n g a o o u t
        loi.     , no r e l a t i o n    is it?          A   N o n e w h a t s o e v e r , s ir -

Q.   It is j u s t       c o i n c i d e n c e h e h a p p e n s to     have       the bame         name?      -
A.   A complete          c o i n c i d e n c e , s i r , yes.

Q.    P a u l h a d a n u n f o r t u n a t e e n c o u n t e r w i t h a h o r s e , is t h a t
     r i g h t ? - A. C e r t a i n l y he h a d a n i n j u r y t o h i s r i g h t f o o t                   and
     t o e w h i c h h e a t t r i b u t e s to t h e a c t i o n s o f a h o r s e .                                     &
                                                                                                                          i<&
Q.    F r o m o u r p o i n t o f v i e w w e a r e no t t o o c o n c e r n e d w i t h h o w h e        ;
     g o t t h e i n j u r y b u t it m e a n t h e w a n t e d t o g e t i n t o t h e § r o u n c g | |
     r a ther m o r e q u i c k l y and r a t h e r more c o m f o r t a b l y than going                 '
     t h r o u g h t h e t u r n s t i l e ? - A. T h a t is so , s i r , yes-

Q-   T h a t is p a g e 15, i s n ' t i t ?      Paul K e l l y isn't here,                         is h e ?        -     ,
A.   He r e f e r s t o it f i r s t o n p a g e 13 a n d d e s c r i b e s t h e                   same
     i n j u r y o n p a g e 15 w i t h t h e h o r s e .

Q-   In e f f e c t , w h a t h e s a y s is t h a t h e w a s t o l d t h e g a t e w a s
     g o i n g t o b e o p e n e d w h i c h w e t a k e it t o be t h e c o n c e r t i n a
     gate | o r o n e o f t h e b i g g a t e s , a n d h e w o u l d b e a b l e to
     i n ? - A. H e d o e s r e f e r s p e c i f i c a 1 1 y , s i r , t o G a t e C.

Q.   Yes, t h a t is r i g h t ,         h e d o e s - - A. It w a s c er a i n l y b r o u g h t
     to his a t t e n t i o n he         m a v be a d m i t t e d t h r o u g h t h a t g a t e
                                                                                                            * & -snfesf-3®

                                                                  P . I - IIA T T Hr. W R 0 5 £ R T b A U E R i




Q.    1 c h i n k h e s a y s , "I w a l k e d in           the    .gate” , d o e s n ’t he,           on    page
      ■15? - A. Y e s , s i r , h e d o e s .

Q.    H e s a ys , "I w a l k e d in t h e g a t e a n d             I w a l k e d b e h i n d the
      turnstiles and I saw Michael David                             K e l l y c o m e t h r o u g h the
      t u r n s t i l e ? - A- H e d o e s , sir, yes.

Q.    Y o u h a v e n o t g o t it in f r o n t o f y o u             but we have.               U p to now
      w e h a v e o n l y r e f e r r e d to t h r e e g a t e        o penings, the             earliest
      b e i n g t h e 144;3 o p e n i n g ? - A. Y es .

Q.    You    can    remember        that,     c a n ' t y o u ? - A.       Yes.

Q.     W o u l d I b e r i g h t in t h i n k i n g t h a t t h e s e g a t e s w e r e    opened                on
      e a r l i e r o c c a s i o n s a s w e l l fo r s h o r t p e r i o d s o f t i m e ? - A.
      T h a t is t r u e , s i r , yes.

Q.    We don't k n o w w h i c h o p e n i n g Paul           refers          to,    do    we?    - A.      We
      h a v e no p r e c i s e i n f o r m a t i o n .

Q-   H e g i v e s n o t i m e ? - A. H e g i v e s          no t i m e       that    we    can
     a t t r i b u t e to t he o p e n i n g of t h e        gate.

              THE CORONER:   Can              you deal        with        the    openings         of   the
     gate,     Inspector Layton,              or not ?

              INSPECTOR        LAYTON:          Only    in    general           terms.

              THE   CORONER:             Yes,    Hr. F r a s e r .

              HR.   FRASER:            Would     you gi ve me         a     moment ple&se?

             THE    CORONER:           Yes.

                             Cross-Examined            bv    HR.     FRASER:

Q.   .Just to d e a l v e r y q u i c k l y w i t h t h e q u e s t i o n o f t h e f a c t t-hat
     there wasn't a ticket with Michael, y o u say he was seen
     g o i n g t h r o u g h t h e t u r n s t i l e w h i c h is s u g g e s t i v e o f t h e f ac t
     he a l m o s t c e r t a i n l y h a d a ti ck et .            C o r r e c t m e if I a m w r o n g ,
     but 1 b e l i e v e it is t h e p r a c t i c e o f t h i s p a r t i c u l a r c o a c h
     o p e r a t o r , y o u m a y not k n o w , no t to. a l l o w a n y b o d y o n t h e
     c o a c h w h o h a s n ’t go t a t i c k e t o f t h e g a m e .              The motives
     b e h i n d that ar e f a i r l y obvious-                   Is t h a t s o m e t h i n g which; h a s
     come up m             y o u r i n v e s t i g a t i o n s ? - A.             certainly within
     my k n o w l e d g e that the coach o p e r a t o r s w ho o p e r a t e on b e h a l f
     of the L i v e r p o o l S u p p o r t e r s F o o t b a l l C l u b a r e q u i t e s t r i c t l y
     a d m i n i s t e r e d a n d t i c k e t s are u s u a l l y c h e c k e d o n b o a r d i n g the
     coach.          P e o p l e a r e n ’t u s u a l l y a l l o w e d to t r a v e l o n a
     Liverpool S u p p o r t e r s ’ sponsored coach,                       if I m a y u s e t h a t
     t e r m, w i t h o u t a t i c k e t .

             HR-                     I am     grateful        for      that
                                                                   P .I ■   IIATTHEM      ROBERT      SAtlERS




    A               THE CORONER:                C a n I just, e x p l a i n t h i s t o y o u -because
          it is o b v i o u s l y a m a t t e r w h i c h c o n c e r n s y o u ? ' T h e s e O f f i c e r s
          c a n o n l y s a y w h a t is in t h e s t a t e m e n t s .         T h e y can guess like
          all o f u s c a n b u t it w o u l d be u n f a i r t o e x p e c t a n O f f i c e r t o
          h a z a r d a g u e s s on Oath-             So h e c a n o n l y s a y w h a t is in t h e
          s v a c e m e n t a n a if t h e r e is n o b o d y t h e r e w h o s a w h i m h o l d a
        . t i c k e t a n d c a n s a y, "I s a w h i m h o l d a t i c k e t " a n d i f w e ' h a v e
          n e t f o u n d it, h e c a n ' t s a y s o m e b o d y s a w i.t o r t h a t w e f o u n d
          it b e c a u s e b o t h o f t h o s e t h i n g s w o u l d b e g u e s s e s b u t t h a t
          d o e s n ' t m e a n t o s a y y o u n e e d to b e t o o c o n c e r n e d .      I am not
          p a r t i c u l a r l y c o n c e r n e d about t h i s point, not w i t h r e g a r d to
          Michael-            All right.

                   THE WITNESS:              It m i g h t b e h e l p f u l , s i r , if I m a k e o n e
         comment.          T h e r e a r e s t a t e m e n t s in t h e f i l e w h i c h I h a v e s e e n
         from t h r e e s u p p o r t e r s who t r a v e l l e d on t h e s a m e c o a c h and
         e a c h s u p p o r t e r r e f e r s s p e c i f i c a l l y t o b e i n g in p o s s e s s i o n o f
         their own ticket.                 It is a n a s s u m p t i o n t h a t t h e s a m e a p p l i e s
         in M i c h a e l K e l l y ' s c a s e but t h a t , t a k e n t o g e t h e r w i t h t h e
         ev i dence of Paul Kelly through the t u r n s t i l e s ,                     le ave s us no
         r e a s o n to s u p p o s e he didn't have a t ic ket .

                                  Cross-Examined             bv    MR.   LIKE:
D
        P a u l K e l l y s t a t e s h e w e n t t h r o u g h Ga.ce C b u t h e is u n c l e a r
        a s to t i m e .      D o e s h e g i v e a n y e v i d e n c e a s to w h e t h e r h e w a s
        pan; of a c r o w d or a p a r t y of p e o p l e g o i n g t h r o u g h G a t e C o r
        h e f o u n d h i m s e l f o n h i s o w n in t h e e n d ?

                 THE    CORONER:         1 think       you    w i 11     find   it   on   page     15.

                 THE WITNESS:            Yes.      Would      it    assist      you,      sir,   if    I set
        this     in c o n t e x t ?

        Yes, g o a h e a d . - A - B r i e f l y , P a u l K e l l y h a s m a d e t w o
        s t a t e m e n t s a n d r e f e r s t o t h i s i n c i d e n t in b o t h , s i r -     He
        r e f e r s t o h a v i n g a c c u i r e d a n i n j u r y t o h i s f o o t in t h e
        v i c i n i t y o f t h e e n c l o s u r e b e t w e e n t h e o u t s i d e g a t e s on
        L e p p i n g s L a n e an d the tu rn s t i l e e n t r a n c e s .        He r e f e r s to
        s p e a k i n g to a P o l i c e m a n and b e i n g led to b e l i e v e t h e g a t e s
        rnav be o p e n e d at s o m e t i m e in t h e f u t u r e -             He r e f e r s to a
        w i t n e s s w h o m he was s ta ndi ng w it h who s p o k e to the O f f i c e r
        a n d s a i d w o r d s t o t h e e f f e c t t h a t t h e g a t e is o p e n e d , " C a n
        y o u g e t t h i s p e r s o n in b e c a u s e h e h a s i n j u r e d h i s f o o t ?"      He
        d o e s not r e f e r s p e c i f i c a l l y to h o w m a n y o t h e r p e o p l e e n t e r e d
        t h r o u g h t h e g a t e at t h e t i m e h e e n t e r e d t h r o u g h G a t e C-

                MR.    LIMB:          Thank     you.

                  THE CORONER:              Y o u will s e e in a           moment why      we are
        s t r e s s i n g t h i s b e c a u s e it cornes u p in            the visual      evicence-
        We c a n c o m e b a c k t o it if n e c e s s a r y -



H
                                                                        D . I.   MICHAEL      LAYTON "        -




               HR. C A T C H P O L E :       Sir, I o n l y r i s e a s a m a t t e r o:
     clarification.              I                                        _ o t the w r o n g
                                            1t t h i n kd owne ’ _h a v e g
     i m p r e s s i o n b u t it       w o u l d be r i g h t to s a y 1 t h i n k t h a t    the
     o n l y t w o o p e n i n g s o f t h e g a t e , in w h i c h          a substantial number
     o f p e o p l e w e n t t h r o u g h , w e r e t h o s e y o u h a v e ^ r e f e r r e d to
     previously.              If t h e r e w e r e a n y e a r l i e r o p e n i n g s f o r a v e r y
     s h o r t p e r i o d o f t i m e , if t h e r e is a n y e v i d e n c e o f p e o p l e
     g o i n g t h r o u g h , It       is o n l y o n e o r m a y b e t w o p e o p l e .

               THE' C O R O N E R :          Yes, t h a t is a v e r y g o o d p o i n t .     We
     ha ve n' t m e n t i o n e d a ny of the e a r l i e r part b e c a u s e what w as
     h a p p e n i n g w a s t h a t t h e g a t e , I w a s g o i n g t o say, w a s
     c o n t i n u o u s l y b e i n g opened.         T h a t is n o t t r u e b u t it w a s
     be i ng o p e n e d i nte rm itt ent ly, u s u a l l y to t h r o w p e o p l e out ana
     not to a l l o w t h e m in.              F o r e x a m p l e , o n e is t i m e d at 143 «, a n
     o p e n i n g , a n d t h e r e is a n o t h e r o n e t i m e d at 1 4 3 9 w h e r e         in
     fact        s o m e b o d y w a s a c t u a l l y t a k e n in o n t h a t one, on<_
     on the p i c t u r e .          T h e r e w e r e o t h e r o p e n i n g s but t h e y h a v e n ' t
     b e e n t e r r i b l y re le va nt until th i s p a r t i c u l a r Inquest an c you
     w i l l s e e in a m i n u t e w h y it is r e l e v a n t .               Shall we le«ve^it
     at t h i s s t a g e w i t h t h e g a t e s a n d w e c a n c o m e b a c k t o it in a
     minute w h e n we have heard Inspector L a y t o n ?                          Any more
       UGSt! i o n s

              I1R.   LIMB:        No   thank     you,     sir.

Q             THE CORONER:             In fact, it is o n l y f a i r t o ^ s a y
     P a u l K e l l y d o e s m e n t i o n a t i m e , I h a v e j u s t n o u c e a ^ , ou <. t h e
     f i r s t t i m e h e m e n t i o n s is t h a t h e s a y s it is a f t e r t h r e e
        'clock a n d t h e n he g i v e s a s u p p l e m e n t a l s t a t e m e n t ^when he
     say s that ca n' t p o s s i b l y right or w o r d s to that                    ffeet . -
A.   T h a t is t r u e , s i r , yes.

Q-   H i s t i m i n g s c a n ' t b e r e l i e d o n ? - A. H i s t i m i n g s c a n ' t ^ b e            N?
     r e l i e d on -       I a m s a t i s f i e d t h e w i t n e s s is a o i n g ^ h i s b e S t ^ t o
     r e c o l l e c t b u t c e r t a i n l y h i s i n f o r m a t i o n a b o u t t i m i n g v~an t
     be    relied     on,    s ir -

Q-   T h e r e is a n i n t e r e s t i n g s e n t e n c e h e r e - T u r n t o pa se 16
     b e c a u s e t h i s may a c t u a l l y help-        The last por -£ to ph , .
     K e l l y says, "Once I was inside t h e g r o u n d I s a w ^ t h e g a t e ^
     open again.             T hi s was about five m i n u t e s a ft er ^I e n t c r e c tne
     groundT          T h i s w a s t h e last t i m e t h e g a t e o p e n e d a n d ^   .     =
     e v e r y b o d y c a m e in a n d w e n t d o w n t h e t u n n e i -   I n o w r>.now ,_n<-
     g a t e w a s o p e n e d at t h i s t i m e a b o u t 14-50." ~ A- !<=:»•

Q.   As    I s a y , I w o u l d n ' t be t o o r e l i a n t o n h i s * l m . n s a              t hat
     is    w h a t h e s a y s ? - A. He d o e s s a y t h a t , s i * , yes.

                     DETECTIVE         INSPECTOR      MICHAEL       LAYTON       - Called

                                         Bv T H E   CORONER:

Q-   Hr-    Layton.      - A-     Sir,    Michael       Layton,       Detective         Inspector,
                                                                                     D .I - MICHAEL       LAYTON




                   W e s t M i d l a n d s Police.-        Sir, a n e x a m i n a t i o n h a s b e e n m a d e o f ’
                   video film a nd p h o t o g r a p h i c evid e n c e and Michaal has been
                   i d e n t i f i e d a l i v e in E n c l o s u r e No. 3-         S t e p h e n Kelly,
                   M i c h a e l ' s b r o t h e r , a s y o u h a v e h e a r d is in C o u r t , h a s v i e w e d
                   v i s u a l e v i d e n c e a n d i d e n t i f i e d h i s b r o t h e r a l i v e in
                   E n c l o s u r e No- 3 o n a n u m b e r o f p h o t o g r a p h s .

                            P h o t o g r a p h r e f e r e n c e d D B 1 6 / 3 Q is t i m e d at 1 4 4 5 a n c
                   t h a t , s ir , is in E n c l o s u r e No. 3.                I w o n d e r , sir, at t h a t
                   p o i n t w h e t h e r y o u w i s h m e t o e l a b o r a t e s l i g h t l y in r e l a t i o n
                   to P a u l K e l l y ’s e v i d e n c e .

             Q.   Y e s , p l e a s e . - A. A..i I h a v e s a i d , t h a t p h o t o g r a p h is t i m e d
                  at 1445.          P a u l K e l l y is s e e n in a B B C v i d e o c a p e o u t s i d e t h e
                  g r o u n d w h i c h w a s t a k e n b e t w e e n 1 4 3 7 a n d 1450 .      As y o u h a v e
                  •already h e a r d , he c a n n o t b e s p e c i f i c a n d h i s d e s c r i p t i o n is
                  h e is e n t e r i n g v i a G a t e C a n d f r o m m y k n o w l e d g e o f ^ t h e g a t e s
                  d o e s n ' t a c c o r d w i t h t h e t w o o p e n i n g s at 2 . 4 3 a n d 2 . 5 2 .    So
                  w e c a n b e s u r e h e w a s •o u t s i d e .t h e g r o u n a b e t w e e n t h o s e t w o
                  t i m e s b ut w e c a n ' t b e s u r e at w h a t t i m e h e a c t u a l l y e n t e r e d .

             Q    i n i s is     ~     A- P a u l K e l l y , s i r .     Sir, o n a p h o t o g r a p h
                  re f a r e iiced     P R 2 / 2 1 w h i c h is t i m e d at 1 5 0 8 t h a t s h o w s ?i i c
                  in E n c l o s u r   ? No. 3 a n d w h i l s t t h e d e t a i l a g a i n is n o t i
                  it a p p e a r s       o s h o w h i m c e r t a i n l y a l i v e at t h a t t i m e bu*   L
                  can't say                w h a t s t a g e o f t h e p r o c e s s m e a i c a u y n« is at .
                  I t h i n k it       is f a i r to sa.y at t h a t p o i n t a s w e l l t h a t
                  Michael's            ister h a s a l s o v i e w e d that v i s u a l e v i d e n c e ;
                  so, in fac           , both b r o t h e r a n d s i s t e r a g r e e that the
                  photographs            show Michael

             Q.   He   l o o k e d a bit      distressed       you    think     in   t h a t ??   - A-   That
                  my   impression.

             Q.   Y o u c a n ' t s a y w h e t h e r h e is c o n s c i o u s o r u n c o n s c i o u s , a l i v e
                  o r d e a d , at t h a t p a r t i c u l a r p o i n t ? - A. It is d i f f i c u l t .          I
                  w o u l d s a y h e is p r o b a b l y s t i l l a l i v e , s i r , b u t c e r t a i n l y i n
                  distress.           In r e s p e c t o f t n e u n o t o g r a p n at 1 4 4 5 h e is
                  c e r t a i n l y a l i v e a n d t h e r e a r e n o p r o b l e m s at ti.«t s t a g e .
                  The' l a t e r p h o t o g r a p h d o e s s h o w h i'liT.

             Q-   T h a t is t h e one, y e s - ~ A- Y e s.                 P C 1W i l m o t t h a s v i e w e c
                  v i s u a l e v i d e n c e a n d h e w a s u n a b l e to i d e n t i f y h i m s e l f
                  d e a l i n g w i t h M i c h a e l but t h e O f f i c e r h a s s i g n e d a p l a n
                  t h e p i t c h i n d i c a t i n g t h e a p p r o x i m a t e l o c a t i o n at w h i c h
                  f i r s t c a m e i n t o c o n t a c t w i t h M i c h a e l at t h e S o i o n K o p er.c or
                  the ground.             T h a t p l a n , s i r , is r e f e r e n c e d C S ~ /•

                           _PC H a u g h a n a t t e m p t e d t o r e s u s c i t a t e a m a n    the_
                  L e p p i n g s C a n s enc of t h e p i t c h but w i t h o u t success.              Ha
                  a s s i s t e u s p e c t a t o r s t o c a r r y t h e m a n tfo t h e S p i o n K o p e n d ot
                  t h e g r o u n d w h e r e h e s t a t e s t h a t h e l ef t h i m w i t h a St. J o h n s
                  A m b u l a n c e Of f i c e r who has not bee n identified.                    The Of::cer
                  h a s v i e w e c v i s u a l e v i d e n c e a n d f e e l s Mr. K e l l y m a y b e t h e
        H
                                                               10                                                         vl
pham ltd ■
                                                              u.                                                  f i i
                                                                                                                                      ?£2t8sS

                                                                                                    D- I - M I C H A E L    LAYTON



                    A
                              m a n h e a s s i ;ted.       S i r, if I c a n j u s t s a y t h i s , in f a c t , I
                              saw PC M a u g h a n .      At t h e t i m e o f m a k i n g h i s s t a t e m e n t to t h e
                              b e s t o f h i s b e l i e f h e b e l i e v e d t h a t it w a s M i c h a e l b u t 1
                              t h i n k it is f a i r t o s a y t h a t M i c h a e l ' s s i s t e r h a s s i n c e met
                              P C M a u g h a n a n d f o l l o w i n g t h at m e e t i n g I t h i n k t h e y a r e b o t h
                              s a t i s f i e d t h a t it w a s a c t u a l l y M i c h a e l t h a t h e a t t e m p t e d to
                              3.S3 iST .
                    B
                        Q.    B u t in t h e s t a t e m e n t h e g a v e w h e n e v e r it w a s h e s a i d it
                              m i g h t h a v e b e e n ? - A. T o t h e b e s t o f h i s k n o w l e d g e , b e a r i n g
                              in m i n d t h e t i m e a n d t h e d e s c r i p t i o n .  Sir, c a n I r e f e r yo u
                              to a plan which has bee n given the r e f e r e n c e n u m b e r HwJ L 9 3 ?

                        Q-    Cl 85.     - A. A n d p e r h a p s , s i r , P C M a u g h a n ' s p l a n n e x t , J R K 1 , -
                              which      I t h i n k is a l i t t l e b i t f u r t h e r b a c k in t h e f i l e .

                        Q.    Cl 86.     - A.    And    do   you      want    PC     Wilmott's      plan,      sir?

                        Q.    Yes,     I think       we w ill        -have t h a t    one    as   well?     - A.    CRtu’1.

                        Q.    C 1 8 7 . - A. (m o v e d t o p l a n )         If w e c a n d e a l w i t h t h e f i r s t
                              p l a n , H W J L 9 3 , in r e s p e c t o f t h e e a r l i e r p h o t o g r a p h at 1 445, _
                              M i c h a e l is s h o w n in t h i s p o s i t i o n h e r e in E n c l o s u r e No. 3-
                D             In r e s p e c t o f t h e l a t e r p h o t o g r a p h s a g a i n it is s h o w n in
                              E n c l o s u r e No. 3 at t h i s p o i n t h e r e -           S i r , in r e s p e c t o f t h e
                              p l a n b y P C M a u g h a n , JRM1, on t h e p i t c h plan, th e f irst
                             p o s i t i o n t h a t is i n d i c a t e d is h e r e ( i n d i c a t i n s ) o n t h e p i t c h
                             A t t h e L e o D i n s s Lcuie e n d a n d t h e s e c o n d p o s i t i o n n s r e f e r s
                             t o is at t h e S p L o n K d p e n d h e r e ( i ndi e a t i n g ) a n d t h e n in
                             r e s p e c t o f P C Nil m o t t o n t h e p l a n , C R N 1 , h e a c t u a l l y
                              i n d i c a t e s a p o s i t i o n h e r e C i n d ic a t i n s ) .
                                                                                                                                                f£
                        Q-   That      a g a i n is a r e c o l l e c t i o n ,      is it n o t ? - A. Ye:                ;o t h e r e
                             is a      slight variation between                      his recollection.

                                       THE   CORONER:            Mr.       Fraser.

                                       MR.   FRASER:            No    questions,        sir.

                                       MR.   LIMB:         No    questions,           sir.

                                       MR.   CATCHPOLE:               No   questions;        sir-

                                       MR. F R A S E R :       Again, sir, b e f o r e y o u c o n c l u d e the
                             e v i d e n c e in t h i s c a s e , M i c h a e l ' s m o t h e r , w h o a s it w e r e is
                             t h e h e a d o f t h e f a m i l y , is u n a b l e to b e w i t h u s t o d a y .                She
                             is in L i v e r p o o l bu t t h r o u g h h e r s o n a n d d a u g h t e r t h e y
                             s p e c i f i c a l l y w a n t m e to t h a n k t h r o u g h y o u e v e r y b o d y w h o
                             h e l p e d Michael on the day obviously.                         E v e r y b o d y ‘s e f f o r t s
                             a r e v e r y m u c h a p p r e c i a t e d a n d t h e y w a n t to o f f e r t h e i r
                             t h a n k s to t h e O f f i c e r s o f t h e W e s t M i d l a n d s P o l i c e a s w e l l -

                                     THE CORONER:               T h a n k y o u v e r y m u c h i n d e e d , Mr- F r a s e r .
                             Would    you make sure             t h a t y o u p a s s m y t h a n k s o n to y o u r m u m .
                H


H a rpham Ltd
                                                                                                 D . I ■ HI CHAEL^t.'flYTON                             m

-•v’
               A .     It is v e r y k i n d o f h e r to s a y t h a t a n d it is m u c h
                       a p p r e c i a t e d by me o n their b e h a l f a nd I am sure by                                 a    1 ,the^
                       people.                                                                                        ;

                               Before        I     ju s e    finish,      the      r e a s o n ,v h y ^ e       were

                       h as b e e n ide
                                             ™‘ £“ d v i^ I n y               « -1 « S .            Ju«       remi nd me o f ^ - J
                                                                                                                                     •'kS*
                                                                                                                                ■■y--Z
                   B   posi t i o n .
                                                                                                                  ( : n d i L-gA- i n £ ) M
                                INSPECTOR. L A Y T O N :              In t h i s    position          her
                       sir-                                                                                                               ■        £
                                                                                                                                          -..,;:4r-J


                                                          h e c a m e in at 1 4 4 3 t h a t is                            difficulty ^
                              THE CORONER             I£
                                                                                                                          O n e is ■■>.-•■
                           you can s e             ^here a r e s e v e r a l e x p l a n a t i o n s .
                       " a r « r C a K e ! t y * - y ha ve made a mi st ak e, Paul that                                   is,    bu^hej
                       tnat nr-         r\<-j.-iy mo.^                                     r h _....|- rhe            “ate ana he . ’>
                   C   does      s a y q u i t e c l e a r l y that he c                   S                         i0   (--n’t
                       Tills       a r e a s o n w h y h e c a m e through,-         So a l t h o u g h ^ e c»n t
                       s a y w i t h a b s o l u t e c e r t a i n t y r h e o n l y w a y t o m * £ * **          of
                       s e L e i s t o a s s u m e t h a t he m u s , h a v e q o m e ^ . h r o u f c 1 e a r
                       the e a r lier openings.                Hr- L i m D , ^ i                           a '■'ew
                       and s a t i sfactory to you?                  I rea l i s e we are dra
                       c o n c l u s i o n s here but I can't s ee any o                                       •=

               D
                                M R • LI HE:             Host     definitely,            sir,       ye:

                              THE CORONER:                      I s u p p o s e a n o t h e r p o s s i o i l i t y 1= t h < ^ u e .
                       ca n 'z mxol*in i z .                  I f « • h a v e r h e u , ? and v i s u a l
                       in   a sense          that       is    a fixed      point,        isn    t     it.                                 ......v*

                                I am        very     so^ry       that    we   have       spent        so      much    time
                                                                                                                                                       1ft*
                   E   about j L H n d                  s o on bu< i n a way t h «                    is      »*>«                                     2
                       about.          W e a r e h e r e to t r y a n d s o r t o u t , Y °             ’
                       people are            w h e r e they are i d e n t i f i e d anc w h e r e .hey uie-
                       a n d o b v i o u s 1 y if w e ge t w h a t l o o k s l i k e a d i s c r e p a n c y w e
                       n e e d t o t r y a n d t h i n k a b o u t it b u t it d o e s a et a b i t
                                                                                                                                                       i-:
                       c o n f u s i n g a n d a l s o you may t h i n k u n n e c e s s a r y            = -
                       w e a r e t a l k i n g a b o u t y o u r b r o t h e r , y o u r m u m - - o n , ~ n c o.                              |
                       course          Joanne's         dad.

                                 I try       to    be       conscious,        at    least       for       a   m o m e n t , in e a c h
                        T
                        Incuest         ot m e       *-= rt that
                                                     tact   tn<a. we
                                                                  w« have
                                                                     n«»v= s.
                                                                            pok
                                                                            . en not                           oDOUt
                                                                                                               . , _ _some
                                                                                                                       . hCJ
                       number, anybody, but somebody very very s p e c u i t o .                                                -
                                                                                                                                I i les
                       fa m il y who y ou r e p r e s e n t and who you a re an                    -                              1OSS
                       y o u t o k n o w s o f a r a s I a m a b l e I a m consc:i            ,  *
                                                                                                                                  cr
                       w h i c h y o u s u f f e r e d w h e n y o u l o st M i c h a e l . Thank you                                                  •i
                       being      here       this       morning.
                   G                                                                                                                                   i■
                                   adies      and       gentlemen,          we     now   rise       and       have     l^ncn
                       resume          at   two     o'clock.
                                                                                                                d      Kellv
                              (T h e    Inquest into             the d e a t h of        M i c h a . l , P_aj n a
                                       was adiourned             to a dat e t o          be— t lx ep.)




Ha r p h a m Ltd
                                                          S.   HAKRA'^T




It was definitely the radial fence, was it? - A. Yes.

Hasit got spikes    or    not? ~ A . I don't know.

     THE CORONER:  I do not think it has got spikes in
the conventional sense.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    It is the sort of fence which has
a number of metal railings going up which is spiked at
the top and a metal bar runs about two or three inches
across from the.' top and so there are straights rails
going up to the top but they are not the angled ones
that we see in the picture.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  I am very sorry about that but I
had to come in on this.

     THE CORONER: I was puzzled as well which is why I
got him to show us which fence it was. We wanted to be
sure we were talking about the right one.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  I just thought I would be helpful.
I did not want to interfere in any way at all.

     THE CORONER: No, Mrs. McBrien, it was a helpful
intervention I am quite sure.

    MR. GRIFFITHS:       I think C.521 might help, sir.

     THE CORONER: Just stick it up on the screen and
let us have a look. This is dealing with the railings.

Just turn round, Officer. That is the top end of one
of those radial fences.  Is that what you mean? - A.
Yes, that is what I am referring to, sir.

     THE CORONER:     There is nothing else, Mr. King?

     MR. KING:     No, sir.

     THE CORONER:  I wish we could do better but we
cannot. Thank you.

                 JOHN RAYMOND MAUGHAN Sworn

                         Bv THE CORONER

You are John Raymond Maughan I think? - A. Yes, that is
correct.

You are a PC and what is your number? - A. 2105.
A
                                                                    70
                                                         J. R. MAUGHAN


    Q . M r . Maughan, I have asked you to come because I want
        you to deal with a specific matter? - A. Yes, sir.
B   Q . I think you had some dealings with a gentleman on the
        pitch, is that rigat? - A. Tiaat is correct, sir.

    Q. Am I right in thi -aking you eventually identified this
       gentleman as bei; j Michael David Kelly? - A. That is
       correct, sir.
    Q. That was from photographs? - A. Yes, sir, that was from
       photographs.
    Q . How confident are you about your identification? - A. I
        am pretty sure it was the same man.

    Q . You are pretty sure about that? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q . Is it right that your duty was off the field initially.
        You had to go somewhere else? - A. That is correct.

    Q. You got on to the field just after three, about four
       minutes past three, is that right? - A. Yes, £fre
       players     'b c m on the pitch.

    Q. Pardon? - A. The football players were still on the
       pitch when I came on.

    Q. We are not too concerned about what you thought was
       going on but eventually you came upon a man on the
       pitch, is that right? - A. That is correct.

    Q. He. did not appear to you to be breathing at that stage?
       - A. That is right.

    Q. He also looked blue, is that correct? - A. That is
       right.

    Q. I think you then positioned him and started
       resuscitation, is that right? - A. That is correct,
       sir.

    Q. In fact, you thought you were successful, is that
       right? - A. I did think I was successful.

    Q. What actually happened? - A. When I approached the man
       he was laid on his side by the side of the goalposts.

    Q. Just speak up and lean forward. - A. He was laid on his
       side by the goalposts on the grass part of the area
       behind the bye line and he did not appear to be
       breathing•and with the help of some civilians we turned
       the man over, worked on him for a few minutes. He
    A
                                                                    71

                                                          J. R- MAUGHAN

           appeared to start to breathe again and then we got a
           hoarding and carried him to the ambulance area at the
           other end of the pitch.

        Q. Before you tell me about that you came on to the pitch
           about three or four minutes past three. How long was
           the time interval before you got to this chap? Have
           you any idea? - A. Probably three or four minutes.



c



D




E




F




G
                                            /Q. Not very long..




H
                                                            72

                                              J.   R.   MAUGHAN


Q . It was not very long, in other words? ~ A . No.

Q. Then you worked on him with the help of some
   supporters? - A. That is correct.

Q. Did he, as far as you remember, actually breathe
   spontaneously on his own, or did you have to continue
   breathing for him? - A. We continued breathing for him
   for a while^_. then he appeared' to slip unconscious but
   he was' breathing, this was just before we took him away
   to the other end of the pitch.

Q. So then you picked him up on a stretcher or hoarding? -
   A. On a hoarding.

Q. And carried him across the field? - A. That is correct.

Q. Towards the gymnasium, is that right? - A. That is
   right, where -the Ambulance Service, or there were some
   Ambulancemen there who had sort of.set an ambulance
   station up, just on the pitch itself, on the corner.

Q. What did you do with him when you got to that position?
   - A. We handed him to the ambulancemen and he was left
   in their care, and we came back down the pitch for a
   second time.

Q. That was the last you saw of him? - A. That is correct,
   sir.

Q. Of course, you can't help me as to what happened to him
   subsequent to that? - A. I can't sir, no.

                Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Q. Officer, I on behalf of the family of Michael Kelly am
   seeking to investigate as much detail as the family can
   obtain about the last moments of his life, and you will
   bear with me on that? - A. Yes.

Q. I want to see if I can pinpoint the time slightly more
   as to when you went to Michael at a time when he was
   not at first breathing, then you worked on him and he
   appeared to be breathing.  You say the players were
   still on the pitch whan you got onto the field? - A.
   That is correct, sir.

Q. Were they actually playing, do you remember, or just
   standing around? - A. Nottingham Forest was attacking
   the Liverpool end.

Q. Can I show you a photograph - I don’t want to deal with
   anything as regards wordings ....
                                            J.   R.   MAOGHAN


     MR . KING:Sir, so you know, it is from the
Sunday Mirror newspaper of Apri1 23rd, 1989.    It shows
a photograph, and I am going to try and ask the Officer
if it was the sort of area where he found Michael
Kelly.   I am going to point out someone on the ground
who it is believed by Mrs. Kelly ....

     THE CORONER:      To be him.

     MR. KING:      Yes.

Officer, do you see that newspaper, and it shows a
photograph which we are led to believe is of the scene
on 15th April/ 1989? (Passes newspaper to Witness) - A.
That is correct, sir.

It shows the Leppings Lane goal and it shows, I think,
a well known goalkeeper, Bruce Grobbelaar, clearly in
the picture, doesn't it? - A. That is correct.

He is clearly still on the pitch there.  Do you see
somebody on his back in white? - A. That is correct,
sir.

Is that the sort of position you found Michael Kelly
in? - A. Looking at the photograph I would say the
position was probably two or three more to the right of
the gentleman lying on the ground.

As you look at the picture? - A. Yes.

Does the gentleman on the ground you see, I know it is
very difficult, does it jog any memories, such as you
can see <?n that photograph, as to whether it looks very
similar to the person you were dealing with? - A. The
chap who I found and approached on the ground had a
blue jacket with him.   If I could be certain he had the
jacket with him I could say that was the man.

When you say he had the jacket with him, do you mean he
was wearing it or it was simply on the ground? - A. It
was beside him on the ground.

So he was not wearing a jacket.   I think the photograph
shows that gentleman has a white shirt on of some sort,
doesn't he? Does that tie in with your recollection? -
A. I would not possibly say that.

Certainly, give or take a few feet, the sort of
position and the sort of timing looks about right? - A.
It is about right, sir.

     MR. KING:      I don't know whether you want to see
that, sir?
                                               J.   R.   MAUGHAN


     THE CORONER:   Yes, could I just glance at it? If
it is shewn to Sergeant Killoch the chances are we will
be able to find this photograph and then if need be we
can exhibit it.

     MR.   KING:   That is helpful.   I   am obliged, sir.

I know it is difficult, but you say you worked on the
man Michael Kelly for a few minutes, I think you put
it, didn’t you? - A . That is correct.

You. are clearly confident in your recollection that you
appeared to have won through, if I can put it that way?
-■ A. Yes, sir,-" I was.

That was an expression which you used when you were
describing it - I think you have spoken to Mrs. Kelly
about it, haven’t you? - A. Yes.                                   9

And you used the expression, "We have won that one", or
something like that? - A. That is right, I did.

So it does sound as if you were quite confident in your
own mind when you took t 2 man over to where you put
him into the care of the St. John’s Ambulance, that he
at that stage was still breathing? - A. I was quite
confident he was, sir.

How did you actually deliver him to the St. John’s
Ambulance? Did you lay him on the ground, did you
actually hand him to somebody or what? - A. No, we
carried him on a hoarding across the pitch to, as I
have described, as you come out of the gymnasium onto
the pitch itself, the first aid people had set a sort
of reception area up in the corner, and we put the
hoarding down on the floor and what they were doing,
they were moving them off the hoardings so that we
could have them to carry back to the other end of the
Ground.

Did you actually receive back the hoarding on which you
had carried Michael? - A. Not the same one.

Did you actually yourself see him being taken off the
hoarding? - A. No.

So the last you saw of him was when he was laid down on
the ground in the way you have described? - A. Yes.

It looks then, it is fairly obvious from your evidence
but I will put it to you and ask you so the family can
hear me, there is from the summary of evidence which
they have been provided with, evidence that at 15.35
(sir, this is paragraph A of the summary), at 15.35 an
                                             J.   R.   MAOGHAN


Officer, Police Constable Wi'lmot, made his way into the
Spion Kop end of the Ground, and he says apparently
that at 3.35 he saw a man who he believes to be Michael
David Kelly lying on the pitch on his back, who
appeared unconscious, and If is said tftaE with another
Officer, that is Police Constable Lalley, the original
Officer, Wilmot, checked for vital signs of life but
could not find any, and Mr. Kelly was placed onto a
temporary stretcher and taken into the gymnasium, and
at about just before 4 o'clock, 15.59, Dr. Byrne
certified life extinct. You have no knowledge at all,
do you, as to what happened to Mr. Kelly, what
attention he received or otherwise, from the moment you
laid him down* and you presumably went back to help at
the other end? - A. That is correct, sir.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I always regret mistakes on
sensitive matters. I have referred throughout to Mrs.
Kelly - it is his sister, and I am sorry.  I hope the
family will forgive me for that:

It was Mr. Kelly's sister you had been speaking to in
the way you have described to me? It is Mrs. Sinclair,
the lady we see there who you were speaking to, wasn't"
it? - A. That is right.

     MR. KING:   I am sure she will forgive me if I
have mis-described her.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I knew about that and I
overlooked it too, I am sorry.

     MR. KING:   You have been very helpful, Officer,
because you can obviously see the concern of the
family.

     Sir, subject to the photograph being found I don’t
think I can take that any further.

      THE CORONER:   We have not got the photograph
here.   It is either in Birmingham or it may be in our
office. What I propose to do is to try and retrieve it
and make an acetate of it in the usual way.

You did not actually identify Mr. Kelly on that
photograph, did you? - A. No.

       THE CORONER:   Do we need it?   Is it going to    help
us?    I don't mind doing it.

       MR. KING:   Sir, I think the witness could go this
far:
                                             J.   R.   MAUGHAN


I think you could say that'it could be Mr. Kelly? - A.
Yes.

There is nothing in it which makes you say that it
definitely isn’t? - A. That is correct.

I think you can say that subject to moving a few fest
to the right in your recollection, it is the sort of
area of the goal where you saw him? - A. That is where
he was found, yes.

Given that we see Bruce Grobbelaar on the pitch it is
the sort of timing you would be expecting from your
evidence? - A.’That would be about right.

     MR. KING:      Sir, it may be helpful for the family.

     THE CORONER:   I am -very happy to do it, it just
may take a little while.

     I think that is the sum total of the cases where
we needed to do urgent things, so to speak. We will
pause for a little while and have a cup of coffee.  Did
you want to say anything to me, Mr. King?

     MR. KING:   Sir, there are one or two matters I
would like to mention to you.

     THE CORONER:   Yes. Leave us and you will have a
slightly longer coffee break.

            (In the absence of the Jury)

     MR. KING:   Sir, in relation to the witnesses
Bichard and Goddard, are they in Court now?

     THE CORONER:     They may well be, so if they could
just leave us?

    (Mr. Bichard and Mr. Goddard left the Court)

     MR. KING:   Sir, I have taken the opportunity
during the lunch adjournment to read through as best I
can the evidence they gave, certainly to Lord Justice
Taylor, and certainly two matters, sir:  I would invite
you to call them but I would invite you to call them to
give a full witness account of the events in the
Control Room during the relevant period, that is to say
on the day of the match.

     Sir, having read through what they have said in
those accounts they clearly have eye witness evidence
as to the circumstances leading up to the request for
the closure of the gates. Their evidence is not on all
                                          J.   R.   MAUGHAN


fours with the evidence which we have heard at all from
Mr. Duckenfield as to what was said in the Control
Room, what was believed in the Control Room as to the
gates which were to be opened, the circumstances in
which Gate A came to be opened are dealt with, the
circumstances in which kick-off was or was not to be
delayed are dealt with and the decision to refuse the
request of P.C. Buxton to delay kick-off is dealt with,
the decision   to send serials round  to Gate A or onto
the North Stand is dealt with, and    sir, Mr. Bichard,
and I say it   so you can hear me so  I do not in any way
take anybody   by surprise, actually  gives evidence asto
what Mr. Duckenfield said in his presence as to how it
had come about'that the problems had arisen on the
Leppings Lane end, and you know, sir, to what I am
referring in that respect.




   /All those are matters
                                                                                       73




          A l l C h o s e a r e n a t t e r s w h i c h I n a v e to s a y to y o u,
s i r , o n b e h a l f o f t h o s e I reoras^.nt, I w o u l d w a i t to
a n d w o u l d s u b m i t I should, be a n t i t i e d to i n v e s t i g a t e
if y o u . c a l l t h e n .      I w o u l d be failin'; in m y d u t y if I
a c q u i e s c e d in a r u l i n g w h i c h y o u h a v e i n d i c a t e d y o u
w o u l d oe m i n d e d to g i v e , t h a t 'it y o u d i d c a l l t h e n ,
s ir , y o u w o u l d r e s t r i c t t h e n in the w a y y o u h a v e
d e s c r i b e d , b e c a u s e t h e y ar e g i v i n g f a c t u a l e v i d e n c e on
n a t t e r s w h i c h the J u r y h a v e to d e t e r m i n e a n d , i n d e e d ,
d e a l w i t h q u i t e v i t a l m a t t e r s r e l a t i n g to the
b e h a v i o u r d £ ’Ir. D u c k e n f i e l d .

           I n t h o s e c i r c u m s t a n c e s , s i r, I in f a c t h a v e t w o
apolications.                O n e is to i n v i t e y o u to c a l l t h e n , in
y o u r d i s c r e t i o n , a n d to i n v i t e y o u , sir, to t a k e thi.<^^
s t a n c e , t h a t .if y o u do c a l l t h e n y o u s h o u l d a l l o w         Q
qu-a 3 1ion in.-! o n a l l t h e m a t t e r s to w h i c h I h a v e
referred.

          S ir , i f y o u r r u l i n g is t h a t in y o u r d i s c r e t i o n
y o u w i l l c a l l t h e m b u t r e s t r i c t t h e m to o n l y the
m a t t e r s y o u h a v e r e f e r r e d to, i n m y s u b m i s s i o n t h i t
w o u l d be the w o r s t o f b o t h w o r l d s a n d , in f a c t , o n e
w o u l d be g i v i n g a f a l s e p i c t u r e to t h e J u r y r a t h e r
t h a n n o p i c t u r e at a l l , a n d a f a l s e p i c t u r e a n d a
m i s l e a d i n g p i c t u r e c a n be w o r s e t h a n no p i c t u r e .

        TilE C O R O N E R :   That,     of   course,      is   the    last     thing     I
want    to d o.

          H R . ICING:        O f c o u r s e , s i r.      But my s t r o n g
s u b m i s s i o n to y o u is n o t w i t h s t a n d i n g the t i m e p r o b l e m
we h a v e , t h e s e a r e w i t n e s s e s ‘o f s u b s t a n c e o n t h e v i t a l
ev e nt s w h i c h this Ju ry are p ar ti cu la r ly c on c e r n e d                    dfc
w i t h , w h i c h a r e t h e e v e n t s l e a d i n g to a n d t h e n
i m m e d i a t e l y f o l l o w i n g t h e d e c i s i o n to o p e n t h e g a t e s
at t h e L e p p i n g s L a n e e n d , a n d it is h a r d to s e e a
r a t i o n a l e f o r h a v i n g i n c l u d e d so m a n y o t h e r w i t n e s s e s
W'io d o n o t g o to s u c h v i t a l e v e n t s i n th e o v e r a l l
p i c t u r e a n d n o t to c a l l t h e s e w i t n e s s e s .

          I f it be, s i r , a m a t t e r o f c o n v e n i e n c e b e c a u s e o f
t i m e , a n d I a m n o t so i n s e n s i t i v e as n o t to a p p r e c i a t e .
that p r ob l em , all I can say on b e h a l f of those I
r e p r e s e n t is - t h i s is n o t m e a n t f a c e t i o u s l y at a l l ,
s i r - ‘r a t h e r l i k e t h e a r g u m e n t t h a t k i c k - o f f s h o u l d
n o t b e d e l a y e d m e r e l y b e c a u s e o f a r e a s o n , i f , in
f a c t , t h ey are w i t n e s s e s of s u b s t a n c e then they o u g h t
to b e c a l l e d as f u l l w i t n e s s e s , e v e n if w e h a v e to
r e c o g n i s e , a n d I a m s u r e I p l a y 3 r o l e in t h e b l a m e
■for t h i s a s m u c h as a n y b o d y e l s e , t h a t o u r t i m e ­
tabling' has g o n e a w r y in this I n q u e s t .               I say that
w i t h o u t m e a n i n g a n y d i s r e s p e c t to y o u , s i r , at a ll
b e c a u s e I m e a n w h a t I s a v a b o u t m v r o l e at a l l t i m e s .
      THE      COROiiZR:       Did   you    want     Co   sav   something,         Ur.
Pa/ne ?

          UR. PAYI'JI:          Si r, a l ot o f w h i t 'Ir. K i n g his s a i d ,
I m i n k ; I w o u l d a g r e e w i t h , t h a t o n c e th e w i t n e s s has
b e e n c a l l e d t h e n ha is at l a r g e , a n d it is d i f f i c u l t
r e a l l y to s e e a n y l e g i t i m a t e b a s i s on w h i c h
e x a m i n a t i o n c a n be r e s t r i c t e d , bu t I t h i n k o u r
p o s i t i o n w o u l d be to i n v i t e y o u to a d h e r e to the
o r i g i n a l a p p r o a c h t n a t y o u i n t e n d e d to f o l l o w , n a m e l y
t h a t o n b a l a n c e , h a v i n g h e a r d the e v i d e n c e o f the
p r i n c i p a l o c c u p a n t s o f th e C o n t r o l Box, y o u w i l l
p r o b a b l y n o t n e e d to r e c a l l t h e o t h e r p e o p l e .

           I a m o n l y g o i n'* to a d d t h i s b e c a u s e I d i d no t
.nention it b e f o r e t h e a d j o u r n m e n t , but I an s l i g h t l y
c o n c e r n e d a b o u t th e s e q u e n c e o f w i t n e s s e s .  Ur. Xin;»
h a s v e r y f a i r l y i n d i c a t e d the. l i n e s o f c r o s s -
e x a m i n a t i o n w h i c h he w o u l d i n t e n d to o p e n u p w i t h
these w i t n e s s e s and, of c o u r s e , one can n o t p r e - j u d ^ e
w h a t t h e y w o u l d s a y or h o w it w o u l d c o n e o ut , b u t b n a
c a n n o t h e l p f e e l i n g t h a t t h e s e c o u l d be p o i n t s w h i c h ,
in f a i r n e s s , o u g h t to h a v e b e e n p u t, o r at l e a s t t h e y
o u g h t to h a v e h a d the o o o o r t u n i t v to d e a l w i t h it w h e n
t h e o t h e r o c c u p a n t s , liessrs. D u c k e n f i e l d a n d M u r r a y ,
were giving their evidence.                        J!t w o u l d be v e r y
u n f o r t u n a t e if t h e I n q u e s t g o t i n t o th e s t a g e of
l e a v i n g n a t t e r s i n t h e a i r w h i c h c o u l d p e r h a p s be
d e a l t w i t h by those o t h e r w i t n e s s e s who m ight then
h a v e to be r e c a l l e d .        T h i s is a g h a s t l y p r o s p e c t w h i c h
c e r t a i n l y I t h i n k w e w o u l d w i s h to a v o i d , b u t i n t ie
i n t e r e s t s of f a i r n e s s o n e c a n see that if p a r t i c u l a r
p o i n t s w e r e to be m a d e , o r e v i d e n c e w e r e to be g i v e n ,
C a e n t h i s is t h e k i n d o f t h i n g w h i c h M e s s r s .
D u c k e n f i e l d a n d H u r r a y o u g h t to h a v e a c h a n c e to d e a l
with.

          T;is C0R0;,T2R: I t h i n k t h a t t h a t g o e s w i t h o u t
s a y i n g , b u t i f m a t t e r s w e r e to b e r a i s e d w h e r e Mr.
I s a a c s a n d Mr. H a n n i n g w e r e to s a y to me , " H a n g on, w e
w a n t Hr. Duc'.cenf i e l d a n d Mr. M u r r a y to h a v e an
o p p o r t u n i t y to a n s w e r " , I w o u l d c e r t a i n l y n o t r a i s e
a n y o b j e c t i o n i f I w e r e to c a l l t h e s e w i t n e s s e s .       I
t h i n k t h a t p o i n t g o e s w i t h o u t s a y i n g , w h a t e v e r th e
effect on timing, I am not re all y interested.                                  It
d o e s n o t m a t t e r to m e .       I w a n t to f i n i s h t h i s m o n t h if-
I c a n , b u t if w e d o n o t , w e d o n o t , we a d j o u r n it to a
c o n v e n i e n t time.

         HR. P A Y U H :     I t h i n k w e w o u l d b e at o n e w i t h Mr.
X i n g on this, that one r e c o g n i s e s that time p r e s s u r e s
do n o t r e a l l y h a v e a n y i n p u t i n t o t h i s d e c i s i o n at
a l l , it' h a s to b e t a k e n o n i t s m e r i t s .      T h a t is w h y I
t h i n k o u r d o s it i o n w o u l d be t h a t w e w o u l d i n v i t e y o u
to a d h e r e to the. o r i g i n a l a p p r o a c h t h a t y o u had,
n a m e l y t h a t h a v i n g h e a r d the e v i d e n c e of the p r i n c i p a l
peoole, and their e v i d e n c e h a v i n g been t h or ou g h l y and
l e n g t h i l y g o n e i n t o by a l l i n t e r e s t e d p a r t i e s , it
w o u l d no t be n e c e s s a r y t o - t a k e t h e m a t t e r f a r t h e r .

       T T Z COROI\S't: ‘
                        ..Te a r e , i o i n y to        have     a   coffee     brea'-:
in   o minute.     Yes, M r . R u s s e l l ?

                  R'JSSZLL:     Sir, I h a v e n o t r i s e n to s a y
a n y ; h i n » in t h i s p a r t i c u l a r d e b a t e .    I am almost
e x c l u s i v e l y ’ on th e s i d e l i n e s i n r e s p e c t o f t h e s e
w i t n e s s e s w h o a r e to be c a l l e d , s a v e f o r o ne v e r y
minor matter.              Bu t p e r h a p s I c o u l d c o m e to y o u r
a s s i s t a n c e to t h i s e x t e n t .     ” e a p p e a r here w i th your
l^ a v a , we a s h q u e s t i o n s o f w i t n e s s e s w i t h y o u r leave^fc
The'/ are y o u r w i t n e s s e s a n d y o u c a l l t h e m for the           ^
p u r p o s e s t u a t y o u s e e fi t f o r the p u r p o s e s of t h e s e
I:i]uests.

          Y o u i n d i c a t e d at o n e s t a g e t h a t it w a s y o u r
p u r p o s e to c a l l the O f f i c e r w h o w a s r e s p o n s i b l e for
o p e r a t i n g th e v i d e o c a m e r a , o r t n e c o n s o l e o f v i d e o
c a m e r a s , to be i n a p o s i t i o n to e x p l a i n to the J u r y
tne t e c h n i c a l c a p a b i l i t i e s o f t h o s e c a m e r a s .    T h a t , it
see.ns. to .me, is a w h o l l y d i f f e r e n t a r e a o f e v i d e n c e
f r o m tn e f a c t u a l r e c o l l e c t i o n o f t h o s e O f f i c e r s ,
e i t h e r t he p e r s o n o p e r a t i n g t h e c a m e r a or the p e r s o n
o p e r a t i n g the r a d i o o n t h a t d a y .         I n a s m u c h as w i t h
s o m e o f th e w i t n e s s e s w e h a v e h a d t o d a y y o u h a v e s a i d ,
" I h ’se w i t n e s s e s a r e g o i n g to       deal with a very limited
a m       of e v i d e n c e a n d n o t h i n g e l s e " , a n d w e h a v e
hiiered          to t h a t , I d o n o t s e e      w h y t h e r e is a p r o b l e m
in y o u d e a l i n g w i t h t h e s e w i t n e s s e s , t h e s e two P o l i c ^ ^
Officers, in that same r e s t r i c t e d manner.                                       W

          C e r t a i n l y I n s p e c t o r J l e m m i n g w a y , as y o u w i l l
np.ireciate, c o u l d ha v e dealt w i t h ail sorts of m a t t e r s
r e l a t i n g to t h e c o n d u c t o f t h e a f t e r n o o n in q u e s t i o n ,
n ot L e a s t t he r e s c u e a n d t h e r o l e o f m y c l i e n t in it.
I d i d no t s e e k to a s k h i m t h o s e q u e s t i o n s b e c a u s e I
u .n l er st oo d t h e v e r y l i m i t e d a m b i t a n d th e v e r y l i m i t e d
purposes for whi ch you w an te d those w i tne ss es called.

          But, s i r , i f y o u s e e k to e l i c i t m a t t e r s o f f a c t
a n d m a t t e r s o f r e c o l l e c t i o n o f t h e s e w i t n e s s e s as to
what they s a w on the day, t h e n of c o u r s e I can
u n d e r s t a n d t h e p o s i t i o n t h a t m y l e a r n e d f r i e n d :!r.
K i n g is i n a n d , n o d o u b t , m y l e a r n e d f r i e n d -Ir.
I s a a c s , a n d Hr. M a n n i n g as w e l l , a s to w h a t e v i d e n c e
t h e y m i g h t w i s h to e l i c i t o n c e y o u g o d o w n t h a t r o ad .
But it d o e s a p p e a r t h a t t h e r e is a v e r y c l e a r a n d
o b v i o u s c u t - o f f p o i n t in t h e i r e v i d e n c e w h e r e b y you
c a n l i m i t t h e e v i d e n c e o f t h e s e w i t n e s s e s to the
                                                                                     31




t e c h n i c a l c a p a b i l i t i e s o f th e p a r a p h e r n a l i a that t h e y
h a d at t h e i r d i s p o s a l , t h a t t h e y w e r e o p e r a t i n g , a n d
l i m i t it to t h a t .           Ones y o u o p e n u p the f a c t u a l
a c c o u n t of tna d a y in q u e s t i o n , t h e n y o u h a v e e m b a r c e d
d o w n the r o a d , a n d c e r t a i n l y w i t h i n the a r e a s t n a t y o u
h a v e e x p l o r e d so f a r in t h e s e I n q u e s t s it w o u l d ^e
v e r y d i f f i c u l t to s t o p e i t h e r m y I s a r n a d f r i e n d Mr.
K i n ; , o r ;ny l e a r n e d f r i e n d 1-ir. I s a a c s , o r Mr. M a n n i n g ,
f r o m a s k i n g q u e s t i o n s a b o u t t h o s e s u b j e c t s as v e i l .

          Mil. CATCUPOLi:: If it is o f a n y a s s i s t a n c e , it
d o e s a p p e a r t h a t a l l the l e g a l r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s a r e of
the 3 3.7ie m i n d , at l e a s t in r e l a t i o n to the s e c o n d l i m b
o f Mr. k i n g ' s a p p l i c a t i o n b e f o r e y o u .   I m a k e no
c o m n e n t as to w h e t h e r y o u o u g h t to c a l l t h e s e
w i t n e s s e s o r n o t , it is a ma'tter f o r y ou , s i r .              But.I
Jo b e l i e v e , as m v l e a r n e d f r i e n d Ur. H u s s e l l h a s s aid,
t n a t if y o u e m b a r k o n a n y a t t e m p t to e l i c i c f a c t u a l
e v i d e n c e , it w o u l d be i n a p p r o p r i a t e to p r e v e n t a n y of
my l e ar n e d f r i e n d s fro m e x p l o r i n g those m a t t e r s and
p u t t i n g it i n t o i t s p r o p e r c o n t e x t .

          T HE C OR O M E R : I accept that point.                   If we 30 i n t o
tn e f a c t s , C h e n it is o n l y r i g h t t h a t t h e y s h o u l d be
a x o l o r e d , b u t it is th e e x t e n t a n d th e m e t h o d o f
e x o L o r a t i o n w h i c h I am c o n c e r n e d about.         I h a v e no
o b j e c t i o n if, f o r i n s t a n c e , I w e r e to a s k the O f f i c e r s
to r e c o u n t in e x a m i n a t i o n - i n - c h i e f w h a t t h e i r
r e c o l l e c t i o n is w i t h r e g a r d t o t h e e v e n t s , to t lat
point being e x a m i n e d but p u r e l y f ac tu al ly .                 W h a t I am
n o t g o i n g t o h a v e is w h a t w e h a v e d o n e in t h e p a s t a n d
w n i c h ve d i d a t g r e a t l e n g t h w i c h lir. M u r r a y a n d Mr.
O u c k a n f i e l d a n d w h i c h , in f ace, I k n e w we w e r e d o i n g
a n ; I t h o u g h t i n t h e c i r c u m s t a n c e s w a s r i g h t , bu t I a n
q u i t e e n t i t l e d to s ay , " Y o u h a v e a s k e d enoug.n
q u e s t i o n s o n t h i s , n e x t s u b j e c t " , as I d o q u i t e o f t e n
w i t h Mrs. M c B r i e n , a n d t h a t is a l l I a m s a y i n g , a n d
c n a t is t h a w a y I a m g o i n g to d o it.                  So I a m g o i n g to
c a l l Mr. G o d d a r d a n d w h e n I h a v e h e a r d h i m I w i l l
p r o b a b l y c a l l Hr . B i c h a r d a n d w e w i l l o b v i o u s l y be
s i t t i n g t o a o r r o w a n d if n e e d b e w e w i l l s i t o n M o n d a y
if w e h a v e n o t f i n i s h e d , a n d t h a t is it.

     MR.       CATCMPOLE:      Y o u m o o t e d th e p o s s i b i l i t y     that
tomorrow       m i g h t bs put in t o a f u l l day.

        THE    COROUER:       Yes,    we   will     sic    C as    a   full   day.

        MR.    CATCHPOLE:ThaC is very halpful,                         Chank you.

          TiiE C O R O M E R : T h e w a y I p u t th e o r d e r w a s n o t an
a c c i d e n t , t h a t was a f t e r som e c o n s i d e r a b l e t h o u gn t. I
c o u l d h a v e g o t it w r o n g .    Be t h 3 t as ic m a y , c e r t a i n l y
if at th a e n d o f t'                    :e it w o u l d a o p e a r t h a t it
is r i g h t to a s k -Ir. O u c k a n f i e l d a a d Mr. .'furray to co:na
b a c k Co d e a l w i t h a n y o u t s t a n d i n g p o i n t s , I w i l l do
so .

     ,'IR.    PAY17E:     w i l l y o u a l l o w :ns to   go    last   if   this
haooens?       These     are Police Office rs.

       T ’lZ C O N O V E R : Y e a .  So w e w i l l h a v e    a q u i c k break.
I a m a f r a i d y o u w i l l h a v e to be b a c k in        C o u r t as fast
as y o u c a n .

                        (Shore    Adjournment)




                             r     \
                             \ S"1 J
     4         4




P£TCR TOOTLE
 PETER TOOTLE



 1.       Peter Tootle, the son of the Applicants Peter and Joan

           Tootle,     attended     the   match     with   a     friend,    Colin

           Frodsham.    They were both in enclosure 3.



 2.       At the mini     inquest Dr. David Slater             put forward his

           view that the    cause of death was          traumatic asphyxia.

      ^   The rest of the     evidence was given by Police Sergeant

          John Killock     and Detective          Inspector Michael        Layton

          which,     when taken     together,       produced the     following

          chronological account.           Colin Frcdsham        was separated

          from Mr. Tootle when the crowd in the enclosure surged

          forward, after     which he       fell unconscious.         When     he

          came round he     saw Mr. Tootle lying on the             ground.     A

          police officer     then attempted to resuscitate             him for

          about 10 - 20 seconds.                                              anc

  ^ 3 . 4 0 p.m.        Police Constable          Friend saw Mr.     Tootle at

          the end    of the ground        opposite to the        Leppings Lane

          end where he examined him and then with P.C. Griffith,

          carried him into the temporary mortuary.                At 3.54 p.m.

          Peter Tootle was        certified dead by Dr.          Matthew Eull,

          who   certified dead       a    total    of thirty      Hillsborough

          victims in a period of twenty minutes.



          At the main inquest no evidence whatsoever was adduced

          which related to Peter Tootle.            His name was mentioned




&NNAAD
            only when the verdicts were returned.                Yet the purpose

            of the main      inquest was to deal with            the question of

            how Mr. Tootle met his death.
      •*


 4.        The complaint of the         Applicants therefore extends far

           beyond one levelled at         the decision of the coroner to

           disallow     evidence relating        to   events that          occurred

           after 3.15 p.m.          More fundamentally it concerns their

           belief that there has been no inquest at all, into the

           most important         question concerning their            sons death,

           namely how he came to die.



5.         This is so       not merely because no         evidence concerning

           this    issue was      heard at     the main        inquest but       also

           because the issue        of lack of care was not            put to the

           jury    as   a   possible     inference        to    draw      from   the

           evidence.        The   Applicants     submit        that the    minimum

           requirements for a fair and proper hearing at the main

           inquest required        the following      to be put        before the

           jury:   a    summary of the evidence that             had been heard

           at   the mini     inquest and       the evidence       of Dr.     Glynn

           Phillips, Dr. John        Ashton and Mr. F.          Eccleston.       The

           jury should      then have    been informed          that a      finding

           that death was aggravated by           lack of care was open to

           them.




ANNAAD
               INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

           VICTIMS OF THE H I L L S B O R O U G H .FOOi BALL

                         STADIUM DISASTER

                    ON THE 1 STH APRIL, 1939



                   :n g u i =t   into     the    death      of

                     PETER FRANCIS TOOTLE
(i-




                                    ==:ors
                 ____      ■: =          p M~n     . E-'-!• E £ . MR
      OR. S-L. r'Jrr'r.r.. i.:---        ---------
                      (H-=r             ~v "= Ccr -r- ^ -'




                                        Aw

                     The - ^ - z z - L : z z z J : a r ''




                       2nd Msy 1990



                     t o ^ ' c ^ T P T OF     .PROCEEDINGS
\




                                              INDEX


DR- DAVID NEIL           SLATER    - Colled

    Ey T H E C O R O N E R   .............................................


POLICE SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCK - Called

    By T H E C O R O N E R . . ‘ .........................         ..............-
    C r o s s - e x a m i n e d by MR. L I H B .....................    ..  ••   o


DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

    By T H E CORONER.        ..   . .•   ...................................... 6




             f


                                         — oo — oo —
        2nd Mav 1^*90

                  IN-QUEST    INTO T H E DEATH OF PETER F R A N C I S T O O T L E

                  nH                       r , che first; e v i d e n c e you -ill near
          today r e U ; s s to P e t e r Francia Tootle. . P a r e r ' s parent.3 are
          in Court w i t h m e m b e r s of his family and I a S D c a r in a
          personal c a p a c i t y f or the family but also, of course, as a
          me m b e r of t he H i l l s b o r o u g h S te er ing C o m m i t t e e in the usual
    B     usv.

                     THE CORONER:         Good morning, Mr- a n d Mrs. T o o t l e and .
           e v e r y b o d y else.   Wh i ch is mum and d a d ?     Yes.  B e f o r e we take
           the e v i d e n c e I am just going to d e s c r i b e to you the
           p ro ce d ur e so that y o u can follow and so that y o u know what
           co me s next, so to speak, because it is e a s i e r f or you to
           follow if I do that, I think.              What we a r e g o i n g to do in
          the first i ns tance is I am going to r e a d to you' what
          h app e ne d on 19th April. 1989 which is w h e n I w as in tnis
          Court and I dealt, w it h the initial evidence, so that I coulc
          all ow the b o d y to c o m e home for the funeral a nd when I have
          dons that, if t he re are any e rro rs in that, we will try and
          correct them.            I don't think there are in thii p a r t i c u l a r
          case and t h e n I will tell you about t he b l o o d            l1 coho 1s .
          Khsn I have c o m p l e t e d that, Dr. Slater, w h o is s i t t i n g up
D         there and w ho is a Pathologist, will g i v e hi s e v id e nc e
          r e g a r di ng the p a th olo gi ca l inves ti ga tio n.

                 On c o m p l e t i o n of that the West M i d l a n d s P o l i c e O ff ic er
         who has p r e p a r e d a summary for me will p r e s e n t the summ ary
         and when he has c o m p l e t e d it, I nsp ec to r L a y t o n will deai
         with the visual evidence-              Me start o v e r there, I nsp ec to r
         Layt on r e c o u n t s it v erbally and t el l s me all ab out it.               He
         gives us all the references, the plan n u m b e r s and one thing
         and a n o t h e r so the shorthand w r i t e r ca n get it ail ccwr. so
         that we all know what we are t al ki ng about.                  It is a little
         co nf u si ng at that point but then he w a l k s r o u n d here and on
         his big p l a n s he will show us what he h a s b e e n t a l k i n g                  |
         about.      So it does become c l e a r as y o u will find out in a
         moment.       W he n t-hat is finished that is all the e v i d e n c e we
         are d e a li ng with at that stage-          Is that r e a s o n a b l y c l e a r sc
         that you k n o w what the fcrmat is g o i n g to be-                It will make
         sense as we are g o i n g along, p a r t i c u l a r l y if y o u have this
         in the back of y o u r minds-           If you f org et it, it doesn't
         matter.

                Thi s t he n is the resumed Inquest w h i c h w as o p en ed on
         19th April 1989 and on that o c c a s i o n Neil A n t h o n y Parkin,
         A cti ng C o r o n e r ' s Officer, said:

                ‘T he b o d y w hi ch is the subject of t h i s Inq ue st has bee:
               i d e n t i f i e d to PC 1929 F ri en d of the S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e
               P o l i c e as that o f Peter F r a nc is T o o t l e by Paui S a v -o n e
               Frocsharn, his friend.           He was ‘ 21 y e a r s of ofe h a vi n s


H

                                        ti
                                                oo-tux_on 2nd F e b r u a ry 19*63 at Liverpool-___________  W 2»3
                                       sing I<2 man a n d liv-ad -it
                                       Liverpool.        He was a l ab ou rer by occupa ti on .           He died
                                       •at K.illsboroueh Football G r o u n d f o 11 o« ir.i an incLeant
                                       there on Saturday, 15th April 1989.                       PC Friend caused
                                       che body co be remo ve d to the M e d i c o Legal Centr<= and
                                       there he i d en ti fi ed it. to D e t e c t i v e C o n st a bl e Simon
                                       W ei g o l d who s u b s e q u e n t l y id en ti f ie d the same body to
                                       Dr. Slater.        It is the f am i ly w i s h that the body shoe',
                     B                 be buried."

                                     I th en wrote to you, I do not k no w if you remember,
                               Hr- Tooele, but o n 13th Hay y ou s i g n e d a form for me and ir
                               effect you c o n f i r m e d all t hi s i n f o r m a t i o n was correct and
                               that is still so, isn't it?            (i n d i c a t i n g a g r e e m e n t )

                                         Dr. Forres' d i d the b l o o d a l coh ol level in the ca s e of
                               P e t e r and he gave us the e v i d e n c e o n the first day when, we
                               r e s u m e d _ m fact     a fortnight  _       aeo now a n d the result in th4
                               case of P et e r was negative. w
                                                                             P e rhao•
                                                                                       s I s h o u l d m e nt io n that
                               e v e r y b o d y who is g i v i n g e vi d e n c e t o d a y h a s a l r e a d y ta ke n z:
                               O at h so that has a l r e a d y been done.

                                                   DP.   D AV I D NEIL S L A T E R   - Called

                 D                                             Bv THE CORONER:

                         Q.   Dr. Slater, if yo u wo u ld start in the usual way?? - A. 7lv
                              name is Dr. D a v i d Neil Slater.       I am a C on s ul ta nt
                              Ki st o pa th o lo g is t and a Fellow of the Royal Col le ge of
                              Pathology, sir.

                         Q.   Now this you ng man we are t a l k i n g a bo ut wh i ch you recorded
                              as Peter T oo tl e b e c a u s e you did not k n o w .his mi ddle r.ame «
                              that time, you al s o knew by i d e n t i f i c a t i o n n u m b e r 5?, is
                              that r is h t? - A- That is correct, sir.

                         Q.   A l t h ou g h we have said Simon Wei sold did the iden ir ic c~ :or.
                              in fact, one of the I n sp ect or s who was w it h him.          You
                              p e r c ei v ed it was him who was i d e n t i f i e d to you? - A- He v z s
                              the initial id e nt i fy in g Officer, yes.

                         Q.   You are qu it e ha ppy that the e v i d e n c e y ou are giving relates
                              to this yo un g man P et er T o o t l e ? - A. C e rt ain ly , sir, yes.

                         Q.   Dr. Slater, osrh ap s you would be k in d e n o u g h to tell us trsn
                              what y o u r f in di n gs wer e - y o u r r e l e v a n t i~i n di n gs - a n c ca_se
                              of d e at h ? - A. fly e x a m i n a t i o n of P e t e r s h o w e d that the
                              general fi nd rn gs were those of asph yx ia .                   Th es e were
                              i ndicated by e x t e n si ve b l u en e ss of the face e x t e n d i n g to tne
                              upp er part of the chest-               T hi s w as a ls o a c c o m p a n i e d by
                              n u m e ro us small h a e m o r r ha g es on the face c al le d petecr.ial
                              haemorr ha ge s.    S i m i l a r h a e m o r r h a g e s we re also present
                              internally including in the brain, lungs, heart anc also tr.e


                 H

H a rp h am Ud


                                                              : 'C )
H
    i
    n i)
                       POLICE      SERGEANT       -JOHN K I L L O C K    - Called

                                           3 v THE C O n O N E ? :

Q.     Yes. - A. P o l i c e S e r g e a n t John. K i l l o c k of the Uest                 riicl-i.acs
       P ol ic e, sir.   I h.ive p r e v i o u s l y t a k e n the O a c h •




                                                                                                    P. II- ■0 'J
Q.    W o u l d y o u p l e a s e , w h e n y o u -ire ready, t a k e me t hr o ug h t
      summary?' - A. At 0 9 0 0 h o u r s on S a c u r d a y , 15ch April 19S
      Kr - P e t e r F r a n c i s T o o t l e s e n i o r w o k e h i s son, a l s o n.arn.;
      P e t e r F r a n c i s T o o t l e , w ho was no a t t e n d to the S he f f i e l
      f o o t b a l l m a t c h to b e p l a y e d at H i l l s b o r o u g h -

                P e t e r left L i v e r p o o l at 1030 h o u r s a n d t r a v e l l e d to
      S h e f f i e l d w i t h h i s un cle, S t e p h e n T o o t l e , a n d a friend,
      C o l i n F r o d s h a m . T h e y t r a v e l l e d in S t e p h e n T o o t l e ' s c a r
      a r r i v i n g in S h e f f i e l d at 1230 hours.            A f t e r p a r k i n g t he
      v e h i c l e t h e y m a d e t h e i r w a y to the g r o u n d a n d s t o o d or. the
      L a p p i n g s L a n e b r i d g e f r o m 1300 h o u r s unt il 1-i-iO .hours'.            At
      t h i s p oi nt S t e p h e n T o o t l e left to t a k e h i s seat in *t:ve
      3 “C-iQuS -

               At 14-4-5 h o u r s , C o l i n F r o d s h a m a n d P e t e r j oi n ed t h e c r c v d
     at t h e t u r n s t i l e s .         Gcite C w a s o p e n e d a nd b o t h Mr. F r o c s n a m
     a nd P e t e r e n t e r e d t h e s t a d i u m via th at gate-                    T he y went
     a l o n g the t u n n e l int o E n c l o s u r e No- 3.                W it h the p r e s s u r e of
     t he c r o w d f r o m b e h i n d t h e y e n d e c up a p p r o x i m a t e l y ei g ht feet
     f r o m t h e p e r i m e t e r fence-          Hr. F r o d s h a m b e c a m e u n c o n s c i o u s
     f or a s h o r t time.               W h e n he r e g a i n c o n s c i o u s n e s s he f o c n c
     h i m s e l f f u r t h e r up t h e te rra ce .           He c o u l d s e e P e t e — l y i n g cr.
     h i s b a c k a b o u t f i v e y a r d s a w a y fro m him.                T h e r e was a P o li ce
     O f f ic er , w h o h a s not u n f o r t u n a t e 1y b e e n i de n t i f i e d , w h o was
     a t t e m p t i n g to r e s u s c i t a t e Peter.         The Officer's attempts
     w e r e u n s u c c e s s f u l a n d he left P e t e r t o a t t e n d to o t h e r
     casualties*             Hr- ■roGshoni was a s s i s t e d r r o m the t e r r a c e a n w
     s u b s e q u e n t l y a t t e n d e d hospital.

               S h o r t l y a f t e r 1505 hours f o l l o w i n g t h e s e v e r e c r u s h i n g
     in the West S t a n d t e r r a c i n g P o l i c e C o n s t a b l e F r i e n c w e n t cr. •
     to t he p i t c h a n d a s s i s t e d with s e v e r a l c a s u a l t i e s *     At £»wm w
     tim e b e t w e e n 1520 a n d 15*^0 h o u r s he s a w a rnan he k n o w s to be
     P e t e r ly in g o n t he p i t c h to the c o r n e r o f            t h e No rt h S t a n d
     and the S p i o n Kop.               He e x a m i n e d P e t e r a nd then, with t h e
     a s s i s t a n c e o f a n o t h e r Officer, PC G r i f f i t h s , he c a r r i e d
     P e t e r into t h e g y m n a s i u m w he re a t e m p o r a r y m o r t u a r y h a d beer,
     set up.

           At 1 5 5 *i h o u r s        Dr. Jlatthew J a m e s       Bull e x a m i n e d   Peter                  ir.
     the t e m p o r a r y m o r t u a r y  and c e r t i f i e d    life e x t i nc t .

             At 2 2 3 0   h o u r s Mr.    Paul R a y m o n d F r o d s h a m i d e n t i f i e d his
     friend P e t e r     to P o l i c e   C o n s t a b l e F r i e n d in the t e m p o r a r y
     rnort u a r y .
                                                                                                                                      ?.£V-           JOHN KI LLOCK



                    Yes, it is o n l y a trivial point but w<a s.= :           1--0 they stayed
              A     on the b r id ge and ch oa.se three he saic : - ^ - 5 ,;r have I
                    m : s s e c a n o t n e it e r 3 nc-r ■ Are you r e f e r r . n s
                    3* -i" rtM'snc . si r .*’
                   I ini sorry, I am r=:=rrir.£' ;o p«ra£raph :-o anc p a = e thre*
                   of his statsmfer.t .   I arn sorry, I bes ycur pardon-  This :s
                   Colin Frodsharn ‘s s : « ; 2 ni«nt.

                        Pci ica Cor.E.abie Friend later e s c o r t e c Peter to the
                   Medico Legal Csr.tra and c on fi rm ed ;he id = r.t i f icat ion ;o
                   Detective C o n s t a b l e Wei sold.

                             Ac Oo l O h o u r s on Sunday, loth Apr: 1 l?S'5 , Mr- Peter
                   j*r a n o :s C o o t i e s e n i o r a tt enoed at v h e I^ecico Lc?^a- ^ 5n l - =
                   where he c o n f i r m e d that ident if ic at io n to D e t e c t i v e
                   Constable K in s ei la .
              C
                           Later that day, f ollowing e x a m i n a t i o n by De te ct i ve
                  Constable. Weigoid, Dr. David S l at er c a r r i e d out an autopsy
                  and s u b m i t t e d a report giving The c au se of death-         It has
                  been e s t a b l i s h e d that Peter ente re d via G at e C and although
                  no ticket was f ou nd in'his personal eff
                  30 ' 3 3 c c n i i z*rn "ci’icvc «r wc.5 in dosssssi ^n        =-
                  ~n-=y ‘sniersc ;nc s r o u n c .        n«it c o n e i uc S i?
            D                                                                             .


                  There is visual evidence.

                                                                                                        moment ?                       is        *”    or. 1y               3
                                         joint        dut            we Sc.:c                           hat they                StavrC                on         c
                  O I"* I O £ 3     o T iG     i    C i*l i           c n   p o ,£ i          i n i      he said                                       *     *       •
                                                                                                                                                                     “ ~~       y- ^
                  refer ri ng to the statement,                                                 sir?

            L     iorr^*,           i     om       3T3£ s m n s             to        pcTcs            ph t w o , r-j£ <ra r — s.—        f h :=
                  statement.  T hi s is Colin Frod                                                     am 's st i.z - r r . e n t - V *25     I 0 3.r.
                                                                                                                  o £*s r c u r JC*       'jc.. .y *
                                                                                                             in

                                                                                                                        D




                  see where you set. 2.-0 from,
                                                                                                                    0




                       rrom ths sto*3m6r»t •

                   ‘’    is       hc.ifwoV dovn •;hs r?*r.£3 ©czu&iiv

                  :He -                 not
                  V : £ L‘ & i          V 1 C c Q C c         w £r   rlT iG W     “    t H 1 £■       1-5     i n   p er. -T r . z T c Z ' i i    -    C _           ~

                  “
                  i 5r.Z I 07*          1Z J 0 .         ' O' LI     5cV        SOT.fiS        * Ime        06: w VTSST'-        •O _ 0          oHw
                  nocrs •                *i * * 1’ici~ 15 r*i £n*c . <3ir*•

                      s i de n ti f ie d at “520 in that area-     Where co ~e £5t :
                  i5~o from, can you r e m e mb er ? - A. The two times, sir, :t
                  a mixture of two times-           One is a video s ou re r ar.d the                                                                                       o'
           G      is from one of the statements.           ;5-0 hours, pa =es     o anc
                  ■zzyo u r c o c u m e n t t sir*.

                  Thank           you v e r y much.         It w a s j u s t t h a t I c o u l c n ’
                  that-            O n e o t h e r p o i n t I thini-; y o u s a i d F r a n c i s
                       au ^5 * C>LI~
                  oociosiss . sir
          H


Harsna’—._:c 1
                                                                            \
                                                                                                      P.S.    JOHN     K :LLOCK



                                    T H Z ^ C O R O N E ? .   :     r:r. Fr.2 s.2 r, ..anyt;i ing ■=! se?

                                    K R . FRASER:                 r a c e r ’s fa mil y have no -ru-as* ions , ::ur^
                            you


                                                        Cro£3-;x5ai,ncd bv ilr. L I “ E

                            1s it •;r.ow., by whi ch ope ni ng o f G at e C Hr. F r o c s h s m and
                 “B         Pe ie r s n t er sd ? - A. Co ul d I just h«vs a f i c o n e to ra re r to
                            Mr. F r o c s h a m ’s st at eme nt , sir?

                                 THE CORONER:   Certainly.                             Pass 5, t h i r d paragraph, “5?
                            this time it was about 2.50".                            T h e n he g oe s on t a l k i n g about
                            the Gats.

                                 HR. LIMB:                    Th e g r ea t er    likelihood,       sir,     is that     it is
                            the 2.52.

                                   THE CORONER:                     Sorry'?

                                   MR.     LIM3:              The    gr ea te r   l ik e li ho od   is that    en try was b y


                 D                   THE CORONER: Y’ou must be ar ir. mi nd when p eop le      give a
                           time you have to treat it with a c er ta in amount of caution
                           but he says, "Ey thi s time it was about 2.50 and Pe t er £.nd
                           .nyseif were in about the same p o s i t i o n as wr.en we joined the
                           crowd".        So he o b v i o u s l y had not got in at the point-  He
                           c o u l d n ’t have got in at 2. -« but he d o e s n ’t then sav w h e t h e r
                           it was the 2.52 or the 2 -5 v o pe n i n g .

                                THE WITNESS:               He does s ay f ur t h e r on,                sir,       that he
                           recalls b e i n g u s h ^ r s c through the g a t e .

                      Q.       ' THE CORONER:        Pardon? -A . He does s ay f u r t h e r on he
                           recalls being u s h e r e d through the gate and that co nfirms t n e
                           second opening.

                      Q.   ifhere is t h a t ? Can you remind me? - A. F u r t h e r on in the
                           paragraph we have just quoted, about h a l f w a y down the
                           statement, sir, " Ev erybody was b e i n g u s h e r e d t h r o u g h . . . ’’

                      Q.   "A large gate"             which would c o n f i r m the 2-52 er.trv,                   w o u l c n ’t
                           it? - A. i'es.

                                  HR-    LIH3:            T ha nk     you.

                                  THE C O R O N E R               Is that s a t i s f o c t o r v     :s ':h a t   cl e a r ,
                           Mr.   Limb?

                                  r!R. LIME:              Yes,       thank you,       sir.




                 H

• H aronam l:d

                                                                    /fiq )
                               By THE COPCNEP:

 Yes. - A. Sir,                       U y t o n , D*sn=cnive tnspecnor, 'iesn
 Hid’, ands Police.           Sir, an exitnina- ion has b«=en m-ide o f vidso
 film a iid p h o n o g r a p h i c s v i d e n c s -and F*=ner has been Ld>rn: L: i>*G
 in E nc l o s u r e No. 3.

           Brian P e t e r Tootle, P e t e r ' s cncla, who in fact is in
 Court nocsv has v ie w ed visual e v i d e n c e and has identified
 his n e p h e w aiive in E n c l o su r e No. 3 .on a p ho t og ra p h
 r e f e r e n c e d PP. i/lCA. That p h o t o g r a p h is t im e d -at 1 503 and my
 p e r c e p t i o n of the phonograph, sir, is that P e t e r is an that
 time s n i 1 i alive a in hough in is non p os si b le no say at whan
 stage of the medical p r o c e s s he has reached-

         PC F ri e nd has viewed' visual e v i de nc e but was u n a b l e to
 identify h i m s e l f  s.czLisliy  d e a l i n g winh P et er or. n.~.e pinch
 but the O f f i c e r h as signed a plan of the pi tc h area
 i n dic at in g the approxi man e lo ca ti on in which he found Peter.
 Than plan is r e f e r e n c e d J E F ;.

Befo re y ou move on no the plans, I have a l rsa cy r ef er re d no
his com me nn . He identified h i m s e l f I nhinI-: on MAP 7 5. n ‘. : Z C
page 22-     Can you just d ou b le check; that?     He has identified
h i mse lf in ot h er pl aces but the one he has m en ti o ne d is
that? - A. That is right, sir.        He refers to h'.-.F 7 ti me d a n ’
1320: i3: 13-    He says, “ I can say than I was w or din g ir. n he
area no nhe left of the G ane in the pen irseif'.           £-ir, can 1
refer you to two plans?

Lan me gen this right.        He goe s on no say he has" n -nua 1 1y
icennified h i m s e l f on nhan film'? - A. Than is rig.*n, s .*

At nhat t i m e had c h os en a locat ion where he r em em be rs             ne was
w o r k in g? - A. Than is exa ct ly right, sir, yes-

Yes, b e c a u s e I had mis re ad that slightly-- The.r.!< you.             -
If 1 can r ef e r you to a plan :fiJLo3, the plan of the
t e r r a c e s ...

Than wili     be C196.    - A.   And the p lan by PC Friend,            air,
JEF 1 - . -

Than will be Cl 97. - A. Which is nhe plan c: nhe pinch
(moved t o p l a n ) if we can r e f e r to MMJLc3 firs* c: ail the
clan of nhe ne rr ac es and nhe p h o t o g r a p h we have re fe rre d no,
nhe nimed p h o n o g r a p h an !
                                 .5C3, :h:s is Er.ricsure Me- 3 ar.d
nhe poinn an which we b el ie ve P et er is shown is
                                                                      O.r.   Mr C H A E L   LAYTON



       approxicn.ac.aly -h i3 location h ere ( ind 1cat in g )~TTr E~ ~ iosure
       No. 3.    T h i s here ( indi cat in ; ) is Gate 3 so in this positic
       here.

            In r e s pe ct o f the plan of the p it ch by PC Friend, JEF
      the p o s i t i o n he h a s indicated is h e r e ( ind ic-~x i n s ) which is
      •at the S p i o n Kop e n d of the pitch, the o p p o si te end of the
      pitch.

Q.    In fact, it is ri,ght a lot of p e op l e were taken to that                             par
      of the ground'? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

Q.    That is w h e r e      it r e f e r s to this MAP          7,   1520? - A.' Yes,        that
      is right.

             THE CO RONER:               Mr.    Fraser,   a n y q u e s t i o n s on that?

             MR.   FRASER:              No,    thank you,   sir.

             HR.   LIMB:          No,     t-hank you,     sir.

             MR.   C AT C H F O L E :         No, thank you, sir-

              THE CORONER;        Mr. and Mrs. Tootle, thi s is a case
     where we- h a ven 't got very much visual evidenes.                The Jury
     who have b e e n h e r e for quite some t im e will by now have
     realised, but it will not be quit e so ap pa re nt to you
     b e ca us e first we are dealing with t hi s p a r t i c u l a r Inquest,
     there is a great v a r ia t io n in the am ount of visual evidence
     and I think one c a n o nl y say it is a m a t t e r o f chance
     w h eth er a c a m e r a w as p oi nt in g in the right d ir ec t io n or
     w he t h e r it has b e e n po ss ib le b e c a u s e th ere are some scenes
     where we just can 't make out who w as who-

                I do want to d raw your a t t e n t i o n to s o m e t h i n g wh ic h
     Mr. F r o d s h a m s a y s and which was r e c o u n t e d in the summary.
     He says w h e n he s a w Pe te r in the t e r r a c e he c ou ld see there
     was s o m e b o d y t r y i n g to give resu'sc i t at ion and he wasn't
     s u c c e s s f u l . That was Mr. F r o d s h a m ‘s as se ss m en t of the
     s i t u a t i o n but it might help you a little bit because
     alt ho ug h the o n l y visual e vi de nc e is sort o f on the s i d e cf
     the pitch, the verbal or oral e v i d e n c e w hi ch has been
     s u m m a r i s e d for y o u indicates that p e op l e w er e a c t ua l ly
     a tt e m p t i n g to do s o m e t hi n g a c t u a l l y ve ry much n e ar e r the
     s ce ne of t h e incident itself.
                              •

          The s ad t h i n g is that it was u n su cc e ss f ul and n o thi ng I
     can say c an p o s s i b l y diminish the p a i n and the loss w hi ch
     you have s u f f e r e d and no doubt still are s u f f e r i n g at the
     loss of t h i s boy.      P lease accept my very s i nc er e s y m p a t h y to
     all of you at t h i s loss.

           As I have indicated to you, that is all the e v i d en c e --a
 are       g o i n g to take. We are not g o i n g any f u rt her now. W-r


                                                  8
                                                                           D .I . MICHAEL        LAYTON’



       will rise for a moment or two w h i c h is o ur normal practice.
       Hr. F r a s e r will e x p l a i n to y ou the a r r a n g e m e n t s with regard
       to y ou s p e a k i n g to the Pa th ol o gi st .  T h a n k you for b e i n g
       here.

             MR. FRASER:                  Mr.   and Mrs.         Tootle    wo u ld   jus*      like to
       say s om e th in g.

                THE CORONER:                Can you       just   find -out for me u'nat it               is?

                HR- FRASER:                Sir, Hr. a nd Mrs. T o o t l e s i m p l y want to
      e x p re s s t h e i r g ra ti tu de to e v e r y b o d y who h e l p e d Pe te r on the                 ■
      day.        T h e y r e c o gn i se that e v e r y b o d y d id e v e r y t h i n g they
      c o u l d a n d they are only so r ry t h e i r e f f o r t s wer e
      u n f o r t u n a t e l y s u c c e s s f u l . T h e y r e c o g n i s e that e v e ry b od y
      t r i e d t h e i r very best.

                T HE C O R O N E R : Hr. and Mrs. T ootle, t h an k you ve r y
      much.         On b eh al f of these p e o p l e I h e a r that o b v i o u s l y with
      p l e a s u r e b e cau se al th o ug h I r e c o g n i s e and you r e c o g n i s e it
      t u rn e d out to be u n s u c c e s s f u l , it d o e s n ' t d im i n i s h the fact
      that p e o p l e did try.          Thank you.         It is g ood o f you to
      m e n t i o n it and it is much a p p r e c i a t e d by me certainly.

                                          (Short- Ad fournment- )

          THE CORONER:                      Can we deal w i t h just one small point :r.
     the case of P e t e r              F r an cis T o o t l e whtare I m i s l e a d Inspe ct or                  !
                                                                                                                   t
     uayton.
                                                                                                                   i
                DETECTIVE          INSPECTOR M I C H A E L        LAYTON     - R e c al l ed

                                       Fur th er bv T H E C O R O N E R :
                                                                                                                   4
Q.    I n s p ec t or Layton,            this is                        to do w i t h that v i d e o               j
      i d e n t i f i c a t i o n at     1522 on H A P     7?    - A.    That is right, sir- •

Q.    I th in k I put it to you it w as at the                           S p i o n Kop enc of the
     g r o u n d ? - A. That is right, sir, yes-

Q. W h e r e a s the e vi d e n c e         is that h e is s e e n h i m s e l f w or k i n g
   w i t h i n the t er ra ce s ?           - A. That is a b s o l u t e l y right, sir.

Q.   Just s h o w us, so that the J u r y a re n 't m i s l e d on that point.-
A.   (m o v e d to p l a n )         If I can just- say, sir, we r e f e r r e d to t-hs
     p h o t o g r a p h i c e v i d e n c e r e l a t i n g to E n c l o s u r e No. 3 w h i c h was
     a b s o l u t e l y right and we r e f e r r e d to the plan of the O f f i c e r
     in this p o s i t i o n here ( indi cat, i n g ) w h i c h was a piar. and a;
     s uch we i nd i ca te d the right.                     W i t h r e f e r e n c e to the v i d e o
     i d e n t i f i c a t i o n he is a c t u a l l y r e f e r r e d to w o r k i n g in
     E n c l o s u r e No. 3 a nd not a c t u a l l y at thi s end of the p i t c h
     a l t h o u g h he doesn't a ct ua ll y see himself.

Q.   He d oe sn' t see h i m s e l f or P e t e r but he just looked at the
     video a n d said, “That is w h e r e I was".         That is right, isr.'t
     it? - A. Yes.

                                                      9
                                                            H r • Frassr■      We
          t h e CORONER :    Is than .f “              '
u i n t e d to ma k e s ur e w a :got >* r l «'   :

       HR.   FRASER:         Yes,   sir-

       THE C O R O N E R :    Thank you,   Hr.    Fraser.
                                                       F r a ».ris TOOt- 1 g
                                                      be    r1x e a >
KEVIN)   WIU-IAMS
KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS



1.   Kevin Daniel Williams the son    of the Applicants James

     Stephen and Anne Williams was born on 27th May, 1973,

     and was 15 years old when he died at Hillsborough

     football ground on 15th April, 1989.



2.   He went to the stadium with friends but became

     separated from all but one, Andrew Duncan.    Together

     they took up positions in enclosure 4 at 1.30 p.m.,

     but some time before 2.45 p.m. they moved into

     enclosure 3.



3.   During the course of Kevin's mini inquest on 2nd May, 1990,

     the following evidence was put before the jury through

     the witnesses Detective Sergeant John Killoch,

     Dr. David Slater, Detective Inspector Michael Layton,

     and Andrew Duncan:-    Andrew Duncan lost sight of Kevin

     Williams immediately after the first surge in

     enclosure 3.    At about 3.28 p.m., P.C. Michael Craighill

     went into enclosure 3 and carried Kevin onto the pitch

     where he attempted unsuccessfully to resuscitate him.

     Derek Bruder, an off duty Police Constable saw Kevin

     lying on the pitch near the Spion Kop, North stand of the

     ground.   He stated that Kevin was having convulsions.

     Mr. Bruder, on seeing Kevin went on to the pitch

     where he gave mouth to mouth resuscitation and an

     ambulanceman carried out cardiac massage.    They were

     later joined by an ambulance woman who took over from

     Mr. Bruder.    After a short time the St. Johns Ambulanceman
Some time later special Constable Debra Martin assisted

in carrying Kevin from the pitch to the temporary

mortuary.    She claimed that when they reached the

mortuary he stopped breathing.     She then gave him

mouth to mouth resuscitation and did some heart massage,

after which he opened his eyes, said the word "mum" and

then died.   At 4.06 p.m. Dr. Curpen examined Kevin and

certified him dead.



Dr. David Slater, stated in evidence that Kevin died of

traumatic asphyxia.   His case was one of the worst of

those he dealt with from the Hillsborough incident.        In

his opinion Kevin would have fallen unconscious within

3 to 5 seconds of being crushed.     He stated that persons

suffering from asphyxia can have fits.     He was not of

the view, however, as SC Martin had suggested, that

Kevin could have spoken.   The autopsy showed that Kevin

had four fractures of his voice box and irreversible

brain damage, both of which he believed, would on their

own have prohibited communication.     Any sound that might

have emerged he put down to the expulsion of air from

Kevin's stomach but stated that this would not explain

the opening of Kevin's eyes.     He believed that because

of the seriousness of Kevin's case, he would have suffered

irrecoverable brain damage and brain death within 3 to 6

minutes.
_The mini ..inquest into ..Kevin was Jt.hen._adjourned until

a date to be fixed.



On 3rd May, 1990, an officer from the West Midlands

Police Force, visited the Applicants at their home.

The officer stated that Mr. Bruder had now changed his

statement as he realised he must have been mistaken.

Mr. Bruder was now saying that there was no vomit near

to Kevin that it could have been mucous.        Mr. Bruder

was also saying that Kevin wasn't convulsing when he

attended him, that it must have been body twitches.

The police officer told Kevin's parents that it would

be better if the family did not speak to Mr. Bruder.

He said that Special Constable Martin was still

sticking to her original statement but that she was

young and inexperienced and that she had undergone a

traumatic experience.      In the circumstances, he said

her statement would be discounted.       He then stated

that there would be another inquest into Kevin the

following day but that the Applicants need not attend,

as the purpose of the inquest was to prove to the jury

that Kevin could not have been alive.



On 4th May, 1990, the coroner returned to Kevin's mini

inquest and further evidence was put to the jury by

Sergeant John Killoch, Inspector Matthew Robert Sawers,

Dr. David Slater and Doctor Ernest John Wallace Gumpert
which, when taken together produced the following account

of events:   'When Mr.'bruder made his first statement he

stated that he came across Kevin at the Spion Kop end

having convulsions.   This happened after 3.32.    He also

said he could feel a pulse.
                  Mr. Bruder gave mouth to mouth resuscitation

and an ambulanceman carried out cardiac massage.      After 7

minutes they swapped roles.    About 6 minutes later an

ambulancewoman took over from Mr. Bruder.    Whilst

Mr. Bruder was attempting to resuscitate Kevin he observed

an ambulance entering the stadium.    He asked the St. Johns

Ambulance colleague who was assisting him to stop the

ambulance as he was considering utilising it.

During resuscitation efforts he noticed Kevin's face

going grey and withdrawn.                    .



In his evidence Inspector Matthew Robert Sawers of the

West Midlands Police confirmed that he had visited

mr. Bruder the previous day.    He stated that Mr. Bruder

on reflection thought that the word 'convulsions' was

not applicable, that twitching was a more appropriate

term to describe Kevin's condition and that if he had

seen any part of the body move, it was the head.       He

reported that Mr. Bruder said that he may well have been

mistaken about feeling a pulse.    He added that, in

contrast to his original statement, he could no longer

say that he definitely saw Kevin's skin colour change
                                -   5 -




           from normal to grey; nor did he now think Kevin had

                     -but that -the fluid he saw coming from Kevin's

           mouth might have been spittle or phlegm.        Mr. Bruder

           had confirmed that he attempted to resuscitate Kevin

           for a period of time of between 10 and 15 minutes and

           that the ambulance he saw was definitely entering the

           stadium and not exiting.



     10.   In his further evidence Dr. Slater stated that Kevin

           would have suffered irrecoverable brain damage and

           death within 3 to 6 minutes, that is, by the time

           Mr. Bruder reached him, and that although he was brain

           dead his heart may have gone on beating for a short

           while longer, and his nerves may have lived on thus

           causing the twitching.         He brain had died near to the

           time of the crushing, but his whole body died at the

           time that P.C. Bruder was with him and saw him turn

           grey.
•»
     11.   Dr. Ernest Gumpert was of the view that Kevin was

           probably dead before he was even removed from enclosure 4,

           in the sense that he was brain dead and was going to die.

           He also thought it conceivable that his heart continued

           to operate for a time as did his peripheral nervous

           system.    But after Kevin had suffered brain death the

           only way to keep him alive would have been by artificial

           means.
On 15th December, 1991, the Applicant Ann ‘Williams met

with m r . Bruder.    A .note of ...this .meeting _is exhibited

at P a g e       appended hereto.      From those notes

it would appear that Mr. Bruder refutes the interpretation

placed by D.I.       Robert Sawers upon the statement made by

Mr. Bruder on 3rd May, 1990.



From November 1991 the Applicants made repeated requests

to South Yorkshire Police to release copies of the statements

made by Special Constable Martin and Mr. Bruder.

The Applicants eventually received the said statements

from the Coroner’s office on 19th February, 1992.           In

relation to Mr. Bruder's initial statement made on 27th

April, 1989, the following matter caused grave concern

to the Applicants

(a)   Mr. Bruder describes seeing a police cordon in front

      of the North stand.      Kevin was lying on the ground

      behind the police cordon having convulsions.          None

      of the police officers left the cordon to assist

      people who were lying on the pitch.         (See Page ....).


(b)   Shortly after Mr. Bruder began resuscitation attempts

      on Kevin an ambulance entered the ground and drove

      towards the Lapping Lane end.        He told the St. Johns

      man to try and stop it.       He tried to flage it down

      but it continued on as if it had been ordered not

      to stop.   (See Page ....).
           —                           - 7 -

           Details of the aforementioned matters were not referred

           to in the police summary of evidence presented at the

           inquest.  The Ap pl icants feel that such omissions
                                    '' ' o f             ' '  ■ ■
           illustrate the shortcomi ng s ^p re s en t in g evidence in

           summary form.     A copy of Mr. B r u d e r ’s first statement

           and the West Midland's Police Summary of Evidence is

           annexed hereto. •



     14.   In relation to mr. Bruder's second statement made on

           3rd May, 1990, he states in the first paragraph thereof

           that he had "been asked to think about a number of points

           which are raised in the statement I made nearly a

           fortnight after the Hillsborough Stadium disaster".

           See Page     ....hereof).    In the Applicants' view, this

           remark, taken together with the notes of the meeting held

           with M r . Bruder on 15th December, 1991, indicate that

           improper pressure was indeed exerted upon Mr. Bruder

           to retract or qualify in part his previous statement.

•»         Further, since receiving the copy statements the

           Applicants have viewed a BBC video of events as they

           unfolded on the day of the disaster.         It is evident from

           the video that a SYMAS Ambulance entered the Spion Kop

           end of the pitch at 3.36 p.m. at which time it has been

           established that Mr. Bruder was attempting to resuscitate

           Kevin.     The Applicants are concerned that despite its

           availability this evidence was not put before the jury.

           Rather, Mr. Bruder was asked to consider whether the

               ambulance he had originally referred to as entering the

           stadium was in fact exiting.
    15.   At the same time as efforts were being made to                    .~

          secure copies of witness statements attempts were made to            ^
/
          contact Special Constable Martin.     On 20th February 1992

          the Applicant Ann Williams received a phone call from

          the Special Constable which culminated in a meeting
                       •                                                         ;
          at the Applicants home on 22nd February 1992. At that                  ;
                                                                                 :
                                                                             •   I
          meeting Special Constable Martin confirmed the contents
                                                                                 :

          of her first statement made on     8th May 1989 wherein she            ;

          described the events set out in paragraph 4 hereof.

          She stated that this statement     was made up from notes which

          she had made in her pocketbook     immediately after the disaster.

          She explained that her later statement dated 17th March

          1990 was compiled by an officer from the West Midlands

          Police Force who visited-her at her home.     This officer

          tried to convince Special Constable Martin that her

          original statement was untrue.     The Special Constable

          signed the statement prepared by this officer without

          reading it.   She was unable to read it due to the state

          of distress brought on by the officer's behaviour.     She

          signed the statement because of the pressure exerted by the

          officer and because she wanted to put Hillsborough behind

          her.

                                                                             1
                                                                             if)
          Special Constable Martin has now signed a statement, in            §
                                                                             m
          the presence of a solicitor, confirming the truth of her

          original statement dated 8th May 1989, and explaining the

          circumstances relating to the compilation of the later

          statement dated 17th March 1990.
      A copy of this statement is appended hereto at Page     . . . i . . .




16.   The Applicants firmly believe that the statement dated

      17th March 1990 led to the undermining of Special

      Constable Martin's statement at the mini inquest on 2nd

      May 1990 (see in particular page 7, para D.E. of transcript

      proceedings).


17.   Subsequent to the meeting with Special Constable Martin

      the Applicants sought the advice of their general

      practitioner as to the contents of Kevin's autopsy report.


      In his view the injuries to Kevins larynx would not have

      prevented him from speaking.   A copy of this opinion

      is appended hereto at page     ....


18.   Now in receipt of most of the evidence relating to

      Kevin's death, the Applicants contend that the inquest

      proceedings into Kevin's death and the result and verdict

      of accidental death are highly unsatisfactory by reason

      of the following matters

      (a)   The jury never heard from Mr.Bruder himself,

            nor did they hear from Special Constable

            Debra Martin.   The jury were merely presented

            with excerpts from their respective statements.

            The Applicants contend that the evidence

            relating to Kevin was presented to the jury

            in a confusing and incoherent fashion.

      (b)   They are particulary concerned at the inactivity
            of the police officers in the cordon whilst
            Kevin was convulsing and the unsuccessful attempt
                      •                     ■
      to flag down an ambulance.     In their view both

      these matters indicate a lack of response on the

      part of the emergency services.

(c)   Notwithstanding the evidence of Dr.David Slater

      and Dr.Ernest Gumpert they believe that Kevin

      was alive for some time after 3.32 and hence

      for some time after the 3.15 p.m, cut off time.

      This belief is heightened by a recent article in

      the British Medical     Journal dated 30th November 1991

      This article   states that the accident and emergency

      departments of the Northern General and Royal

      Hallamshire Hospitals, Sheffield, were never

      formally told to implement the major disaster

      plan.   Further, the article states that most of

      the seriously injured arrived at hospital between

      3.30 p.m. and 4.00 p.m.     Nine of those injured were

      convulsing upon admission.     A further 6 were confused

      upon arrival and then began having severe convulsions

      It is known that some of these people survived with

      no long term physical effects.

(d)   The further evidence which has come to light since

      the inquest indicates in particular a suppression

      of evidence, irregularity of proceedings and

      discovery of new evidence.



The Applicants submit that in the light of these matters

and had Mr.Bruder and Debra Martin been called as
witnesses there may have been sufficient evidence for
the jury to conclude that Kevin's death was due to or

aggravated by lack of care.
MEETING BETWEEN ANNE WILLIAMS AND P.C. BRUDER -
15TH DECEMBER. 1991
— — — — .— -— -— --------- —   — _—




VP.C. Bruder             made his original statement                 approximately ten
days after the disaster.



At that time he asked the West Midlands Police for the name

of      the boy          he had         attempted to       resuscitate (i.e.       Kevin

Williams).             This was refused.           ,



At the meeting with P.C.                       Bruder on 15th December, 1991, he

stated that              he came           across Kevin     on the     pitch and    that

Kevin        was either               convulsing or       twitching.     Kevin had     a

pulse                                                                  As he tried to

resuscitate Kevin an ambulance approached going towards the

Leppings           Lane end           of    the   ground."     He    shouted for     the

ambulance to stop in order to put                         Kevin in it, but it went

straight past.



On 3rd May, 1990, P.C. Bruder was                         visited in his heme by a

West Midlands Police Officer                      who asked him to 'reconsider'

his statement.                  He     was asked if       he was mistaken        when he

stated that             Kevin was           convulsing and had        a pulse.      P.C.

Bruder stated that he was not mistaken.




ANNAAJ
N. B .    It     was cniy at this          time (i.e. 3rd May,         1990) that

P.C.      Bruder learnt          for the      first   time the      name of    the

person he hac tried to help.
V




At     the      same    time      as    the    West   Midlands      Officer    was

interviewing him in his                horns, the Coroner rang P.C. Bruder

and tried to           persuade him that the facts            of his statement

were incorrect in              particular that the ambulance            could not

have      been    driving onto          the    pitch, but might        have   been

driving off it.           Again, P.C. Br.uder 'refused             to admit that

he had been mistaken and was adamant that the ambulance had

been driving onto the .pitch.



The      West    Midlands       Officer       was   with    P.C.   Bruder     from

approximately 10.00 a.m. - 4.00 p.m. on 3rd May.



P.C. Bruder        told the       Officer that he          didn't want      to see

Kevin's parents but if they wished to meet with him then he

would be        prepared to meet         them anywhere.        (N.B.     When the

West Midlands          Officer visited          Mr. and     Mrs. Williams      the

same day        he informed them          that P.C. Bruder would          not see

them) .



P.C. Bruder        stated the          reasons behind       the West     Midlands

Officer visiting him             when he stated "when he           came down to

see me it was with a brief - to get me to change my mind."




ANNAAJ
                                            -    3 -




        In response tc whether or not            he would be prepared to make

        another statement,     P.C. Bruder         replied that        he would    be

        prepared to     stand up     in Court      and state     that Kevin       was
    V
/       convulsing,     that there    was       a pulse




    Asked whether         or not Kevin was         alive when he got        to him,

    P.C. Bruder replied "there was a pulse and if that means he

    was alive then he was alive."



    When P.C.         Bruder left    Kevin he          was certain     that he    was

    dead.      He himself vomited and then went home.                  He destroyed

    all the clothes he was wearing on that day.                      He stated that

    he has      never received any       counselling and has            dealt with

    the disaster "in his own way."




    ANNAAJ
                                                  DECEASED REFERENCE NUMBER: £ 1


                        WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
                  A report into the d e a th                              of:                 w-:
                                                                                              £

NAME:                                    WILLIAMS, Kevin Daniel

AGE: 15 years                            DATE OF BIRTH:      -27 May 1973
                                                                                              t£vr
                                                                                                 ’
                                                                                                 -
ADDRESS:                                                                                      §
                                                                                              fcji


OCCUPATION:                              Schoolboy

STATUS:                                  Single

NEXT OF KIN:                             James Stephen WILLIAMS

RELATIONSHIP:                            Father

DATE OF ’BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:

ADDRESS:

                                                                                          -

GENERAL PRACTITIONER:
                                         Merseyside

DOCTOR PRONOUNCING LIFE EXTINCT:         Dr CURPEN
                                                                                          «
DATE, TIME AND PLACE:                    15 April 1989, 1606 hours a t th e Temporary

Mortuary in th e gymnasium a t Hillsborough Stadium.

PATHOLOGIST:                             Dr SLATER

STATED CAUSE OF DEATH:                   Traumatic Asphyxia



BLOOD ALCOHOL ANALYSIS BY DR FORREST - RESULT:

                                          56 mg/100 ml

IDENTIFICATION EVIDENCE:                 On th e morning o f Sunday 16 April 1989,

James Stephen WILLIAMS i d e n t i f i e d th e body of h i s s t e p son, Kevin Daniel

WILLIAMS, to PC 1269 GLAVE in t h e Temporary Mortuary a t Hillsborough Stadium.
CIRCUMSTANCES

At about 0700 hours on Saturday, 15 April
1989, Mr James Stephen WILLIAMS saw his son,
Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS, dece as ed , leave the
family home with th e i n t e n t i o n of t r a v e l l i n g
to S h e f f i e l d .   He was to t r a v e l by t r a i n with
a number of h i s f r i e n d s to watch the F.A. Cup
Semi Final f o o t b a l l match a t Hillsborough
Stadium.         Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS had a t i c k e t
f o r t h e match.


Andrew DUNCAN t r a v e l l e d to S h e f f i e l d with
Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS, Thomas James NICKSQN
and Gregory FAGEN by t r a i n a r r i v i n g a t
S h e f f i e l d a t about 1040 hours.             Gregory FAGEN
l e f t the o t h e r s a t t h e s t a t i o n .    The other
t h r e e youths caught a bus from the s t a t i o n to
Hillsborough Stadium where Thomas NICKS0N
l e f t them.


Andrew DUNCAN e n t e r e d the stadium with Kevin
Daniel WILLIAMS a t about 1330 hours via the
Leppings Lane t u r n s t i l e s .        They i n i t i a l l y
stood t o g e t h e r in Pen 4 but a f t e r a sh o r t
time moved in to Pen 3 .              At about 1445 hours
Andrew DUNCAN saw o t h e r f r i e n d s on the
t e r r a c e s includ ing Anthony Maxwell GRIER and
S t u a r t THOMPSON (Deceased Reference Number
53).
 At about 1455 hours Andrew DUNCAN was s t i l l
 with Kevin WILLIAMS and although the crowd in
 the pen was t i g h t l y packed he was not too
 concerned a t t h a t time.            As th e match s t a r t e d •
 he was pushed forwards down the t e r r a c e and
 did not see Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS ag ain.


 Following th e se v e re crushing i n . t h e West
 Stand t e r r a c i n g P o l i c e Constable 1790 Michael^
 John CRAIGHILL' went i n to Pen 3 and a s s i s t e d a
 number of c a s u a l t i e s .     P o l i c e Constable
CRAIGHILL a s s i s t e d t o c a r r y a youth, he now
 b e l i e v e s t o be Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS, from
the g a te in th e p e r i m e t e r f en ci ng of Pen 3
onto th e p i t c h .      The o f f i c e r attempted
r e s u s c i t a t i o n but w it h o u t suc cess .


Derek William BRUDER i s a P o l i c e Constable
with Merseyside P o l i c e and was a t th e match
as a s p e c t a t o r in t h e North Stand.            He
r e c a l l s se eing a per so n lying on the p i t c h
near th e Spion Kop/North Stand having                           •
convuls io ns .      Mr BRUDER went onto th e p itc h
and gave mouth to mouth r e s u s c i t a t i o n aided
by a St Johns Ambulanceman who c a r r i e d out
c a r d i a c massage.     Mr BRUDER r e c a l l s t h a t a
f r i e n d of th e c a s u a l t y was with him on the
pitch.     R e s u s c i t a t i o n was continued and th ey
 were jo in e d by a St Jonns Ambulance woman who
 took over from Mr BRUDER.-After a s h o r t time
 the St Johns Ambulanceman s a i d t h a t the
 c a s u a l t y was dead.   Mr BRUDER then l e f t the
 scene.


 N either of th e St Johns Ambulance personnel
 or the ' f r i e n d ' of th e c a s u a l t y have been
 i d e n t i f i e d . The person Mr BRUDER t r i e d to
r e s u s c i t a t e i s now known to be Kevin Daniel
WILLIAMS.


Special Constable 221 Debra Jane MARTIN went
onto the p i t c h to a s s i s t and helped to c a r r y
se v e ra l deceased and a ls o many in j u r e d to the
gymnasium.       She a s s i s t e d to c a r r y one young
boy, now known to be Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS,
in t o the gymnasium and remained with him.


At 1606 hours Doctor Naderassen Carpoosamv
CURPEN examined Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS in the
gymnasium which had been e s t a b l i s h e d as a
temporary mortuary and c e r t i f i e d l i f e
extinct.


Special Constable MARTIN l a t e r e s c o r t e d th e
body of Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS to the Medico
Legal Centre and confirmed the i d e n t i f i c a t i o n
by Reference Number t o D e t e c tiv e Constable
638 Simon WEIGOLD.
On Sunday, 16 April 1989 Mr James Stephen
WILLIAMS i d e n t i f i e d th e body of h is son to
P o lic e Constable 1269 S c o tt 6LAVE.


On Sunday, 16 Apr il 1989 following
i d e n t i f i c a t i o n by D e t e c t i v e Constable
WEIGOLD, Doctor David SLATER c a r r i e d out an
autopsy and su bmitted a r e p o r t giving cause
of d e a t h .


BLOOD ETHANOL ANALYSIS

Evidence is included regard in g the a n a ly s i s
of the blood sample from th e deceased where
the presence of e th an o l was d e t e c t e d .            The
w itnesse s proving c o n t i n u i t y of the blood
sample are D et e c t iv e Constable 1076 David
Michael GREEN, D e te c tiv e Sergeant 2616 John
A lber t TURNER and D e t e c ti v e Sergeant 1098
James Norman FLETCHER.               Doctor Alexander
Robert FORREST c a r r i e d out the a n a l y s i s .


Found in the perso nal e f f e c t s of Kevin Daniel
WILLIAMS was a t i c k e t c o u n t e r f o i l which
confirms his e n t r y to the stadium via a
turn stile.


VISUAL EVIDENCE

An examination of video f i l m and photographic
evidence has been made by Police In sp ec to r
  LAYTON and Kevin Daniel .WILLIAMS has been
   i d e n t i f i e d in Pen 3 . being c a r r i e d ac ro ss the
  p i t c h and a t the Spion Kop end of th e p i t c h .                  I


  Photograph Reference DAC 3/1 shows Kevin
  Daniel WILLIAMS a p p a r e n t l y unconscious near                     |
  the p er im eter fe n c in g in Pen 3.                  Video            S?
                                                                           St:
  Reference MAP 7. 1528:33:22 shows him being
 removed from th e t e r r a c e s via Gate 3.


 P o lic e Constable CRAIGHILL has signed a Plan
 of the p i t c h showing where he f i r s t came into
 c o n t a c t with Kevin WILLIAMS and where he l a id
 him on the ground.                The o f f i c e r i d e n t i f i e d
•himself on Video Reference MAP 7. 1528:43:24
 ca r r y i n g a youth now known to be Keith
 WILLIAMS from g ate 3 and onto the p i t c h . The
 o f f i c e r did not know th e i d e n t i t y of the
youth and f i r s t b e l i e v e d i t to be another
deceased.


Photographs Reference PR5/32 and PR5/33 timed
a t 1532 hours, show Kevin WILLIAMS being
c a r r i e d a c r o ss th e p i t c h on a temporary
s t r e t c h e r by a number of s p e c t a t o r s and two
p o li c e o f f i c e r s .   P o l i c e Constable 437 Garrv
HAYES has confirmed h i s i d e n t i f i c a t i o n on the
photographs.             The o f f i c e r a s s i s t e d to c a r r y
two deceased per sons on temporary s t r e t c h e r s
but could not r e c a l l any f u r t h e r d e t a i l s . He
did not know th e i d e n t i t y of the persons he
c a r r i e d , he merely a s s i s t e d to c a r r y the
temporary s t r e t c h e r .
A number of photographs including Photooraoh
Reference TT1730. s h o w Kevin WILLIAMS ........
being given mouth t o mouth on th e p i t c h by Mr
BRUDER who has confirmed t h i s i d e n t i f i c a t i o n .


The p ar en ts of Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS have
viewed v i s u a l evidence and confirm the
i d e n t i f i c a t i o n s of t h e i r son.


CONTINUITY CHART                         '        .


This has been prep ar ed and is included with
t h i s f i l e to provide an o v e r a l l p i c t u r e of
the evidence.
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
              ' (WEST DISTRICT)       " :



    ~ I N Q U E S T S INTO THE DEATHS OF THE ~

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

             KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS




                      Before

DR. S.L. POPPER. LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM. BS , MRCGP
            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                        At

           The Medico-Legal Centre.
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                        On

                   2nd May 1990



            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harphain, Ltd. ,
          Official Shorthand Writers.
      55. Queen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX
                                               INDEX


DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Called

  By THE C O R O N E R       . . . . . .       ..   ..    ..                          2


DETECTIVE SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCH                      Called

  Ey THE C O R O N E R ............................................... 5


DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Recalled




                                                                                     CD 00
. Ey THE C O R O NE R ..          ....
  C r o s s - e x a m i n e d by MR. FRASER.


DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

  Ey THE C O R O N E R ..                                                             8
  C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by   MR. LIME        .. . .                            11
  C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by   MR. C A T C H P O L E ........................... 11




                                             oo— oo —




                                                                                   1 00 8
    y~-



              2nd Mav 1990
                       TNOHEST     into   THE DEAT H OF KE VI N D A N IEL WI LLIAMS

                           MR. FRASER:     Sir, you will now h e a r evid enc e r el ati ng
                 to Kev in Daniel Williams.              K e v i n ' s m um and dad are in Court
/                with the social w o r k e r from M er se ysi de who has been
                 a s s i s t i n g them. The s o l i c i t o r s for K ev in 1s m u J"   ^   ar
                 me mbers of my G r o u p and I t h er ef or e a p p e a r in the usual
          B      guise as th ei r agent to t h e St ee ri ng Committee.

                          THE CORONER:              Good morning, Mr. and Mrs. Williams.
                 Before we be gi n I am going to e x p l ai n to you the
                 format of the Inquest b e c a us e you weren't here a fortnight
                 aeo      were you. and even if you w ere you might have
                 forgotten.            We will start in a moment or two by m e re ad in g
                 to you what was s a i d .o n 18th April 1989 w h i c h is wh en 1 ^
                 opene d the Inquest in this very room.                     Then if there are      y
                 am e nd me nt s w h i c h need to be made, if we have got some ot
                 facts wrong, we will sort that out.                    I will then tell you
                 what the blood alcohol levels were, as me asu re d by
                 Dr. Forrest, and then we will turn to Dr- Slater, who is .the
                 Pathologist s i t t i n g up t h e r e b e hi nd you.         He will give us
                 the pa thological evidence.                  I think I can safel y say that
                 if af t e r this Inquest over, you feel you wou ld like to talk
          D      t o ’ D r . S l a t e r pr i v a t e l y he is qui te ha p py to ao that   if i t
                 would be-of any he lp to you.                  When Dr. S l a t e r has finished
                 the West M id la nd s Police O ff ic e rs have p re p a r e d a summary
                 for me and he will deal with that and tell me about it.

                        Then we will h ear from Inspec tor Layton, a not he r West
                 Midlands     Poli ce Officer, who- will deal w i t h the visual
                 evidence.      He will first of all tell me all about the plans
                 and so on and that is s o m e t i m e s a bit c o n f u s i n g because
                 there are a lot of r e f e r e n c e s giv en but wh en he has finished
                 talking about it he comes ove r and s ho ws us on these big
                 plans so that all o f us, that is me, you, the Jury and
                 e ve ryb od y else can follow it.        Th en wh e n that is done we
                 conclude and take no fur th er e vi de n c e at this stage.           Is
                 that re as ona bl y clear ?      I like to tell you so that you know
                 what to expect.       O t he rw is e you d o n ’t know what is coming.

                       This then is the r e s u m e d Inquest wh ic h was opene d on
                  18th April 1989 and on that o cc a s i o n Neil An th on y Parkin,
                  Acting C o ro n er 's Officer, said:

                        "The bod y whi ch is the subject of this Inquest has be e n
                        id entified.to PC 1269 Gla ve of the South Yorkshire
                        Police as that of Kev in Daniel Wi ll ia ms by James
                        St ephen Williams, his father.         He was 15 years of age
                        havin g been born on 27th May 1973 at Southport                  ®
                                                                                            He
                        lived at ________
                                                                            Mil i t o u J r ough
                        was a s c h o o l b o y by occupation^  He d ied at
                        Football Grou nd following an incident there on


          H
                                                 v*=n                                        1009
                                                        DR.   D A V I D NEIL S L A T E R



           .Saturday, 15th April 1989.            PC Gla ve caused the body to
           be re mo ve d to the M ed ic o Legal C e n t r e and there he
            identified it to De te c ti ve C o n s t a b l e Simon Weigold who
           s u b s e q u e n t l y identified the same bo dy to Dr. Slater.
           It is the fami ly wish that the body sh ou ld be
           c r e m a t e d ."

            I a d j o u r n e d the Inquest at that point.   I wrote to you
     sh ort ly af t e r w a r d s and you, Mr. Williams, .very kindly s i gn ed
     it on 1st Way 1989 and I che ck ed with you the de tails and
     you c o nf ir m ed the name, that we had got it right, date of
     birth 27.5.73, that is right, isn't it, and the place of
     birth whi ch was Southport wasn't it?           We typ ed it into the
     wrong spot in y our case but you s p o t t e d that.

          Dr. Forrest did the alcohol levels for many of the
     people who died, including Kevin, and the level in respect
     of Kevin was 56 m i l li gr a mm es per 100 mils.

                     DR.   DAVID NEIL SLAT ER - C a ll ed

                               Bv THE C O R O N E R :

Q. Dr. S l a t e r . A . Sir, my name is Dr. D a v i d Neil Slater.    I
   am a Consultant Histo pat ho log is t and a F e l l o w of the Royal
   C ol leg e of Pathologists.

          THE CORONER:   Before         I go on,    Mr.       Williams,      you are
     true dad of this lad.

           MR.   WILLIAMS:     Stepfather-

             THE CORONER:     Thank you very much.       Y o u a r e mum, yes.
     Mr. Fraser, so that we get the r e co rd right.             Is this an
     informal or a p r o p e r adop tio n bec ause ob vi o u s l y the lad
     ca r ri es the same surname?

          MR. FRASER:        There   is no formal        ad op t i o n but    it is a ^
     twelve years plus.

           THE CORONER:       Pardon?

          MR. FRASER:     There has been no formal ado pt i on by
     Mr. Wil lia ms as such but the r e l a t i o n s h i p is more than
     twelve years old.

Q.        THE CORONER:     I am very sorry, Dr. Slater, to have
     interrupted you.    Just remind us of yo ur name because I ha ve
     forgott en whfere.we were up to?  Just start again? - A. My
     name is Dr. David Neil Slater, Con sul ta nt H is top at hol og ist ,
     sir.

Q. Dr. Slater, in the usual way you are s a ti sf ie d that the
   evid en ce you are going to give me in this case re lat es to


                                        2
                                                        DR.   D A V I D N EIL S L A T E R



     K ev in Daniel W i l l i a m s who was al so identified as No.                51,      is
     that right? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q.   Id ent i fi ca ti on was done by Inspe cto r Titnms so far as you are
     c on c e r n e d ? - A. That was the initial i d e n t i f i c a t i o n .

Q. But there is no doubt            in your mi n d about       the    identity? -
A. No.

Q. There were v a r i o u s marks on the body itself to identify it?
A. Sir, Kevin was cl ea r ly labelled both by nu mb e r and by name-

Q. Dr. Slater, w o u l d you be k ind e no ug h then to take me through
   the post m o r t e m ? - A. My e x a m i n a t i o n of Ke vin showed that
   the main fin di ng was that of asphyxia.                           Thi s op inion was
   formed through the ex ten si ve bl ue n e s s on the face and upper
   part of the chest.                   In a dd iti on the re were small
   ha em or rh ag es in both the face and internal organ s including
   the brain, heart and lungs.                      T h i s as ph y x i a had cle arl y
   re s ul te d from c om pr es si on of the neck and chest and this
   opi n io n was s u p p o r t e d by the p r es en ce of th ree s m a l 1
   sc ra tc he s o v e r the left si de of the neck and also o ver the
   front of the voi ce box.                   Th is had also r es u l t e d in four
   fractures to the small bo n es in the actual voice box.                              In
   ad d iti on there was ev id en ce of b r u i s i n g to the lungs, again
   s u p p o rt in g c o m p r e s s i o n of the chest.

             My a u t o ps y s ho wed that Ke vin was a n or ma ll y developed,
     fit, healthy, yo un g male with no e vi de nc e of any natural
     di sease which cou ld have c o n t r i b u t e d t o w a rd s death and it
     was my opi ni on that Kevin had a normal life expectancy.                     In
     te rms of the m od e of death the c o m p r e s s i o n o f the neck or
     chest has o cc u r r e d here and u n c o n s c i o u s n e s s occurs very
     rapidly, c er t a i n l y with in a few second's, a n d there is one
     re p or te d case of it o cc u r r i n g a p p a r e n t l y instantaneously.
     F o ll ow in g u nc o n s c i o u s n e s s then t he re is no dis comfort and no
     pain.      Death then occurs a ft er a p p r o x i m a t e l y three to five
     minutes, sir.                                                            *

Q. So be cause when we say a sp hyx ia p e op l e thi nk of agony for
   ages and ages.        What you are s a y i n g is that the person
   him s el f would very r api dly not k n o w a ny t h i n g at all about
   what was ha p p e n i n g ? - A. I sho ul d say the word "asphyxia" is
   un fo rtu na te in that s ci e n t i f i c a l l y it par t ly includes si mp l y
   that there is not enough ox yge n in the blood.                  It doesn't
   imply actual s u f f o ca ti on and p r o l on ge d death.

Q. Did you say the re were four fr ac tur es to the voice box? -
A. Yes, there are two bones in the voi ce box, as you know, sir,
   and both these s ho we d two fractures each.

Q. Now the re as o n why I asked you was this, and I want to put
   this to you be ca us e I would like to get your view on it, one
   Off i ce r will be dea li ng with the value of this evidence in a

                                       3



                                                                                   1011
                                                                DR.   DAVID NEIL SLATER



             moment but she say s that at a point wh en this lad was in the
             gymnasium, in other words he had a l r ea dy been mov ed ac ros s
             the pitch, she says she h e l p e d him into the gym from the
             pitch, p re s u m a b l y she car ri ed him.              He s t o p p e d breathing.
             She gave him the kiss of life, did some heart massage, he
             o p en ed his eyes s ai d a wo rd a n d died.                 Now in the light of
             your patholo gic al findings, is that in fact a possibility,
             do you think'* - A. Well, sir, 1 was aw a re of this statement
             and theref ore 1 h a v e c l e ar ly g i v e n this mat te r c o n s i d e r a b l e
             thought, sir.                1 think there are several c om me nt s to make
    B        but the mo d e r a t e l y large n u m b e r of a u t o p s i e s I did from this
             incident, sir, this was c er t a i n l y the most sev er e case of
             tr au ma ti c a s p h y x i a that 1 ac tu a l l y dealt with.              Th is was
             both in terms of bl ue ne ss of the face a n d also the area of
             pallor of w hi t e n e s s around the mouth.                  Sir, it was a very
             very s e ver e form of asphy xia and I do not think that
             u n c o n s c i o u s n e s s wo ul d have b e e n q u i ck er than ’•hree or five
             seconds.            I ha ve no reason to al t e r what I have alr ea dy saj
             on that a s p e c t .

                     The ot he r very si gn ificant thi ng about this, and it alsc
             sup por ts the s e v e r i t y of th is case, is that again of the
             au to ps ie s I did ap pr ox im at el y 15 per cent had some sort of
             fracture to the voi ce box, the larynx.           This case was h ig hl y
             unusual in that in fact it had four f r ac tu re s to the larynx.
    D        It was by far the most severe case of vo ic e box fractures.
             Not only does tfciis indicate the s e v e r i t y of the traumatic
             a sp hy xi a at the time but it also in fact makes it vir tu al ly
             impossible for the person to have s p o k e n by virtue of the
             fact that the re were fractures to the voi ce box, sir.              So
             all I can say, sir, that s c i e n t i fi ca ll y and me di ca ll y I find
             that inc onc eivable that the person co uld have spoken.

        Q- The oth er t hi ng I notice is that you s h o w in this pa r t i c u l a r
           case ex ten siv e co ng e st io n of the cerebral veins and
           c e r e b a l i u m and cortical c o ni ng and if a pers on sp ea ks his
           neu rons are working, aren't they? - A. That is right.

        Q. That e vi de nc e wou ld indicate there had been ex te nsi ve br ain
           damage and he couldn't real ly communicate.      Would that be
           right?    I don't want to put words in y ou r mouth but I want
           to be sure about tha t? - A. The c on in g indicates the
           seve rit y of the asphyxia and again that would have resu lte d
           in ir reversible brain d am age which aga in would totally
           prohibit any form of communication.

        Q.   I have thought about this comment as well, of course, and
             there are several e xp la n a t i o n s (1) that it didn't occ ur and
             that the o b s e r v e r is m is tak en but a n o t h e r possib il ity that
             has o cc ur red to me and I want to put it to you and please
             di s agr ee if it is not e it he r right or you don't accept it;
             it is possible, is it not, that if a per s on having died is
             moved air or st omach con ten ts might be expe lle d and might
             make a sou nd as it escapes, so to s p e ak ?             Is that a


    H
                                              3 lO O                                   1012
L
                                                             P-^S-- JOH N K J l L O C m



p o s s i b i l i t y ? - A.. It is an i n t e r e s t i n g comment, sir, be cause
it is a p o s s i b i l i t y I c o n s i d e r e d a lso m y s e l f and that is
c e r t a i n l y an e x p l a n a t i o n to the n oi se w h i c h co u ld have been
m ad e w hi ch may h a v e m i m i c k e d the w o r d "mum" but it would not
e x p l a i n the o p e n i n g of the eyes, sir.

Mo.    - A. Eut      it w o u l d e x p l a i n the noise.

     MR. FRASER:             No questions, sir, but thank you very
much, Dr- Slater,           for that s y m p a t h e t i c a nd d et ai le d
explanat i o n .

          THE C OR ONE R:    Any o t h e r q u e s t i o n s for Dr. Slater?
Th a n k - y o u ve ry much, Dr. Slater.           We sp en t a lot o f time
t h in k i n g about t hi s s en te nc e b e c a u s e it was difficult.      I
didn't think it w a s possi bl e from what I k new of the
e v i d e n c e but, on the o th er hand, we d i d n ' t want you to feel
that we w e r e r '+ t e l l i n g you what w ^ « in the statements.           We
felt it was b e t t e r for you to h e a r it a n d ha ve it e xpl ain ed
r a t h e r than for us to keep it u n d e r wraps, so to speak, and
you might p o s s i b l y find out som e o t h e r time.           I hope I have
tak en the right decision.             I don't know.           The only person
who knows that is you.             We did s p e n d a lot of time thin kin g
about it w o n d e r i n g what to do for the best.

               FPL ICE S ER GE AN T JOHN KlLLOCH.^.'Cal led

                                Bv THE C O R O N E R ;

Yes. - A. P o l i c e Sergeant John Killoch\, sir, of the West
M i d l a n d s Police. I have previousTy' 'taken the Oath.

Co u ld you t hen please, if y o u would, t a k e me thr ou gh the
s t a t e m e n t ? - A. At 0700 ho u r s on Saturday, 15th April 1939,
Mr. James S t e p h e n Wi ll i a m s saw h i s son, Ke v i n Daniel
Williams, leave the family home w ith the inten tio n of
t r a v e ll in g to Sheffield.        He w a s to trav el by train with a
nu mb er of f r i e n d s to watch the Semi Fi nal football match at
H i l l s b o r o u g h Stadium. K e v i n h a d a ticket for the match.

          Andrew D u n c a n tr a v e l l e d to S h e f f i e l d wi th Kevin, T h o m a s
James N i c k s o n a n d G r e g o r y Fagen.       T h e y t r a v e l l e d by train,
a rr i v i n g at S h e f f i e l d at 1040 hours.           G r e g o r y Fa ge n left the
o th ers at the station.              The o t h e r th r ee y o u t h s caught a bus
from the s t a t i o n to H i l l s b o r o u g h S t a d i u m wh er e Thom as
N i c k s o n left them.

      A n dre w D u n c a n en ter ed the s t a d i u m wit h Kev in at about
1330 hours via the L ep pin gs Lane t ur ns ti le s.               They i nit ia lly
sto od t og e t h e r in Enc l os ur e 4 but s h o r t l y a f t e r they mo ved
to En cl os u re 3.       At about 1445 ho u rs A n d r e w Du nc an saw o t h e r
fri ends on the terraces, includ ing A n t h o n y Maxwell Gr ie r and
Stuart Thompson.           Stuart, of course, a l s o lost his life at
Hillsborough.


                                          5

                                                                                   1013
                                          I
                                                            F ' - JOHN’ KILLOjCH




          At about 1455 ho urs An dr e w D u n ca n w a s still with Kevin
a nd a l t h o u g h the cr o wd in the e n c l o s u r e was tightly packe d
he was not too c o n c e r n e d at that stage.             As the match
s t a r t e d he was p u s h e d fo rw ar d d o w n the t e r r a c e and did not
see K e v i n again.

          F o l l o w i n g the s e ve re c r u s h i n g in the West Stand
t e r r a c i n g P ol ic e C o ns t a b l e Michael John Cr ai g hi ll went into
E n c l o s u r e 3 and a s s i s t e d a n u m b e r of c as ua l t i e s .   Police
C o n s t a b l e C rai ghi ll a ss i s t e d to ca r ry a youth, he now
b e l i e v e s to be Kevin, from the ga te in t he p e ri me te r fence
of E n c l o s u r e 3 and on to the pitch.                 The O f f i c e r attempted
r e s u s c i t a t i o n but without success.

          De r ek W i l l i a m Bruder, an o f f - d u t y P o l i c e Consta ble fr om
the M e r s e y s i d e P o l i c e who was a s p e c t a t o r at the match,
r e c a l l s s e e i n g a person lying on the p i t c h n e a r the Spion                g
K o p / N o r t h St a nd of the ground.            The p e r s o n     as havi ng         "
convulsi ons .            Mr. B ru der went on to the p i t c h and gave m ou th
to mou th r e s u s c i t a t i o n ai ded by a St. Jo hns A m b u la n ce ma n who
c a r r i e d out c a r d i a c m a s s a g e . • Mr. B r u d e r r e c a l l s that a
friend of the ca su a l t y was with hirn on the pitch.
R e s u s c i t a t i o n was co nt i nu ed and they w e r e join ed by a St.
Johns A m b u l a n c e w o m a n who took o v e r from Mr. Bruder.                 After a
short time the St. Johns A m b u l a n c e m a n s a i d that the casualty
was dead.             Mr. B r ud er then left the scene.

      N e i t h e r of the St. Johns A m b u l a n c e pe rs on ne l or the
friend of the ca su a l t y have been identified.               The person
Mr. B r u d e r tr ie d to r e su sc it at e is now k n o w n to be Kevin.

          Special C o n s t a b l e Debr a M ar ti n went on to the pitch to
assist and she h e lp ed to carry several d e c e a s e d persons and
many injured pe rs on s to the gymnasium.                She a ss is te d to
ca r ry one youth who she now kno ws to be K e v i n            into the     ^
g y m n a s i u m wh e re s he r em ain ed with hi in.                       ™

          At 1606 h o u r s Dr. C u rp en e xa mi ne d K e v i n in the
g y m n a s i u m which had been e s t a b l i s h e d as a t e m po r ar y
mortuary.          Dr. C u r p e n c e r ti fi ed life extinct.

       Special C on s t a b l e Marti n later e s c o r t e d Kevin's body to
the M e di co Legal Cent re and she c o n f i r m e d the id ent ification
by r e f er en ce n u m b e r to DC Weigold.

      On Sunday, 16th April 1989, Mr. J a m e s Ste ph en Wi lli a ms
iden ti fie d the bo d y of his son to P o l i c e Con s ta bl e Scott
G1ave.

         On Sunday, loth April, fo ll ow in g i d e n t i fi c at io n by
De t e c t i v e C on s t a b l e Weigold, Dr. Dav id S l a t e r ca rried out an
aut op sy and s u b m i t t e d a report g i v i n g the ca us e of death.




                                                                                    1014
    $
r                                                                              P. S. JOHN ^KJLLO.qH



                             E v id en ce is included r e g a r d i n g the a n a l y s i s of a blood
                   s a mp le taken f r o m K e v i n whe re the p r e s e n c e of ethanol was
                   detected.           The w i t n e s s e s p r o v i n g c o n t i n u i t y of the blood
                   sa mp le are D e t e c t i v e Co ns t a b l e Green, D e t e c t i v e Sergeant
                   T u r n e r and D e t e c t i v e Sergeant Fletcher.                    Dr. Alexand er
                   Robert Forrest c a r r i e d out the analys is -

                              F o u n d in K e v i n ' s pe rsonal e f f e c t s was a ticket
                   countterfoil w h i c h is consistent w i t h his e                <■n t r y to the
        B          s t a d i..u..m
                                 .. via a- ------.
                                           turnstile.  *-i-   That c o n c l u d e - -
                                                                                     my evidence, sir.
                   Th e re is visual evidence-

            Q.    I think I am right in saying, am I not, that Hr. Brud er (I
                  am lo oking at pa g e 47) identifi es K e v i n from clothing, is
                  that r i gh t? - A. He ha s be e n s h o w n p h o t o g r a p h s which show
                  K e v i n wh ich Hr. L a y t o n will deal wi th later and one of the
                  p h o t o g r a p h s I b e l i e v e does show Mr. B r u d e r a ct u a l l y givin g
%                 first a i d .

            Q. So there         is no doubt about          it that     Mr-   B r u d e r was involved?
            A . No.

            Q. His personal r e c o l l e c t i o n isn't as s t r o n g ? - A. No, but what
               he does r eco lle ct is c o r r o b o r a t e d by the visual evidence. •

        D   Q.     We have a l r e ad y m e n t i o n e d the e v i d e n c e of Special Con s ta bl e
                   M ar tin who sa i d about the lad speaking.                     In no way do I want
                   to run poor Special C o n s t a b l e M a r t i n d o w n b e c a us e she had a
                   very hard day but it is right s h e was o b v i o u s l y from her
                   s t a t e m e n t s ve ry d i s t r e s s e d ? - A. I a ls o w ou ldn 't want to
                 - cri t ic is e WPC M a r t i n in any way but I h av e int erviewed her
                   twice, sir, and s he was p a r t i c u l a r l y up set as indeed many
                   p e op le were but it af fe ct ed her p a r t i c u l a r l y badly the
                   e v en ts of that day.

                       THE CORONER:   Well               I won't ask y o u to draw a
                  conclusion.  Mr. Fraser-

                           MR. FRASER:       T he re is a m a t t e r a r i s i n g out of what the
                  O f f ic er says wh i c h may pe rhaps leave a doubt in Ke vin's
                  parents' minds.         C an I ask you to ask Dr. S l a t e r to deal
                  wi t h the point that was ma d e in p a r a g r a p h s i x of the
                  summary, sir?

                         THE CORONER:           About the c o n v u l s i o n s ?

                         MR.   FRAS ER        Yes. sir.

                         THE CORONER:    Yes, I will do that,                       I will ask
                  Dr.   Slater to co me do wn in a moment.

                         MR. FRASER:          Thank you,      sir.

                         THE CORONER:           Is   the re a n y t h i n g el se you want to ask?


        H
                                                                                                   1015
                                                             DR. DAV ID NEIL SLATER
                                                             D . I . MICHAEL LAYTON



           MR.   FRASER:          No,   thank you,       sir.

           T H E CORONER:          I will     recall Dr.        Slater.

                      DR. DAV ID NEIL S L AT E R - R e c a l l e d

                                    Bv THE C O R O N E R :

Q. Dr. Slater, the point that is be i n g made, of course, you
   have got to rem emb er that Mr. B r ud er was at the Sp i on Kop
   end, the b o t t o m end and not the top, and he says, "I saw
   this man lying on the floor h a v i n g co nvulsions".               C a n you
   he lp us about that?             What d oe s that add or not to your
   pa thological o pi ni on ? - A. It is o b v i o u s l y very distressing.
   U n f o r t u n a t e l y when people have not got e n o u g h ox yge n in the
   brain, as I said in my ear li er evidence, which is really
   what the wor d "asphyxia" means, indiv idu al s can in fact have
   fits.         This is one of the m e c h a n i s m s that leads tow ards
   de at h and ma k e s the a sp hy xi a worse.         T h i s does, however,
   only oc cur wh en the individual is to t al ly unconscious-                   It
   does not me a n there will ’be any pain or discomfort.                    The
   per so n will not know they are fitting a nd actu all y I have to
   accept that some individuals do have c on vu ls io n s and it is
   one of the m e c h a ni st ^ leading to death in traumatic
   asphyxia, sir.

Q. Do es it make you feel the ot he r ev i de nc e about the lad
   b r ea th in g and s pe ak in g either more or less likely be cause
   o b vi ou sl y this would be much c lo se r in time to Special
   Co n s t a b l e Ma rti n' s evid enc e t han what had ha ppened on the
   te rra ce ? - A. Yes.         For s o m e b o d y to have convulsions, this
   would imply that the amount of as ph yxi a is such that there
   must be vi r t u a l l y irreversible brain d am ag e present and
   again this wo uld fully support the concept that the ev id en ce
   of o p e n i ng eyes and s pe ak in g is not r e a l l y conceivable, sir.

          THE CORONER:             Does that help,          Mr.    Fraser.

                         Cr o s s - E x a m i n e d bv MR- F R A S E R ;
                                                                                          »
          MR. FRASER:    I am sure it does, Dr. Slater.    It is
     difficu lt to find the phrase to sum the situation up.       Ke v i n
     at that stage w as be yo n d help. He was as good as de a d ? - A.
     Yes, that is right, absolutely.

Q. And would feel no th in g and kno w nothi ng ? - A. Absolutely.
   He would know nothing.

             D ET E C T I V E   INSPECTOR MIC HA EL LA YT O N - Called

                                    Bv THE C O R O N E R :

Q.   Inspector Layton. - A. Sir, Michael Layton,                           Detective
     Inspector in the West Mi dl an ds Police.

                                               8


                                                                                       101 6
                                                  D •I• MICHAEL LAYTON



         Sir, an ex a m i n a t i o n has been made of video filn and
p h o to gr ap hi c ev id en ce and K e v i n has been identified in
Enclosure Mo. 3, also, sir, be in g c a r ri ed acro ss the pitch
.*nd at. ■'the Spi on Kop tand of the ground.

        On a p h o t o g r a p h r e f e re nc ed DAC3/1 K e v i n is shown
a p pa ren tl y un c o n s c i o u s near the p e r i m e t e r fencing in
Enclosure No- 3.             On a BEC vid eo tape, r e f e re nc ed MAP 7,
timed at 1523:33:22 this sh ow s him being re mov ed from the
te rraces via Gate No. 3.

        PC Craighill has signed a pl an of the pitch sh ow i ng
where he first came into contact with Ke vi n and where in
fact he laid him on the grou nd and that plan, sir, is
re f er en ce d MJC2.  The Of fi ce r has ide nti fi ed him s el f on
video, aga in a BBC vide o tape, MAP 7, t i m e d at 1523:43:24
carry in g a you th who he knows to be Ke vin - that is a typing
error there.       It says Keith in the s u m m a r y but it shou ld be
Kevin - from Gate 3 and on to the pitch.             The O f f i ce r did
not know the identity of the youth and at first in fact
believed it to be an o th er of the d ec ea se d but that has been
clarified.

     P ho to gra ph r ef er enc ed PR5/3 2 and PR5 / 33 which are both
timed at 1532 show Ke vi n being car ried a c r o s s the pitch on a
temporary s t r e t c h e r by a n u m b e r of s p e c t a t o r s and two Police
Officers.     PC Hay es has c o nf ir m ed his ide nt i fi ca t io n on
those photographs.          The O f f i ce r as sis te d to carry two people
on temporary stretchers, both of who m were deceased, but he
couldn't recall any ot he r d e t a i l s and he didn't know the
identity of the p e r so ns he carried.             He m e r e l y t as it were,
assisted in carrying.          We have me nt i o n e d that before.          It is
not au uwuaual fe ature that pe op le 's r e c o l l e c t i o n s weren't
exact.

       A numbe r of photographs, including a pho tog ra ph
referenced TT 1/3 0 sh ow Kevin be i ng given mo uth to mouth
re su sci tat io n on the pitch by PC B ru de r who c onf irm ed his
identification.       Sir, you me nt i o n e d this Of f ic er earlier.
In fact, it is true to say Mr. and Mrs- W il li am s have
prev io usl y seen visual evidence.           They ha ve in fact seen
som e of that visual evidence aga in today and I think I am
right in s a yi ng t he y have c on f i r m e d that Kevin is shown on
that phot ogr ap h so, as it were, P C B r u d e r is confi rme d as
havin g giv en mo ut h to mouth re su s c i t a t i o n to Kevin.

The reason I a s k e d is because it r e fe rs to a friend and
there doesn't s e e m to be any other ev id enc e of that? -
No, that is right;      It is true to say the initial
identification w a s from c lo thi ng but it has subsequently
been confirmed.

      Six , can I r ef e r you to a plan which has been given the
re fere nee I1WJL40 wh ic h is a plan of the terraces?
                                                                                D.I. MICHAEL LAYTON




                             Yes.   C20V        And MWJL41      wh ich    is a plan of the pitch.

                        Q.   MJC2 are they the same m ar k i n g s ? - A. I w o u l d say, sir, that
                             in fact altho ug h there are two ma rk in gs the reference Co MAP
                             7 on the p r e v i o u s p la n a ct ua ll y w o u l d deal with PC Craighill
                             on that occasion.

                        Q. So MWJL41 we make C 2 0 2 . Let us include that one as well
                    B      MJC2 will be C 2 0 3 . - A. Which is PC C r a i g h i l l ' s plan.
                           (moved to p l a n ) Sir, if we can deal with the plan MWJL40,
                           whi ch is the plan of the terraces, the first photograph
                           DAC3/1 r e f i n e d to in this su mma ry indicates the position
                           here; (indicat i n g ) and this indicates E n c lo su r e No. 3 and it
                           is at this point here (i n d i c a t i n g ) that K e v i n is sh ow n quite
                           cl ose to the pe r i m e t e r fence.

                                    The s ec on d identification, MAP 7, the BBC tape, refers
                             to the id ent if ica ti on by PC Craighill and the point a.t which
                             we see Ke vi n is a p p r o x i m a t e l y here (indicat- i n g ) and it. is M
                             pr i or to his removal via Gate 3.                                            ™

                                       Then, sir, in respect of PC C r a i g h i l l ' s plan, MJC2, it
                             is a te rrace pl an he refers to but he a c t u a l l y indicates a.
                             posit ion here (inoicat i n g ) in front of Ga te 3 and a further
                    D        p o s i t i o n which is sh ow n just off the plan but it is here-
                             It is just on to the pitch.

                        Q.   It is d i a g r a m m a t i c ? - A. Yes.

                        Q. C e r t a i n l y the. s e co nd location can't be ta k en as givin g us
                           any se ns e of d i st an ce ? - A. No, but fac t ua ll y the next plan
                           will do that.            I think, sir, just to correct myself I should
                           have been poin tin g there.

                        Q. Yes. - A. Sir, in respect of M W J L 4 1 , the video refer enc e on
                           BBC tape, MAP 7, indicates a po sition he re (i n d i c a t i n g )
                           which acc or ds with PC Cr ai gh i ll 's recollection.     Th ere is ^
                           also pho to g ra ph ic id ent ification on PR5/32 which is where
                           K e v i n is being ca r ri ed a c ro ss the pitch and the location
                           re f err ed to is there (i n d i c a t i n g ).

                        Q. R em in d me, do we know the time for that o ne ? - A. Yes, I
                           think it is 1532, sir.            Yes, 1532.   A fur th er photograph,
                           sir, TT1/30, which I think refers to PC Bruder, the location
                           of that is a pp ro x i m a t e l y this posi tio n here (i n d i c a t i n g )
                           which is tow ards the S pi on Kop end of the pitch.

                                    THE CORONER:'        Mr.   Fraser.

                                    MR.   FRASER:      No questions.




                    H
                                                                    0 6                              1018
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        Cross-Examined -byTtft-. LIMB:

Q. Was che ph ot og r ap h wich the referen ce DAC3'/1 a timed
   p
   phho
      oco
        to gr
           er ap h? - A- No,
                         No 'sir.

                   C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by MR.   CATCHPOLE:

Q. Andrew Duncan, d id he show any visual ev id e n c e or di d he
   give a plan s h o w i n g where he lasc saw Kevin, when chey
   p ar ted company"? - A. I don't bel ieve so.    Can you just give
   me a mo me nt?   The an sw er is we don't have a p la n from
   Mr- Duncan.

           THE CORONER;        If I can help you a little bit on that
   one, what A n d re w D un ca n says is, "We st o od up and were
   st a nd in g about two to two and a qua rt er yards from the
   p e ri me te r fence around the pitch.       We were wai ti ng for the
  game to start.         At about 1445 or so a gr ou p of friends were
  st a ndi ng behind me, Stuart Thom pso n and Tony Grier.            I was
  s t an d i n g with Ke vi n Williams".    Then he de sc ri be s the people
  coming out and he says, "When the game kick ed off I was
  pushed forward down the terrace about two yards.                After this
  push I lost K e v i n and did not see him again".           His final
  remark is that he saw Kevi n for the last time on the terrace
  just before the crush started.            "The last time I saw Kevin
  was on the t e r r ac e just be fo re the cru sh started.        Af te r
  this I did not se e him again".           That is his statement, just
  b o   that we know what it is which one we are tal ki ng about,
  dated 17.5.89.         A ny thi ng else, Mr. Fraser, you want to ask?

        MR.   FRASER:        No, sir.

           THE CORONER:           Mr. and Mrs. Williams, that is the
  evid en ce we are g oi ng to take-              As I sai d to you in the
  middle of the h e a r i n g we spent qui te a lot of time w o nd er in g
  what we should do for the best.                   O b vi ou sl y we knew Kevin
  lost his life a n d we were wo rr ied about ups e tt in g you in
  Court but I th in k on bal an ce we have do ne the right thing
  because you h av e h ea rd wi thi n the limits of what we are
  doing a n d s u m m a r i s i n g the ev ide nc e what hap pen ed and what
  went on.       Fo rtu na tel y, Dr. Sl at e r has been able to be here
  and he has be en able to give you his op in io n as to what
  h a pp en ed in his v iew and what in his view is po ss ib le and I
  think I am sure that will help you - not to com e to terms
  with the loss o f yo ur son but it is very difficult to come
  to te rm s with that loss at all but just to a p p r e c i a t e in the
  stres s s i t u a t i o n in which people found th em se lv es
  r e c o 11ec tio ns .tend so m e t i m e s to be m is tak en and indeed there
  are lots of m i s t a k e n r ec ol l e c t i o n s not on ly in relat ion to
  Kevin but also in r el ati on to many of the ot he r peop le of
  which we have heard.              That is not at all un c om mo n and o c c u r s
  in normal fatal incidents as well.                     It is ex cee di ngl y
  difficult when you are sudd en ly con fro nt ed with a s i t ua ti on
  co then recount ex actly what happened.
                     A            I- re ali se K ev in was a young boy, just fifteen, which is
                         very very young of course and I wou ld like you 'to know how
                         very so r r y wt are that he s h ou ld have lost his life at such
                         an ea rl y age In t h i s tragedy.      The Jury have had to deal
                         with m a n y cases but today, at this moment, we are just
                         d e a li ng with yo ur s and so far as we.are able we wo uld like
                         you to k no w we are co ns cio us of that.      Th an k you for being
                         here.
                     B
                              L a d i e s and gentlemen, we rise for a moment   or two and
                         then we pro ce ed to deal with our next Inquest.

                           (The   Inquest- into the death of Kevin Daniel Will iam s
                                    was a dj o u r n e d until a date to be f i x e d )


                     C




                     D




                     E



  Q                                                                                          #
                     F




                     G




                     H


J. L. Harpharo Ltd
  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

           ON THE 15TH APRIL. 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

            KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS
                 (F u r t h e r )




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM. BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                        At

           The Medico-Legal Centre.
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                        On

                  4th May 1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham. Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55. Queen Street. ShefLLL&Ld SI 2DX
                                                  1021
                               »0
      *?
C "




                                        INDEX

                                                    Pa%e


    OPENR       BY THE CORONER                        1.

    SERGEA NT JOHN KILLOCH Recalled

            B / THE CORONER                           2.
    INSPECTOR 'MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS Called

        C b y THE CORONER                             5.
    DR. DA tfID SLATER Recalled

            By THE CORONER
             ross-Examined by MR. LIMB
                                                    10 .
                                                    13.

    DR. g      -1EST JOHN WALLACE' GIJMPERT Sworn

            B y THE CORONER                         15.
            Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB              18.
            Further by THE CORONER                  19.



           E



o


        G




        H

                                          (Sio)            1022
A
    Friday,   4 t h May,   1990


                             FURTHER EVIDENCE IN

                      THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
B                           KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS

           THE CORONER:    Now you may remember on Wednesday I
      kept you late.    I said I had to go out and do a little
      hit of thinking, and that is what we are going to deal
      with this afternoon.

            What we were thinking about was that one of the
      inquests which we had done related to Kevin Daniel
      Williams.    I will remind you of this inquest.   This
      was the case of another young man, in fact he was only
      15.    The problem in that case was that the evidence
      was difficult to unravel as to when he died and what
      had happened when he was being taken across the pitch
D     and had he said something in the temporary mortuary and
      so on.

           After the inquest was concluded my attention was
      drawn by some of my legal colleagues, and very
      rightlybecause they were realised it was a sensitive
      problem and did not want to upset the family, so they
      brought it to my attention privately first.    The point
E     which they were bringing to my attention was that one
      of the witnesses appeared to say that when he came to
      this young man at the Spion Kop end, more or less,, of
      the ground, he had convulsions and he also said he
      could feel a pulse.    We knew from the visual evidence
      - we are going to repeat all the relevant evidence in a
      moment - we knew that he was being taken across the
      pitch and we had a timing at 1532.   Assuming that was
      right, this convulsion or whatever it was, was
      happening after that point of time.   The question was:
      what on earth was going on?

           I agreed that this was a valid point. I think    we
      were so concerned about the event which happened after
      that, namely, what happened in the gymnasium, did he
      speak or did he not speak - this was the lad with the
      fractured voice box - that we may not have put quite
      enough concentration and thought into the earlier
      evidence, but we are going to do it now. We are going
      to sort It out so that we know, as far as we are able,
      so that we understand, if we can, what happened.

              I think if Sergeant Killoch could come back.
H
                                  • ‘ • ( S / j )                1 0 2 3
    A                SF.RCKANT JOHN KILLOCH. R e c a l l e d

                              By   TiTE   CORONER;

               THE WITNESS:   Sergeant John          Killocb   from the
          West Midlands Police.

        ). Sergeant Killoch, if y°u read ~ we are not 8oin8 to
    B      read the whole summary again because we don t need to -
           but I think paragraph 5 which is where somebody starts
           describing helping him from the terraces. - A.
           Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
           terracing Police Constable Michael John Craighill went
           into enclosure 3 and assisted a number of casualties.
           Police Constable Craighill assisted to carry a young
           man he now believes to be Kevin Daniel Uilliams from
           the gate in the perimeter fencing of enclosure 3 and on
           to the pitch.

          The officer attempted resuscitation but without
          success.

          Derek William Bruder is a Police Constable with          the
    D     Merseyside Police who was off-duty at the match          that
          day.   He was a spectator in the North Stand.            He
          recalls seeing a person lying on the pi tch meiax        thje
          Soion Kop and North Standing and describes that          person
          as having convulsions-.

          Mr. Bruder went on to the pitch and gave mouth to mouth
          resuscitation, aided by a St. John's Ambulanceman who
    E     carried out cardiac massage.      Mr. Bruder recalls that
          a friend of the rasualty was with him on the pitch.
          Resuscitation was concxiiuecf and cney were joined by a
          St. John's Ambulancewoman who took over from Mr. Bruder
          and after a short time by a St. John's Ambulanceman.
u         The St. John's Ambulanceman said the casualty was dead
          and Hr. Bruder then left the scene.
    F
          Neither of the St. John’s Ambulance personnel or the
          friend of the casualty have been identified.

          The person Mr. Bruder tried to resuscitate is known to
          be Kevin Daniel Williams and there is visual evidence
          to show that, sir.
    G     Then the next paragraph deals with the lady police
          officer.   Just read that next paragraph as well. - A.
          Special Constable Debra Jane Martin went on to the
          pitch to assist and helped to carry several deceased
          and many injured to the gymnasium.   She assisted to
          carry one young boy, now known to be Kevin, into the
          gymnasium and she remained with him.
    H                              - 2 -
                                                                            10 2 4
Now what she said we are not going to deal with because
that was satisfactorily explained. What we are
interested in is that bit which has been read.    If we
turn to page 41, I think I am right in saying that what
Mr. Cruder says - he says he saw a person about a
quarter of the pitch length away from the Spion Kop? -
a . x'es.

He was lying on the ground or thereabouts? - A. That is
correct, sir.

He says he can remember this because he recollects an
ambulance going past which locates it in his mind and
in fact he tried to flag it down? - A. Yes.

Then he says:
     "I saw this man lying on the floor having
     convulsions."

- A. That is his exact wording.

Then if we turn over the page and pick out the bits
that are relevant.   He says he went down and he went
up to this man:

     "...and then went to the man having convulsions."

- A. Yes, sir.

Then he says:

     "I was joined by a St. John's Ambulanceman."

- A. Yes.

     "That chap said, 'You do mouth to mouth and I will
     do heart massage'"

- A. That is correct.

He goes on to say:

     "I then took his pulse in his neck.   I could feel
     a slight pulse."

- A. Yes, sir.

He then tried to resuscitate him, mouth to mouth, and
undressed him so he could do it more conveniently
probably. - A. Yes.

Then he says:
                               "We continued to work on the man hut after about
                               five minutes he went grey and his face was
                               withdrawn."

                          - A. That is right, sir.


                    B
                        J. lie also noticed there was something unusual about his
                           rib cage:

                               "As I did heart massage his ribs were unnaturally
                               prominent."

                          - A. Yes.

                          •Then eventually another St. John's Ambulance person
                          came and he left the man? - A. That is right.

                          This whole thing took quite a few minutes? - A. Yes,
                          obviously the officer had no conception of time.
                    D
                          Can you remind me about the v isual evidence?   It is
                          just to make sure I have got it right that there is
                          visual evidence, both of Mr. Bruder... - A. One
                          photographic print was mentio ned, sir, and was given
                          the reference number TT.1/30.    That is a photograph
                          which shows Kevin lying on th e pitch.   The person has
                          been-identified by Kevin's pa rents.   Shown about to
                          give mouth to mouth resuscita tion of Kevin is a man who
                          has been identified as Police Constable Bruder.    PC
                          Bruder has identified himself on that photograph.

                          Then there is another timed print, is it PR.5/32 or
                          PR.5/33, showing Kevin being carried across, paragraph
 w                        18? - A. There are two photographs, sir: PR.5/A/32,
                          which is timed at 1532 and PR.5/A/33.   That is also
                          timed at 1532.

                               THE CORONER:   Inspector Layton, just show us
                          where those photographs are.

                               INSPECTOR LAYTON:   Yes, sir.   They are referred
                          to in the plan MUJL.42.   PR.5/32 is approximately at
                          this position here on the pitch.   That is the timed
                          photograph, sir.   TT.130 is not timed, but I believe
                          it is somewhere in this area here.   From recollection
                          I think I did that actually from what Mr. Bruder says
                          in his statement, about the positioning on the pitch.



                    H                           - 4 -
                                                                                     1 02 6
J. L, Harpham Ltd
     THE CORONER:   Nov*/ Inspector 'Sawers went to see
Mr. Bruder because we wanted to be sure we had the
facts.

       INSPECTOR MATTHEW ROBERT SAUERS Called

                   By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:   Matthew Robert Sawers, Inspector,
West Midlands Police.

I believe you went to see him yest^rda*.9 - A. Yes, sir.

In fact it was Mr. Bruder's day off but he very
willingly gave his time? - A. He did.

Now can you summarise for me what he says? - A. Yes,
sir.   lie starts off by referring and identifying his
two previous    statements to us, sir, the first of which
was approximately a fortnight afJLer the disaster
itself, and' a a^v-onci statement in August of last year
was a very short statement in which he merely
identifies himself on the photographs that you have
heard reference to, sir.

He goes on to say that I had shown him a number of
documents and plans, from which he was able to refresh
his memory.     He refers to the fact he had made some
notes on the   day after thedisaster but that they did
not refer specifically to his dealings with this
casualty.

He refers, sir, to joining Merseyside Constabulary in
1987 and receiving basic first-aid instruction during
his initial training.    That was both in theory and
practical application.    He refers, sir, following the
incident and his dealings with this youth, to feeling
he was inadequately trained in his own- confidence,
although it is also true to say that he is absolutely
satisfied that the first aid he rendered on the day was
the very best he could do and he felt he could do no
more.    He goes on to say as a result of feeling
depressed about the incident he applied of his own
volition for further first-aid training within
Merseyside Police.    Indeed, he attended a full week,
Monday to Friday course, leading to a further
qualification and much greater confidence in his own
ability.    However, with the benefit of that training,
sir, he is able to reflect on his actions of the day
and he is still absolutely satisfied that the first aid
he rendered in terms of mouth to mouth and heart
massage were correct and he could have done no more for
He goes on then, sir, to deal with specific matters
that I referred him to in his original statement.
Specifically, sir, from the transcript and police file
he deals with page 41 of the police file statements,
which is naee 6 of his original statement in April last
year.   He reters and confirms seeing Kevin a quarter
of the length of the pitch.from the Spion Kop end of
the ground.   He refers to his being on the floor and
clarifies that as on the grass surface of the pitch.

He has given very careful consideration, sir, to the
expression that he used of having convulsions and in
the light of his further training and what he now knows
and thinks about the incident was that "convulsions"
was not the word that was applicable to these
circumstances.   He refers specifically to having seen
epileptic fits and says that what he originally
described as a convulsion was not anything like an
epileptic fit.   He goes on to say later, sir, that if
there was a part of the body that he saw move it was
his head and that the word that he best thinks
describes this movement is that of a twitch.

He refers to comments he made originally about
approaching the body, the body that was convulsing.
Having specifically considered it again, sir, he does
say that the body was not convulsing as he approached
it.   He referred originally, sir, to feeling for a
carotid pulse and originally he thought he had detected
a slight pulse.   On reflection, sir, he feels he would
be much more skilful if he were required to perform
this action again and he cannot discount the
possibility that he did not feel immediately in the
right place for the carotid artery.   He certainly felt
in the neck region where he  thought he would find the
artery but he cannot say he would have gone to it
directly.

I put to him, sir, the specific point I believe Dr.
Slater made in his evidence  about this inquest a couple
of days ago and PC Bruder specifically discounts having
felt for the carotid artery with his thumb.    He refers
to the first two fingers of his left hand.

He says in dealing with the carotid pulse that he may
have touched other areas around the neck region,
including the Adam's apple and that whatever hd felt
there he cannot be categoric it was a pulse.   He feels
he may well be mistaken in that matter, sir.

Later in his statement of April last year, sir, he
referred to the face of Kevin Williams going grey and
being withdrawn.   He wanted you to know, sir, that he
cannot specifically say he saw the face change from a
normal pallor, or colour, to grey.   He mentioned it in
his statement, sir, in the sequence that it occurred to
him that he was now noticing that he was grey.   He may
have been grey as he approached him before he mentioned
it, or it may have occurred as he noticed it.

In his original statement h.e referred to vomiting and
thinking that Kevin had been sick.    He has given this
matter some further thought and he is absolutely
satisfied that Kevin was not sick.    He did not see
Kevin vomiting and he did not see vomit on the ground
or on his clothing.

Does he still confirm that there was a distinctive
smell? - A. Yes, he does, sir.

To finish with the vomiting aspect of his original
statement, he does have a clear impression in his mind,
sir, of a fluid of some sort in the mouth, but he
cannot discount that that could be spittle or phlegm of
some sort.

He referred in his original statement to the original
resuscitation attempts whereby he gave mouth to mouth
resuscitation and the St. John's Ambulanceman commenced
heart compressions.    His original thought, sir, was
that that was for approximately seven minutes and, give
or take, he is happy with that time and thinks it is
reasonably accurate.     He then later referred to
swopping over with the St. John's Ambulanceman and PC
Derek Bruder was then involved in external heart
compressions and this was when he noticed the unusual
rib cajje and he had earlier referred, sir, to
unbuttoning his shirt, I believe.     He referred to
unzipping his trousers and noticing some striped boxer
shorts that you will see in the photographs that have
been referred to, TT.1/31 and 32 respectively.

I have put to him the apparent difficulties in the time
sequence of the action that he describes near the Spion
Kop end of the ground and his specific reference to am
ambulance and asking the St. Jphn's Ambulance colleague
whp was assisting nim and whu has nuc been identified,
t.o stop cne arr’oulanvc because he was considering
utilising it, sir.

I have drawn his attention to the problems in relation
to the known timing of ambulances arriving on the
pitch, both of St. John's and of the South Yorkshire
Metropolitan Ambulance Service and I have drawn his
attention to the qpp^rent discrepancy in relation to
the time shown on photographs P R . 5/A.32 and 3 , sir.



                                                          1029
     A   ). The point is that the ambulances were known to arrive
            at about 1515 and 1517 or thereabouts? - A. Yes, sir.

         ). And the photograph, PR.5/A/32 and so on, is timed at
            1532? - A. That is correct, sir.

•v       ). We are saying he was dealing with this young boy after
            that? - A. That is correct.
     B
         ). In fact I put the wrong times to you.   It is 1515 on
            the pitch for the St. John's Ambulance and 1520 for the
            first South Yorkshire... - A. That is correct, sir,
            irrespective of which...

         ).   It is still earlier... - A. It is still earlier than
              1532, sir, and that point has been put specifically to
              Mr. Bruder and try as he may he is simply ur, ible to
              reconcile those differences.   I have put to him, sir,
              was it for instance a question of one of those
              ambulances actually exiting the stadium across the
              pitch rather than entering the stadium.   He has
              considered that point and try as he may his
              recollection is still of it being an ambulance that
     D        entered the stadium.

              He refers then to being joined by the woman St. John's
              Ambulance Officer,.who he refers to pushing him out of
              the way to become involved as a trained first aider and
              recollects this was approximately six minutes after he
              changed places with the male ambulance officer.   for
              that reason, with the original seven minutes mouth to
     E        mouth resuscitation, PC Bruder feels that that total of
              thirteen minutes he could amend to a period of time of
              between ten and fifteen minutes of sustained attempts
              to resuscitate Kevin.

              It was at this point, sir, that after approximately two
              minutes of the involvement of the woman St. John's
              Ambulance Officer, that the male St. John's Ambulance
     F        Officer stood up and said, "He's gone."    He referred
              to the expression being completely grey and would seek
              to reaffirm that choice of words as his description of
              Kevin at that particular moment in time.   He says,
              sir, and I quote:

                   "There is absolutely no doubt in my mind, both now
                   and with the benefit of further training, that
     G             then at the moment the youth I had tried to save
                   was dead, certainly dead, and beyond any further
                   help.   I and St. John's Ambulance personnel would
                   not have stopped if there had been any glimmer of
                   hope at all.   There was none."


     H
                                                                       1030
He refers to the personal description of Kevin again,
sir, and refers to the fact he is r.bsolutely satisfied
it was Kevin Williams that he was attempting to
resuscitate.

     THE CORONER:    I just want to make it crystal
clear that there is no suggestion in any of this of any
criticism of PC Bruder.    I think he did absolutely
valiantly and did his best.    Not only did he do his
best on the day, he is doing his best today as well,
through Inspector Sawers, to try and help us understand
what he remembers and I want that clearly understood by
everybody.    I don't want you to think we are knocking
him. We are not. All I am trying to do is finding out
what happened.

      Mr. Fraser, any questions of this officer on this
part?    I had better tell you who else I am going to be
calling.    Dr. Slater and Dr. Gumpert, whom I will tell
you about when he comes.    He is a neuro physiologist,
a clinician, and an expert on this sort of thing.

     MR. FRASER:   No, sir, I have no specific
questions, save to say that I understand, Officer, you
have spoken to Mr. and Mrs. Williams, having spoken to
the officer?   I rise because I appear for Mr. and Mrs.
Williams and obviously have their interests at heart.

     THE WITNESS:   I did go and. visit Mr. and Mrs.
Williams, sir, yesterday evening, having seen PC Bruder
and I have outlined briefly to them the contents of PC
Bruder’s further thoughts and recollections for Kevin
on the day.

     MR. FRASER:   Sir, I understand they are
appreciative, both of the efforts the officer has made
and of his visit and they have no questions.    They
have decided not to come today, sir, for reasons which
I am sure you will understand but they ar^e fully aware
of exactly what is going on on their behalf.

     THE CORONER:      Thank you.    Have you got any
questions?

     MR. LIMB:      No, thank you.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:      No, thank you, sir.
     THE CORONER:   When we have heard the rest of the
evidence I am quite prepared to recall any of these
officers, or, indeed, any of these witnesses because I
want us to understand it.
              DR. D A V I D S L A T E R R e c a l l e d
                      By THE CORONER:
Dr. Slater, you have, of course, already dealt with
this case a couple of days ago.    If I remember rightly
you said, among other things, that (a) this lad had a
broken voice box.   It was broken in four places.
Also (b) he was, of all the cases you dealt with,
perhaps the most asphyxiated, if one can judge tnat by
cyanosis and so on.   Would that be a correct
recollection? - A. That is absolutely correct, sir. Of
all the cases I dealt with Kevin showed really the
worst injuries to the neck in that there were four
fractures to the voice box.    In addition there were
three very large scratches; to the neck.   In addition
tu cne normal signs ot asphyxia, the blueness and the
hemorrhages which were yery marked, there is no doubt
this was a very, very severe case of asphyxia and
probably the worst one I dealt with, sir.

l/e established to everybody’s satisfaction what had
happened in the gymnasium and the account, we dealt
with that as to whether this lad could have spoken and
so on, so we don't need to be concerned about that.
What we are interested in this afternoon is the
evidence relating to Mr. Bruder.    I will also remind
you that in general that what has been said is that a
person becomes unconscious in an asphyxial situation
within anything from zero to twenty to thirty seconds.
There is a slight variation amongst pathologists, but
quickly.    Then that death usual supervenes within four
to six minutes or thereabouts.    The problem is, as you
have already heard, that whichever way you look at it,
Hr. Bruder was dealing with this young man quite a few
minutes after he had been taken out from the Leppings
Lane terraces.

In the light of the evidence can you help us as to what
you think was going on on? - A. Yes, sir.   I will deal
with this in three general areas and then Dr. Gumpert
certainly will come and enlarge on these and help us
out further.
Firstly, and I apologise if this is an emotive area, I
think I need just to spend thirty seconds in explaining
what death is.- - Death is a sequence of events.  It is
not one set event and the sequence I will put to you is
an individual becoming unconscious; whilst they are
unconscious they quickly lose all sensation of pain and
discomfort; then there is a period of various tissues
in the body which are susceptible to a lack of oxygen,
dying.   The most important one of these is, of course,
the brain, and after about three to six minutes the

                                                          1 03 2
brain undergoes irreversible brain damage.    There is
then a point which we call brain death.    This is a
difficult concept, but by this I am implying that the
brain is irreversibly damaged.   The brain is no longer
able to control respiration and in fact that person,
for effective purposes, is dead, irreversibly.    That
is a medico legal definition, at least one medico legal
definition, of death.

The problem now comes that I have not mentioned other
tissues in the body.   For example, the heart, a very
emotive organ.   When somebody is brain dead it is
quite possible that the heart is still alive and still
beating and this can go on for a few minutes or longer,
perhaps even half an hour.

Then we come to the point where the brain is dead, not
controlling respiration, and finally the heart stops
and that is really the point of whole body death and
that is really what the lay person understands by
death. A doctor going up, putting the stethoscope on
the chest, no heart beat, no respiration, then that
person is unequivocally dead.

I hasten to add there that although the person is truly
medico legally dead, in fact even then there are
tissues in the body that are still alive.   The skin is
still living.   The kidneys are still living.    This is
how we can then transplant them.   In fact it is an
emotive area and although that person is dead, there
are still tissues living.   It then takes another six
to twelve hours for all the tissues in the body to die.

Really, when we use the word "death" we have to be
very, very careful we are not talking about one set
event at one point in time.   We are talking about a
whole continuum of events that go on.

I mentioned that some tissues do not die as rapidly as
the brain and this.includes both nerves and muscle.
In fact one can have a situation of somebody being
brain dead but the muscles and the nerves in what we
call the peripheral nervous system - not the brain -
are still living and in fact these can occasionally
function in some way.

Sir, that is a -general comment on death.

In relation to the Hillsborough incident, the sequence
that myself has given, and although I have not heard
the other pathologists I understand they have given a
very similar sequence of events, has been a rapid loss
of consciousness, perhaps five to ten seconds.   I
understand I have been the nearest by quoting a paper


                                                           1033
where unconsciousness can be irfstantaneous.   That is
the rapid loss of consciousness.

As soon as that person becomes unconscious I have said
several times that pain modalities, discomfort, again
disappear very, very quickly, perhaps within a second
or five seconds.

In very general terms, certainly myself - and I have
tried to keep it general - I then said that death - and
I have used the word very broadly, as you will
appreciate in my previous evidence - that death occurs
five, ten perhaps fifteen minutes after.   I purposely
kept that very open because human beings are very
variable.   You cannot say that somebody is going to
die in fifteen minutes, and not in fifteen minutes.

I am trying to put the concept that although I have
talked about averages, very occasionally you are going
to have additional extremes.   1 think kevin was one of
these extremes that did not fall into this fivfe, ten or
fifteen minute sequence of somatic death, whole bodv
death, but in fact this was extended.

Having said that, Kevin had extremely severe asphyxia.
I have no doubt in my own mind that he had suffered
irrecoverable brain damage and death within the three
to six minutes that I said.   Therefore, I am quite
confident at that time tnat Kevin was dead and there is
nothing that anybody on this earth could have done for
him after that time, including PC Bruder and any
ambulance people who arrived.

Again, you will appreciate from what I have said to you
that although Kevin was brain dead I have not said that
other tissues in the body tnay not have been living -
the heart, muscles, nerves.    In fact I know Dr.-
Gnmuert will explain in a minute that In Fact there are
mechanisms whereby wTicn »omeoody is brain dead in fact
the muscles in the body can twitch.    This will come as
a surprise, and I apologise if it is eaotive, this can
even happen to somebody who hasn't got a head.     That
person is clearly dead, they haven*t got a head, but
those persons can actually have twitches in their
muscles.   This is what happened to Kevin.    He died
early - brain death - but unfortunately in this
particular instance we are talking about an extreme
case where perhaps the heart beating went on for a bit
longer and we noticed these twitches, at least PC.
Bruder noticed these twitches in the body.

I feel this is what happened in the case of Kevin.



                      - 12 -
From the description - in fact it is only fair to say
you also had a word _with PC Bruder because you were
concerned, you wante'd to be quite sure that you
understood his evidence personally, so to speak? - A.
Yes, sir.
In the light of what you heard and what we have heard
now, do you feel that this lad died, if you like, in
the totality sense, I don't meant that his skin was
dead, but in lay terms at the point in time when Mr.
Bruder was with him? - A. Yes, sir, 1 am quite
confident of that.    When one speaks to lay people who
have experienced people dying, a word which is
recurrent in these descriptions of death is the way
that individuals turn grey.    In fact I was very
impressed by the content in PC Bruder's statement of
the word "grey", recurring several times.    To me as a
doctor that implied that that was the point of whole
body death.    In fact I feel that it was probably
around that time that Kevin's whole body died.     His
brain had died twenty/twenty five minutes before that
at the time of* the crusning, but his whoie body died at
the time PC Bruder was with him.

We have mentioned these twitches and I think sometimes
they are referred to as spinal reflexes? - A. that is
correct, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Now, Mr. Fraser, is that reasonably
clear?

     MR. FRASER:   Even to me, sir, thank you, and I am
sure it will be clear to the family.

    THE CORONER:    Any questions?

            Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB:

Doctor, it is an emotive subject.   I remember in your
evidence about Kevin you described death in terms of a
process rather than as a moment? - A. Yes.
I would like to ask you a few questions about the
process following unconsciousness.   As 1 understand
it, in the cases of these victims, unconsciousness has
come ten to twenty seconds after compression of the
chest? - A. Yes*- .

That is as a result of oxygen to blood mix leading to
unconsciousness? - A. Yes.   There are various...    Ue
are now not talking about the actual cause of death,
but mechanisms.   One very profound view that has been
put forward of crush asphyxia, traumatic asphyxia, it
is not simply only the reduction of oxygen going to the
brain, but the fact that in fact there cannot be
circulation through the brain.   The pressure from the
chest is reflected up into the brain so in fact
effectively the cerebral circulation stops, so it comes
up against a dead end and it cannot circulate round.
But, yes, your concept then is right.

Following unconsciousness, that is to say, twentv
secondsj, say, after the start of the crush becoming^
fat.*!, is the body capable of facial expressions or
uoes it have a neutral expression? - A. First of all
the word "unconscious" itself is a very vague term, as
you probably appreciate.    There are varying degrees of
unconsciousness - superficial unconsciousness, perhaps
a sort of sleeping...    You are unconscious, really,
when you are sleeping, and then, of course,
unconsciousness becomes deeper and deeper and deeper.
The deeper bit is when one truly loses pain sensations
and in fact in this particular instance having spoken
both to Or. Gumpert and, indeed, a consultant
anaesthetist, everybody I have spoken to is confident
that pain modalities have disappeared very quickly,
perhaps within one or two seconds, five seconds is the
longest I have heard somebody express.

As I understand your evidence, following that short
period of five, ten, twenty seconds at the most, there
is profound unconsciousness rather than, say, the
unconsciousness of sleep.   Is the face then of the
unconscious person, the profoundly unconscious person,
capable of expression of any sort, or is there a
neutral expression? - A. I think I prefer to leave that
to Dr. Gumpert because you are into a clinical area
there of what we call reflexes.   I am not trying to
avoid the question.   I think he will be able to give
you a very expert professional witness reply to that.
Would that be reasonable to you?
     HR. LIMB:   Certainly.   Sir, m a y I pursue that
matter with Mr. Gumpert?
     THE CORONER:   Certainly.    I want to be as
helpful as I can.   It is a difficult subject and in a
sense we are slotting it into the inquest of. this poor
boy, but it is a more general topic and it willj^ot
cuuise, apply in a sense to everybodyt but 1 Hon t see
how we can avoi<f doing It.   Please do pursue it with
Dr. Gumpert.

     Thank you, Dr. Slater.




                                                           1036
            DR. E R N E S T J O H N W A L L A C E G U M P E R T Sworn
                             By THE CORONER

Q. Dr. Gumpert, could you first of all give us your full
   names, qualifications and.appointment? - A . Ernest John
   Wallace Gumpert.   I am a Bachelor of Medicine of the
   University at Cambridge, Bachelor of Surgery of the
   University of Cambridge.   A Member of the Royal
   College o£ Surgeons and a Fellow of the Royal College
   of Physicians of London.   I am consulting clinical
   neuro physiologist and consulting neurologist to the
   Sheffield Area Health Authority, Teaching.

Q. Dr. Gumpert, although you are a Sheffield man
   professionally, I dragged you bacK rroa Cambridge
   today? - A. Yes, sir.

0. Where I tracked you down!        I very much appreciate the
   fact you dropped all your other arrangenents in order
   to be here.      Thank you very much.     Dr. Guinpert, you,
   of course, had nothing whatever to do with this case.
   I think you dealt with quite a lot of the injured
   fol lowing. Hillsboi*ou.£.h ana inoeea you may well know one
   or two people X will be referring to later, but this
   particular case was not one you came across.         You have
   heard the evidence which has been put regarding this
   young man.      What I would like.you to do now is to give
   us a short explanation, as you see death, in the first
   instance and then we will try and relate it to this
   young man and particularly Mr. Bruder's evidence
   relating to him. - A. In about 1979 or 1980 when it
   became possible to carry out renal transplantations or
   kidney transplantations, it became very important that
   the supply of kidneys of people who had died acutely,
   usually in accidents, could be increased because the
   life of a patient who has had a kidney transplant is
   completely different to the life of a patient who has
   to have dialysis three times a week.        They can go back
   to normal life.
   A hypothesis of brain death was then discussed, agreed
   and published.    This consisted of certain examinations
   of the back part of the brain, the part we call the
   brain stem.    If you imagine the brain as being like a
   walnut, and it is., it is like having a carrot stuck
   underneath the walnut, and it is the carrot that
   matters.    This is where blood pressure, pulse,
   respiration and a whole variety of other functions are
   controlled.    Once this part of the brain is dead, and
   this death occurs, as you heard from Dr. Slater, in
   between four and six minutes after deprivation of
   oxygen, then the person is going to die.    They can be


                                                                        1037
kept alive by artificial means and some of you may
remember the case in America which was kept alive for
thirteen and a half years.
Some of us were concerned that the guidelines that were
drawn up were not strict enough and that there was no
call for them to be repeated after a passage of time.
Perhaps unwisely we said this and this resulted in a
BBC "Panorama" programme one night at ten o'clock when
the medical profession for once actually debated it,
oight of us.    As a result of that debate the
regulations were hardened.    They had to be carried out
by senior people who were used to doing it and they had
to be repeated.    A satisfactory outcome from my
personal point of view, although I don't know whether
the anguish was worth it really.

As a consequence of that I suppose in the next three
years I had to go through this rather unpleasant
procedure many times.   It was part of my professional
duty but still to this day I cannot certify someone
dead without being disturbed by it still.
From this I suppose I have gained a great deal of
experience of brain death and brain damage.     It seems
clear to me, sir, in this case that poor Kevin was
grohablv dead before he was got out of. the area in
yjitch he was standing.   I would" agree with Dr. Slater.
I would think consciousness was lost probably within
ten seconds.    I would say loss of pain would be almost
instantaneous - not quite, but almost*

I cannot explain the.Liverpool Police Constable's term
"convulsion because to me a convulsion is a major
epileptic attack and he has quite clearly said he does
not mean that, so I don't know what he does mean.   I
think it would be wrong for me to try and guess what he
means.   I think we could accept that he does not mean
any significant movement.
Unfortunately, after people are brain stem dead, they
can twitch and very unnerving it is too.   This is
really due to a spinal reflex. What we think happens
in anoxia - lack of oxygen - is that the brain stem
dies first.   The cortex, that is the thinking part of
the brain, your walnut, probably goes on quite a bit
longer and the peripheral nervous system probably quite
a bit long still and I think that is the explanation of
what has been described by the Liverpool officer.

I know the Liverpool officer in his supplemental
statement when he was discussing the question of a
pulse says he may have been mistaken, but let us
hypothesise that in fact he wasn't and he had felt a
pulse when he approached this young man on the pitch,
would that fit in with your understanding...     Is that
a possibility? - A. It Is a. .possibility, sir.   I would
like just to observe that feeling the carotid pulse is
quite difficult in somebody who has got a low blood
pressure, as would have been here.     In fact it can be
so difficult it is impossible and you have to put an
electrocardiogram on to know whether the heart has
stopped or not.

I would also like to say something about resuscitation.
I was very fortunate when I qualified that I became
house surgeon of a famous heart surgeon called Lord
Brock at Guy's Hospital.   That was in the days when we
did open cardiac massage.   In other words, if somebody
died you opened their chest and you massaged their
heart between your hands.   A terrifying experience.
It was while I was working for him that one day three
of us were doing it one morning, that he stopped it,
and that was the start of external cardiac massage.
Even to somebody like me who has been doing it for
twenty-five years, it is still very difficult.    The
last time I tried to do it I failed completely.    Even
to a trained person it is difficult.   Indeed, when
junior doctors are examined for this now, as they are,
a significant number fail rather than pass.    It is
quite difficult and for the lay person it must be
incredibly difficult.

You heard Dr. Slater's account of death, shall we say.
Would you go along with that? - A. I thought it was
eloquent.   I felt quite nervous!

You mentioned this point about unconsciousness and the
loss of pain and I think you distinguish slightly
there. Can you give me any idea that if a person
becomes unconscious, can he feel pain, and for how long
can he feel pain, in your judgment? - A. Again, Dr.
Slater put it very clearly.    You all read in the
newspapers about patients - particularly when they have
had caesarean sections, the ladies as usual - being
able to tell what the doctors were talking about during
the operation.    Again I have experienced this at first
hand when I was doing heart surgery because then it was
often very important not to depress the state of
consciousness too far because things were pretty tricky
anyhow*   When-we. used to resuscitate the patients we
used to give them an electric shock.    Lord Brock used
to always shout, "Give it two fast ones."    The patient
would then ask you the following morning two fast ones
were.   Then you would ask, "Did you hear anything
else?" and they didn't, so it is all very much a
question of degree.
I think slipping from slight unconsciousness to deep
unconsciousness in this circumstance, one, because of
the compression and two because of the asphyxia and
three because as Dr. Slater again explained everything
is shoved up into the head and so there is nothing
moving around, it would have been very quick, almost as
quick as a rabbit punch I would have thought.

     THE CORONER:     Mr. Fraser?

     MR. FRASERi     No questions, sir.

            Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB:

Dr. Guinpert you have spoken in terms of passing in a
very quick space of time from slight unconsciousness to
deep unconsciousness.    Following deep unconsciousness,
do the eyelids remain open or are they closed? - A.
Either may occur. There is no particular rule.     The
thing we all see on the cinema of the person going to
close the dead person's eyes.    I don*t think I have
had to do that more than two or three times in my life.
Most of the people I have seen die have died with their
eyes shut.
Deep unconsciousness is associated with no longer
feeling any p*»in or discomfort.  Is then the face of
the person who is profoundly unconscious capable of
grimaces or expressions which might be taken as showing-
pain or discomfort? - A. Not in my view, sir.

Is it in fact capable of any facial expression? - A.
Not in my view.

Following profound unconsciousness, is it right that
the face will become discoloured towards the next stage
of the sequence of events, namely, brain damage and
thereafter brain death?
     THE CORONER:     Could you repeat that question?

     MR. LIMB:    I am referring back to the process, or
the sequences of events as outlined by Dr. Slater, sir.
Firstly, unconsciousness, thereafter brain damage and
thereafter again brain death.    The nature of my
inquiry was as to whether following profound'
unconsciousness,, although there may be no outward
expressions there is this change that the face becomes
discoloured?
     THE CORONER:     The greyness you are driving at?

     MR. LIMB:      Sir, that is right.



                                                           1040
        THE WITNESS:    Are you asking me to say when I
   think the greyness came on or just the way it changed?I
   cannot tell you when it came on.    I think probably j.t
   came on .during the unconscious stage and I don't think
   the face would change when the moment of death came,
   total somatic death, I don't think there would be any
   change.

        MR. LIMB:   Doctor, I am asking whether it happens
   following the entry into unconsciousness towards the
   next stage in the sequence, namely, brain damage? - A.
   I don't think there is a change of facial expression at
   the time of brain damage necessarily.   This change of
   expression will be a gradually evolving process from
   the minute the crush started.

           MR. LIMB:      Thank you, sir.

        THE WITNESS:   Sir, you cannot tell by looking at
   a person that they are dead or unconscious, at least I
   can't.   You can by feeling them but you can't by
   looking at them.

                       Further by THE CORONER:

Q. If a person has been, shall we say, somatically dead
   for long enough, would you accept or would you agree
   that sometimes the   face goes paler? - A. Oh, itgoes
   paler, and becomes   rigid and takes on a stare. Yes,
   that is quite different.

           THE CORONER:      Anything else you wanted to ask on
   that?

           MR. LIMB:      No, thank you, sir.

           MR. CATCHPOLE:      No questions, sir*

        THE CORONER:   Is           there anything   else we want to
   ask Dr* Slater?   (No)

        Ladies and gentlemen, I will give you a chance.
   It is emotive but it is also very interesting*   Is
   there anything else while we have two experts here?
   You have understood it as far as one is able to
   understand it?

           THE FOREMAN:'     Yes.

        THE CORONER:   Dr.Gumpert and Dr. Slater,  may I
   say to both of you, you have done remarkably well in
   explaining what is clearly a very (a) emotive and (b)
   difficult subject, succinctly and clearly to all of us
   and I very much appreciate your help.   Dr* Slater has


                                                                       1041
                    A   had to come as well, but not quite so far, and I am
                        very grateful to you for taking the trouble and the
                        time to come and I am sure it will be of benefit not
                        just to Kevin's family, but to other people who of
                        course are involved in this tragedy as well.   Thank
                        you very much indeed.
                             MR. FRASER:    Sir, I will certainly make sure that
                        Kevin's family have the opportunity to see the
                        transcript of what the doctors have said and I am sure
                        they will feel some benefit from that when they feel
                        able to look at it.    Thank you, sir.



                    c                                                              ♦


                    D




                    E


  <


                    G




                    H

J L. Harpham iw f
                                                      A. DUNC

                      ANDREW DUNCAN Sworn
                        By THE CORONER;
 Q. You are Andrew Duncan? - A. Yes.

Q. Is it still                              A. Yes.
Q. You too are a Liverpool supporter? - A. Yes.
Q. I think you came to the match with several of your
   friends including Kevin Williams? - A. Yes.
Q. You came by train, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you come to the main station in Sheffield or'did you
   come on the special train? - A. The main train.

Q. What time did you get to Sheffield? - A. About half past
   ten.
Q. When you got off the train were you steered towards
  •coaches? - A. Yes.
Q. Were you wearing regalia?     Could they tell you were a
   football supporter? • ■A. No.
Q. Just ordinary clothing? - A. Yes.
Q. How come you were steered towards the coaches to take you
   to the ground?   Did you ask or did they just say, "Young
   man, are you going to the match?"   What happened? - A.
   There were people getting off the train who obviously
   weren't going to the match.   If you were like a lad they
   asked, they said, "Are you going to the match?"   If you
   said, "Yes , they said, "Go that way."
Q. Did they check your tickets or anything at all that you
   can remember? - A. No. The train tickets?
Q. No, the match ticket? - A. Oh, no.
Q. So you then got on to the coach? - A. Yes.

Q. That brought you to Hillsborough? - A. Yes.

Q. You got to the ground at about 11.30? - A. Yes.
Q. Did you go straight in or did you do a bit of shopping? -
   A. Well, the ground wasn't open so we walked round for a
   bit.   We went to the shops and just walked round until
   about half past one.

Q. That was you and Kevin? - A. Yes.
Both of you had tickets, Itake it? - A. Yes.
I think you entered about half past one? - A. Yes.
Were you searched when you went in? - A. Yes.
And on the other side of the turnstiles as well? - A.
Yes.
You had no difficulty getting through, I take it? - A.
No.
Then I think you went and bought yourself a cup of coffee
inside? - A. Yes.
You saw the tunnel and you went down it?   - A. Yes.

Had you been to the ground before? - A. No.
Were there people going down the tunnel at that time
already or... - A. There were a few, but there wasn t
many people.
It wasn't too bad anyway? - A. No.
You came out of the tunnel and you entered the terracing?
- A. Yes.
Did you go left or right, can you remember? - A. At first
we went left and then we decided to go to the right.
You just thought that would be better? - A. Yes.
There wasn't any other reason for changing at that point?
- A. No.
Do you know what time it was when you got into the right
hand pen? - A. Probably about twenty-five to two/twenty
to two.
How would you describe it at that time? - A.             was
pretty empty because we actually sat down on the
terracing.
With the passage of time of course it started filling up?
- A. Yes.
You were standing fairly near to the perimeter fence, is
that right? - A. Yes.
Fairly near to the front?   In line with the goal, or a
bit further? - A. Just right of the goal.
                                                  A.   DUNCAN


You were just talking anc waiting for the .r.atch to start?
- A . Y as.
At that stags I take it nothing concerned you, apart from
the fact that Liverpool shouldn't lose? - A. Yes.
It happened that you actually saw two of your friends,
Stuart Thompson aha Tony Grier, is that right? - A. Yes.
I know what time you said in your statement, but do you
remember about what time you saw them? -A. Well, it was
pretty full then so we didn't speak to them, we just saw
them.   They were further up.
They were behind you, were they? - A. Yes.
when you saw them can you remember Tony climbing up on to
a barrier? - A. No.
You don't remember that? - A. No.
It doesn't matter, you may not have been watching him at
that particular moment.   Do you remember a beach ball
being knocked about? - A. Yes.
Was that at about the same time as you saw Tony or was it
earlier or later? - A. I can't remember.
Can you remember the players coming on to the pitch,
pre kick-off? - A. Yes.
Were you still in the same position? - A. Yes.
At that point, what was it like? - A. Just like a normal
game, really.   A bit of pushing and that but not bad.
Nothing that concerned you at that stage? - A. No,
You of course were excited, the match was going to begin
soon, you hoped. Did you see the kick-off? - A. They
were about to kick-off - I didn't actually see it because
of people pushing about.   You were sortof moving round
everywhere.
So when the players came out pre kick-off, it was still
like a normal match as far as you were concerned? - A.
Yes.
Just before kick-off something had happened.   Tell me
what had happened in that period between the players
coming out and kick-off? - A. Well, there was a bit of
pushing and moving round and that, then I don't know.   I
just don't remember actually seeing any of the game, so I
obviously can't remember seeing the kick-off.
                                                   A.   DUNCAN


You say you ccn'c r2 ner.ber the game at all? - A. Not
really.

Whan the players came cut. which you do remember, was
Kevin still with you? - A. Yes.
What happened to Kevin?   when did you last catch a
glimpse of him? - A. Well, there was a big push forward
and he went off to the right a bit.   He said something,
"It's a bit packed, isn't it?"   Then I didn't see him
after that.
Are you saying you felt a big push then? - A. Yes.
Where did that push take you?   Did it leave you^in the
position that you were in, but mors squashed, or*cid it
move you? -A. It moved you forward and you were
squashed, but normally what would happen is it would go
back.   You know, people would push back.

That's what didn't happen? - A. No.
We have tended to use the word "surge", but you can use
"push", it doesn't matter.   How many of these pushes did
you feel, just the one or more than one? - A. Well, there
was the first one and then it didn't move back and then
another one came, a bigger one.
There was a bigger one after the first one.   Did the
first one move back or not? - A. It did slightly. It
eased off slightly.
Not as much as you would expect? - A. No.
Then the second one was much stronger? - A. Yes.
But you don't know what was haDoening with the game? - A.
No.
You were fairly near the front. Had you seen    the gate
which is in the fence? - A. Yes.
You had seen that.   Could you see what happened to that
gate? - A. Well, there were people shouting for the
Police or stewards or whatever on the other side or tne
fence, for them to open it because they were getting
crushed.   No-one opened it and then I think some of the
crowd who were in front of it started pushing on it to
get it open and it came open.   Then a few Policemen ran
over and shut it again and were leaning on it. After
about five minutes or so - I think they got it locked
again, and then after about five minutes or so one of
them opened it.
                                                    A. DUNCAN

Q. So ycu were say m e -his fcaccenad. -id this happen
   after kick-off cr just ar kick-cfi cr befcra kick-
   off? - A. It was     after the kick-off.
Q. You   think it was after? - A. Yes.
Q. You are saying it was opened by seme fans who pushed
   it open? - A. Yes.
Q. Did you see any of them run on to the fiaid? - A. A
   few ran out and then when the Police had seen them
   run   out they ran   over and shut it,  leanedagainst it.
Q. Did   they get them back in, can you renember?- A.
   They tried to. I am not sure whether they ran off in
   another direction, I am not sure.
Q. I cannot hear you? - A. I am not sure whether they
   ran off in a different direction or the Police could
   not get them.
Q. We have heard from several young men who were
   standing at the gate and who ran out into the field.
   What I am trying to find out is what you remember.
   You remember this happening. You remember the gate
   being shut? - A. Yes.
Q. How confident are you about your timings? - A. I
   could not really tell ycu. I am not toe cartain.
Q. Do you know hew long the match played frcm beginning
   to end? - A. I did not know at the tise. I have
   heard since.
Q. Pardon? - A. I have heard sinca but I didn’t knew at
   the time.
Q. What I am trying to find out is whether you ars
   saying the gate was shut for the whole of the
   duration of the match because the match only played
   for five minutes? - A. I do not think sc.
Q. Did you see a Police Officer open the cata or was it
   the fans that opened it the second tiae that ycu
   noticed? - A. I could not really be certain. It was
   either a Policeman or an ambulanceman, I think. One
   of the St. John Ambulance or what have you.
Q. You were standing in the crowd and there was a man in
   front of you who was not very well, is that right?
   A. Yes.
Q. Somebody shouted to you and said, "Try and revive
   him'', is that right? - A. Yes.
                                                             46
                                                      A, DUNCAN


2-      ycu rameaber whether tha aatch was still in
     prcgrass at that point? - A. No, I couldn't see cn to
     the pitch.
Q. In fact, this man told you to bite his ear, did he
   not? - A. Yes. His friend was standing outside the
   fencing and told me to bite him.
Q. He told ycu to do that? -A. Yes.
Q. How did you get out? -A. I was there for a bit anc
   eventually I suppose I got on to my side.
Q. I am sorry? - A. I got sort cf sidewards on a bit sc
   that I could get a bit of air and then someone pulled
   me over the fencing.
Q. Somebody pulled you over the fence? - A. Yes.
p. Eventually another friend told you that Stuart was
   missing, did he not? - A. Yes.
Q. Unfortunately your friend Kevin also lost his life? -
   A. Yes.
Q. I want you to show us on a plan where you wers? - A.
   Yes. (witness marked the plan)
       MR. BEECHEY:   C.457, sir.
Q.        THE CORONER:  Did you notice the barrier at all
     behind you? You have put your cross from near the
     barrier. Do you remember that barrier at all? - A.
     No.
Q. You do not remember anything about it? - A. Not whils
   the crush was on I didn't.
                  Crogs-Br»min«>ri bv MR. PAYNE

Q. Have you followed the team to other grounds? - A.
   Yes.
Q. How long have you been doing that? - A. Actually that
   was the first away game I went to and since then I
   have been going now and again.

Q. -This was the first time you had been to an away
   match? - A. Yes.
Q. At this particular Semi Pinal? - A. Yes.
                                                   A. CUNCAN

             Crsss-Sxamir.ed bv MR.   ISAACS

An.draw, ycu told the Coroner that ycu recall tie
players coming out and at that point it was just like
a normal game? - A. Yes.

There was pushing but it was not that bad? - A. Yas.
You get pushing behind the goal in a normal came? -
A. Yes.
And surging, as you have told us, with people ccminc
down and people going back up again? - A. Yes.
You said that you started to feel, and I am
paraphrasing now I think the impression you gave and
tell me if I am wrong about this or if I am right.
It started to get bad when this first big surge came
just when they were about to kick off? - A. Yes.
I wanted to ask you about that because you were asked
by tbe Coroner whether you actually saw the kick-off
and you said you had not. By that you meant you did
not actually see someone kicking the ball? Ycu did
not see Rush kicking the ball? - A. Mo.

When you say they were just about to kick off, do ycu
mean they were standing in the centre circle ready to
kick off? - A. Yes.
In the centre circle ready to kick off? - A. Yas.
They were getting into position to kick off, were
they? - A. Yes.
     THE CORONER: Mr. Manning, shall we adjourn new?
Did you say, yes or no, Mr. Manning?
     MR. MANNING: I think we can finish this
witness. Shall we try?
     THE CORONER: It is easier for him but I do net
want anybody to feel rushed.
     MR. MANNING:   I actually think it would be
better.
     THE CORONER:   Go head, Mr. Manning.

            O T * 9‘Examined bv HR‘ manning
I just want to go further in time just a little bit
further than the gentleman next to me had done.
After that first push came, of course, that was when
                                                 A. DUNCAN

ycu and Kevin talked, when he had been pushed off to
tr.a r:;-* and.t-tat is when he said or you said, I am
net sura, "It is a bit packed, isn't it?”? - A. Yes,
he said it.
It was him who said it and you agreed with him at
that time? - A. Yes.
The first time you had the push it eased back a bit.
The second time it did not ease back at all? - A.
Yes.
     MR. XING: Do I understand the evidence of
Andrew correctly that he lost two friends?
     THE CORONERr Two. He went with Kevin Williams
whom he lost and he knew Stuart Thompson.
     MR. KING: I do not think it will serve any
purpose to question him.
     THE CORONER:     Yes.
     MR. KING: I just want to say to Andrew, thank
you for coming, because I suspect it is difficult for
you to relive it.
                    LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT
  6 March 1992


  To whom it may concern


  Dear Sir/Madam

  Re Mrs Anne Williams,


  I have been asked by my patient, Mrs Anne Williams, to
  give my opinion concerning the death of her son Kevin at
  the Hillsbrough disaster in 1989. I can confirm that I
  have read the report of the autopsy dated 16 April 1989
  and have counselled Mrs Williams regularly since that date.
  Mrs Williams has been able to interview witnesses at the scene
  of Kevin's death only two weeks ago and was able co discuss with
  a Mrs Deborah Martin in detail the final few minutes of Kevin's
  life. I have been asked to give my opinion on whether or not
  Kevin was able to utter the word "Mum" following attempted
  resuscitation by Mrs Martin of Kevin. It is.my opinion that from
  the given information from Mrs Williams and the detailed report of
  the autopsy, it would not be impossible for Kevin to have uttered the
* word "Mum" and I have informed Mrs Williams accordingly.


  Yours faithfully
  ___     A_______



  Dr S J Crosby
                                                                         STATION
lAT-E:           DEREK WILLIAM
                 BRUDER
ADDRESS:         MERSEYSIDE POLICE, 'F' DIVISICN,
                 HALEWOCD PSTN, LIVERPOOL.

      / DATE 3F BIRTH:
3CCUFATICN:      POL FC7808 F DIVISICN

Vho states:- This statement consisting of 012 pages, each signed
3y ms, i s true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
Lt knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
zo be false or do not believe to be true.


2IATED: 270489                                              D W BRUDER (SIQED)


  ^       I an a serving Police Officer with Merseyside Police, on Saturday 15th
         April 1989 (150489) I was off duty and went to support Liverpool in
          the match against Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough Football Ground.

          I want to the game in my own car with my friend
                                    He had bought our tickets for seats in the

         North Stand for #14.00, frcm Liverpool football club supporters club I

         think.
         We drove to the ground via Huddersfield where I dropped ny sister off

         at Polytechnic and then carried on to Hillsborough. On the way to the
         ground there was a short delay at the Manchester Interchange on the
  (
         M62 with roadworks.
         Aftar we arrived at Sheffield I went with               to the Gateway
         stcre on the continuation of Halifax Foad.   This being ware we parked

         the car at about 1.10cm (1310). At the Gateway store there were

         between 200-300 Liverpool fans. We stayed with then and were allowed

         into the store in small numbers to buy drinks.            11 bought

         fcur cans of lager between us and then went outside and sat on a

         grass verge together with the other 200-300 fans and v»e drank tvso cans
    BRUDER                DEREK WILLIAM                                         \

                                                         \

    eacri.   The group of fans was well behaved and I didn't see any

    drjnkeness. We were supervised by a Merseyside and South Yorkshire

    Police Officer who were sat on two horses outside the Canet

    Superstore.

    Whilst I was sat on this verge everyone was happy and amenable and at
    one point I saw a uniform Superintendent and Chief Inspector WALK past

    us.   Between 1.45pm and 2pra (1345) (1400) the two mounted police
    officers came over and told us it was getting on and time to Bate our
    way to the ground.   The whole crowd moved on without any problems at
    all. I remember it was the Merseyside Officer who actually spoke to

^   the crowd.
    We talked to the ground and when we got into Leppings Lane itself it

    was packed with people even half a mile fran the ground itself.
    Because of the crowd my friend asked a policeman for directions to
    the ground, he was manning a junction either two or three roads up
    frca the ground off Leppings Lane.    He then directed us to go back the

    way we had cane and round to the Spion Kop end.    I didn't think that

    was right but followed his directions and walked back the way we had

    ccrra and to the Spion Kop.   This was about 2.20pm (1420).
    We then went to the Spion Kcp but three quarters of the way round on
^   Penistone Read I realised we were going totally the wrong way and we

    walked back.
    The time was getting on now and the walk round was:long because a lot

    of the connecting roads between Leppings Lane and Penistone Read were

    blocked by Police.   Because of the time I approached a police officer
    on one of the barriers and he allowed us to take this short cut when I

    explained what had happened and shewed him my police warrant card.     We

    arrived back at Leppings Lane at 2.30pm (1430). When               I

    arrived back at the turnstiles there were no queues whatsoever and a



                                                                                    37
                            DEREK WILLIAM                                         3


     large mass of people all trying to get through the turnstiles and into
    the ground.     It had reached the point of every man for themselves in
    oresir to get to the turnstiles.
    I irarte for and entered the far left hand side turnstile of turnstiles

    1-15. There was no police officer by my turnstile.         Cver to my far
    right I saw a number of police officers on h o r s e s .   I could not see
    any police officers on foot but could not say whether this was
    because there were none or they were blocked from ny view by the

    crcud.
    Outside the ground my friend had both our tickets and to try and stay
(   tocsther I had hold of his jeans. However, the pushing of the
    pecpie was that much that we vrere pushed apart and separated.
    Ones we were apart I decided to mate for the turnstile on my own.
             had got in before me and once I reached the turnstile he handed
    my ticket out to me and I was allowed inside.       I handed my ticket into

    the turnstile operator and retained the stub of the ticket.

    I had difficulty in finding the entry point only by the misdirection

    of the police officer, but once I got back into Leppir.cs Lane, I found

    the turnstile but had difficulties getting in because of the sheer
    rnacoer of people. At the time of my entry I saw no gates open other

    than the turnstiles.    I did not see any of the gates cpen.

    As I was trying to get to the turnstiles I saw about five or six
    teenagers climb over a concertina gate immediately to the left of the

    turnstiles. After the first five or six went over I saw a number of

    others climb to the top of this gate but then drop back into the crcwi

    outside as if there was sanecne in authority on the inside telling

    thea to get back.
    Cnca David and I had got into the ground I saw a police sergeant and
    four constables immediately behind the concertina gate where I had
                          DEREK WILLIAM                                        4
 gpL'SE^7'
                                                                                   1
         the teenagers climb over.   I approached the sergeant and said
 sciraching along the lines of "I am a Police Officer from Merseyside,
 theres a huge crowd outside and they're pushing to get in, can you do

sar3thing about it or get something done?".        At this time, I was with
          2ut I did not produce my warrant card or formally identify

myself.       He made no reply to me and by this time it was close to

kick off time so I left it at that.
Ones inside the ground I saw no direction signs to my seat in the
North stand and had difficulty in finding it because the sections of

seating were given letters of the alphabet, however, the letters did’
not follow alphabetical order ie AEFDGCM, though I can't remember the

exact order.
I entered the North Stand through a tunnel, there was no crowd within
this tunnel and no problems at all.       I saw no Police within the

tunnel and only a few stewards right at the beginning.

Ones inside the ground I saw no alcohol being drunk at all.

I took my seat along with I          just as the two teams came out onto
the pitch.      This was about 2.57 pm (1457). Once through the
tunnel and up the stairs, I went to the section of my seats where two
stewards directed us to our particular seats.      These were right by the

entrance to this section of seating.       People continued to enter after

me and after about ten minutes between ten and twenty people arrived

at this entrance and didn't appear to have tickets for this stand.         I

actually saw two people holding tickets which were for the West
Stand-       This was after the incident in pens 3 and 4 and people had
started to care cut onto the pitch.       Everyone started to discuss what

was going on and these t*iO men said that they should be in those pens

and shewed the tickets which wers complete without the counterfoil

being removed.



                                                                                       317
                        DEREK WILLIAM                  .                   5

 r <=ccerier.cad no personal crowd crush within the ground only that
 outside which was about 2.45 pm (1445).   I did not see any crowd

 surre within the ground and was not injured.
At about the time these men had appeared at the entrance to my section
of seating which was three quarters of the way along the North Stand
nearest to the Spion Kop about ten rows from the front, I saw people
climbing over the fences from pens three and four of the Leppings Lane
stand from kick off but initially they ware directed behind hoardings

and sat near to the pitch.    I could not see whether they were directed

ty stewards or Police.
Aftar about five minutes a Police officer ran on to the pitch and
stepped the game.   People then began to climb over the front fencing
onto the pitch at will and I could also see people pulled up into the
seating area above. At no point did I see any gates opened to allow

escape from the pens.
Onca play had been stopped the Nottingham Forest fans in the Spion Kcp

began to taunt the Liverpool Supporters.
A fan then ran onto the pitch and then ran up to the Spion Kop and
began shcuting and making 'V' signs with tvro fingers at the Forest
supporters. Myself and other fans in the North stand began to shcut

telling him to go away because we could see there was something wrong

in the Leppings Lane end. This man who was in his early twenties with
long hair and a black capped sleeve T shirt was then turned back by

either stewards or Police and ran back towards Leppings Lane but was

detained by Police before he got back.
Another older man then ran up to the Spion Kcp and then began to wave

his hands at the Forest fans.   He wasn't taunting, he was signalling

for them to calm dewn and trying to tell them there was something

vrcng. Shortly after this the Police formed a cordon across the
                                                                                 6




      F-ecoie in the Leppings Lane end then ripped dcwn advertising hoardings

      arc began to carry people on then up towards the comer formed by the
      Spion Kcp and the North Stand.    I could see that same of then were
      presumed dead as they had coats over their faces and one Ban in
      pf»rric^1*T- had a jumper pulled back to cover his face. These people

      wera then rolled onto the pitch and the carriers vrent back for more

      pecole or bodies.
      Hie police then formed a further cordon in front of the North stand.
      Around the same time a number of people wearing tracksuit, trousers arid

      sweatshirts came fran the direction of the players tunnel and went to
      the Spion Kcp end.    They then pulled down more hoardings here and went

  to help carry more people up frcm Leppings Lane.
  A number of people v^re also carried up to the corner in front of me

  bodily.      There were a large number of people in this corner either

  laid out behind the police on the pitch or sitting with their heads in

  their hands.
  I did not see any of the Police in the cordon in front of the North
  Stand break ranks to assist these people.
  /

/ 1 saw one person on the pitch about a quarter of the pitch length away

  £z c ji the Spion Kcp about twenty feet frcm the hoardings in front of

  the North stand.        I distinctly remember this because later on as I
  will describe an ambulance drove directly past us and a St John's
  Ambulance man who was with me tried to flag it dcwn but it carried on.

  I am not sure if this man had been carried on a hoarding or by his

  friand who was with him.       I saw this man lying on the floor having

  convulsions.
  The Police cordon in front of the North Stand appeared unconcerned and

  'srcarmy' , this agitated the supporters in the stand who were shouting
 ePC?£P.            .   DEREK WILLIAM

 for than to go and help the people on the pitch.      None of the Police

officers left the cordon.
I was very close to the pitch so I went down the aisle, over a small
fiva fcot wall with hoardings on, I walked through the cordon without
being challenged at all and then went to the man having convulsions.
Alirost inmediately I was joined by a St John's Ambulance nan.        I
identified myself to the St Johns man as an off duty Police Officer.

He then said to me " You do mouth to mouth and I'll do heart massage".

I then took his pulse in his neck.      I could feel a slight pulse.       I
then canmenced mouth to mouth resuscitation and the St John's man
started heart massage.    I undid tvro buttons on the top of the man's
shirt.     If I remember rightly the bottcm of the shirt appeared

ripped.
We continued to work on the man but after about five minutes he went

grey and his face was withdrawn. As I had approached the man his head
had moved as if he was being sick.      When I got to him I cleared his
mouth and the back of his throat              ^ before cannencing mouth to
mouth resuscitation.                                       "After about

five minutes when the man went grey,




Aftar about seven minutes I swapped places with the St John's
Ambulance man and he cannenced mouth to mouth and I heart massage.             As

I cid heart massage his ribs were unnaturally praninent in the whole

of his rib cage even though he was only thinly built.       His stanach

was depressed and abnormally lower than his ribcace.
Aftar a short time I undid the button on his trousers and ripped open

the zip.    I then continued heart massage.
Shortly afterwards an ambulance entered the ground.       It   appeared   to be
 BpLOER                  DEREK WILLIAM

 a Haalth Authority ambulance as opposed to St Johns.     It began to
 drive dcwn towards Leppings Lane.     I then told-the St John's man to

 try and step it.     He tried to flag it dcwn but it continued on as if
 it had been ordered not to stop in the top corner but to go to the
 Leppings Lane end.

 The St John's man then rejoined me and continued to give mouth to
 mouth resuscitation.

 Shortly after this we were joined by one of the men I described
earlier in the tracksuit trousers and I think green sweatshirt.     He
asked me if I was all right and knew what I was doing.                  *-
I said "I'm an off duty bobby, i'm all right", with that he left as if
to go sanewhere where he could be of more use with other injured

persons.

Shortly after this man, which must have been about six minutes since I
had changed places with the St Johns man, a female St Johns Ambulance
officer came over and pushed me out of the way and took over from me.
I t:*en stocd up and watched as she was obviously better trained in

First: Aid than me.
I then stood by the injured man together with his friend who had been
there all along, telling us to keep going and not to let his mate die.
Within two minutes of this, the St Johns Ambulance man told the St
Johns Ambulance vranan, "He's gene", and stocd up.    I looked at the

man's friend who was standing by his head, he was completely grey.

By this time, I felt ill myself and just turned away as there was

nothing else I could do.
I would describe the man who died as:- between 17 and 20 years of age,

approx 5'8 - 5'9 tall, short sandy or reddish coloured hair, slim
build, no facial hair, white eurcpean, I could see no cuts or

abrasions on him.     I seen to remember freckles on his cheeks, but I'm
                       DEREK WILLIAM                                          9


 ncc sure                               I'm almcst positive it was
 freckles.   As I said previously he had an unusually prominent rib cage
and depressed stomach.
Ke «es wearing a light, possibly white button up shirt, light grey or

beige cotton trousers, i                                  I noticed no

jewellery or footwear.
His friend I would describe as 21 or 22 years of age, dark brown hair,
shortish hair, about 5'9 tall.    I cannot rananber much of his clothing
but he appeared quite plump with a slight beer belly.       He had no

facial hair nor glasses.
The St John's man was in uniform, the only thing I can rsnemfcer was

that he had dark hair and was thirty plus years of age.

The St John's wcman was in uniform again very slimly built and no

older than 18 years of age
After the St John's man had said the man was dead I'd seen enough,
I fait ill and had to get out of the ground.       I knew David would have

stayed where he was because he knows no First Aid.       I went over to the

wall where I had climbed in. As I got there I saw a photographer

kneeling dcwn with an orange tabard he was taking photographs of the

injured and dying.
A fan who was already on the pitch went over to him and said "Fuck

off, you're taking pictures of my injured mates".
The photographer carried on taking pictures so the fan started pushing

him.   The photographer stood up and the fan then pushed him back to

the wall and tried to take the camera fran him.      The camera then swung

and smashed into the wall.   I then climbed over the wall using the

photographers case as a step.    I then rejoined
He said to me "Cane on we're going", and we both then left.      I cannot

say what time this was.
 0PL-ER                  DEREK WILLIAM                                     10

 whilst at Hillsborough the only criminal offences were of a minor
 public order nature ie, the fans climbing over the gates etc. After
 the disaster within the stand, I saw a number of instances such as
 the photographer's camera and sausage rolls thrown at the cordon in

 frcnt of the North Stand and one old man who threw a cup of tea at an

officer in the cordon.
This was caused purely by agitation amongst the crcwi by the apparent
callousness of the photographer and apparent inactivity of the police
with regard to the injured and dying.

I witnessed no sericus offences.
There were a number of factors which I believe contributed to the

nurrcer of deaths and injuries.
Outside the ground there appeared to be a lack of co-ordination
between the mounted and foot police officers. The approach roads to
the ground were well manned with Police officers at junctions and

outside pubs and off licences.    However, I made a ccnment about being

misdirected by the police officer to another officer and he said it
was understandable because a let of the officers vrere drafted in fran

outside stations and had pocr local knowledge of the area.      This may
hava contributed to the build up outside the ground which caused the

initial crush outside.
Inside the ground once the disaster had occurred there appeared a lack

of ro-ordinaticn between senior police officers and lower ranks on the

pitrh.    The actual scale of the incident wasn't appreciated
imrsdiately which resulted in a delay in the response and personnel

being despatched to deal with it.
Frcm my own personal experience I and most Police officers have only

basic First Aid knowledge.    When I administered first aid to the man I

felt totally inadequate on reflection.    However with that particular
         B FC 3E R            DEREK WILLIAM                                      11
         man, I don't think more knowledge would have helped but it might have

         in others.
         I would also like to add that though the Police in the cordon did not
         assist the injured and dying I saw a number of other officers who did.

         In particular two small policewomen who tried to help a very large man

        but couldn't carry him until helped by fans.




                                                           D W EKUDER SIGMEU

     2MENT TAKEN
           FLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:   270489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE
OFFICERS SI31ATURE




 (
                                                                                                                           W   iU

                                          West Midlands Police                                                             ‘s-3->
                                                                                                                           (Amended 10.
                                          STATEMENT OF WITNESS                                                                      ^ *
                          ( C .J . Acc I 9 6 7 , i . 9 ; JJ.C. Ac= 1980, * .1 0 2 ; M.C. R u l e . 1981, r . 7 0 J


    Name                                                                Derek Willian BRUDER
    Age                        (Yrs)        Date ofBirth
    Occupation                                                           police Officer (Merseyside Police)
    Heme orbusinessaddress
      jteiepnonenumber
    and             u                                                  Merseyside
                                                                            1     Police
                                                                        ’r’ Division
                                                                        Haleweed Police Station

                                                                        Liverpcci            (05i 709 6010)


This statement, consisting of sever.page (s) each *signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and beiief
and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I snail be liable to prosecution if I have wilfully stated
in it anything which I know to be faise or do n ot beiieve to be true.
Dated the            3rd day of             May        .

Signed            q grujer                                           Signature witnessed by                 ^ Sawers
                                                                      Officers Name                         M R Sawers
                                                                     Rank Inspector                                  No   3^51

    Further to my previous statements of 27 April 19S9 and 17 August 19S9, I
    have been asked to think abcut a number of the points which are raised in

    the scatemer.t I made nearly a fortnight after the Hillsborough Staciun

    disaster on 15 April 19£9•



    Eefcre clarifying a number of these points I would point out that I have

    today been shewn a number of photographs, plans and documents by Inspector

    SAWERS cf West Midlands Police which I have used to refresh my memory.                                                       Ibs

    also fair to say that my first statement (27.4.89) was the first occasion

    thac involvement with the disascer was set dcwn in any detail, in writing,

although I did make some brief notes myself on Sunday, 15 April 19S9.                                                          I

retain these in my possession and would say that they do not relate to my

dealings with any deceased casualty that day.




Signed           D Brude>"                  /L        ^        l Signature witnessed bv             M Sawers Inspector

•    D e ls :; as applicable               PS7 J
                                            \              y
                                      rfV C O * t v < i u < « 4 i v l O r w l i t / C                          (Aaantiad 9.31}


                                      STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                       ( C . J . Act 1967, a. 9} S .C . Ac= 1980* j. 1 0 2 ; M.C. fculea 1981, r . 7 0 )


 Continuation of statement of                          DEREK W.^L-AM Er.UEcH                 (2)


 I am a single man and joined Merseyside Police on 27 October 1927.' During
 initial training at Bruche District Training Centre, Wcrringtcn, I received

 basic first aid resuscitation in both theoretical ar.d practical
 application.          I obtained a pass and was issued with an identifying card

 qualifying me for, I think, 2 or 3 years.                                    Cn 15 April 1989 I had received
 nc further instruction or refresher training in basic first aid.                                                However,

 as a direct result of the situation I found myself in on the day cf the

 disaster I personally felt inadequately equipped in either theory-cr
 practise of first aid.                 I am absolutely satisfied that the first aid I

 rendered in terms of mouth to mouth resuscitation and heart massage were
 correct and that I could have done no more, but, nevertheless, 1 felt 1

 didn't know enough and regretted not having taken that aspect cf initial

 traning seriously enough.


 For these reasons, I applied on my own initiative for further first aid

 training in the form of a one week full time course leading to

 qualification as a first aid public order trained officer.                                                I undertook

 the course in June last year, which means I new have a special role within

 public order deployments to treat casualties either of mescers cf the

 public or police officers as injuries occur.



As a result of that course, I feel confident and much better equipped to

deal with injured people whether these injuries be miner cr life
threatening.          It also confirms that, in fact, my actions were rigr.t cn tr.e
day and my attempts at resuscitation, although unsuccessful, were prcper.y

administered.



Signed    D B ruder                                       Signaturewflnassad by         M Sawers Inspector
                                                    STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                    ( C . J . Ace 1 9 6 7 ,* .9 ; H.C. Act 1980, » .1 0 2 ; B.C. B u la a l f S l , r . 7 0 )


  C o n tin u a tio n ot s ta te m e n t of                   D E r.i.\    ti       A d 3RU D & 3      (3 )




 I will now deal with                            a number of specific points frcm                                       ay       original     statement
 (27.4.89) using the page numcers of that statement.                                                          I understand that the
 numbers I will use in bracks-3 are these of the file cf statements
 contained in respect of Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS, prepared by West Midlands

 Police under the deceased reference number 5'.


On Page          6     (File page                41) I first refer to the youth I                                      new know          to   beKevin

Daniel WILLIAMS lying a 1/4 length of the                                                pitch frcm the Spion Kop. I
refer to him being "on the fleer", meaning the pitch surface, and "having

convulsions”. I have thought about this carefully today and with the added

benefit of my training I can say that this was not a process that lasted

for any time.                    It certianly wasn't anything similar tc an epileptic fit,

for example.                   It was an impression that I had which I originally associated

with the lad vomitting.                             I will say that I did net see the casualty vomit

nor did I see any sick on the body or grassed area around him.                                                                  I will
correct further references to vcmit as they occur in mr original statement.


Cn page 7 (42) I describe approaching the body.                                                    He was not convulsing as I

did so (line 5).


I refer to feeling for a carotid pulse in the neck anc said originally that

I thought I could detect a sligr.t pulse, however, I ncv feel that I an abie

to correct this.                        I felt for the pulse with my firs- tve fingers of my le: t

hand, I believe, tc the carotid artery.                                            I car.r.ot say absolutely that I

felt for the pulse before I started south to mouth or after; ncr indeed

whether I did both simultaneously.                                        Whilst I would new have much mere



 Signed          D Bruder                                                 Signature witnessed by        m Sawers Inspector
                                                                                                          WG *13   (SO G22)
                                       West Midlands Police                                               (Aoeodad 9.31)

                                       STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                         ( C . J . Ac: 196*,a .9 ? M.C. Acc 1980, * .1 0 2 ; M.S. Xul«s 1931, r .7 0 )


 Continuation of statem ent of         DEREK WIL— AM sRUDER (4)


skill, cn the day I cannot say with absolute certainty that I went

accurately straight to the carc:ic artery.



Fcr ail those r e a s o n s , I car. say that I felt for a pulse in the region cf
the carotid artery, but I may have also touched the area of the "Adams

Apple" or felt something in the neck region which I originally thought was

a pulse but may have been mistaken.


I refer to the face going "grey” and "his face was withdrawn".                                           1 cannot
say specifically that this was a change from ncrnai pallor to grey, or what
I now know to be cynosis or blueness.                           I mentioned it in the sequence cf

when I became aware of it.


I refer tc approaching the lad and having the impression that his head

rrcvec and associating this with his being sick.                                 I as new absolutely

satisfied that he was not sick, or certainly I did not see vcmitting or

vcnit.      The movement of the head, if thats what it was, I would say its

test described as a "twitch".


I refer tc clearing his mcuch before resuscitation, by that I mean tc say I

checked that his airway was clear before expressing air into his mouth.

There was a fluid of seme description but I accept reacily that this ccu.c

have beer, spittle cr phlegm.




 Signed       D Brucer                                    SignatunTwtnssaed by          ^ Sawers InspeC-OT
                                    West Midlands Police                                                 ttc 413 (S
                                                                                                          (Aaaodad 90
                                                                                                                    .3C
                                                                                                                      1)22)


                                    STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                      ( C . J . Ace 1967, « . 9 ; M.C. Ace 1980, *.102; M.C. 2 u la « 1981, r . 7 0 )


Concnuation of statement of             DEnEX                   Br.UDER (5)


  I refer to the man going grey after about 5 minutes and a very distinctive

 saeil coming from his mouth.                     This was again net vomit but its true to say
  I can still remember it now as it caused me to‘heave and feel sick myself.


 I refer to performing mouth to mouth whilst the St John ambulanceman did
 heart compression for about 7 minutes.                            Whilst this is purely recollection
 I believe it to be reasonably, accurate.


 Having changed places with the St Johns ambulanceman I refer to feeling
 what I thought was an usual rib cage and abdomen.                                   A photograph I have been

 shown at post mortem appears to support this.



 I refer to unzipping the lad's trousers at this point and in my second

statement recollect the striped boxer shorts which I have seen in

 photographs (Ref No TT1/31 and TT1/32).


 I have been shown documents which purport to give timings of the arrival cn

 the pitch of the 1st ambulance (St Johns Ambulance) and the 2nd ambulance

 (being the 1st SYMAS ambulance).                       I have considered this information
 (referred to as MAP 1 15-15-32 and RJH2 15.’7.06) in comparison with the

photographs PH5/A/32 and PF.5/A/33 which purport to shew the casualty being
carried cn a stretcher at 15.32 and which I understand wculd be before I

saw and assisted tc resuscitate him at the Spier Kcp end of the ground.




                                                        -cnature witr.assac   ty        k*              —- - -   *
                                                                                                           « c *13 (SO C22J
                                       West Midlands Police                                                (Aaeadad 9 .8 1 )


                                       STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                         ( C . J . Acs 1967, • . 9 ; M.C. Ac: 1980, * .1 0 2 ; M.C. &ula« 1981, r .7 0 )


 Continuation of statem ent of             DEREK WILLIAM BRUDER                  (6 )



I cannot reconcile the time sequences and I an still sure that I did see ar.
asU:ulance, distinguish in my owr. mind that it was not of St Johns but
Health Authority and that I told the St Johns man with me tc step the

ambulance.         I have considered that what I referred to may have been this

azsbulance exiting from the stadium but I don't think it was. My

recollection is still that it was entering the stadium.



I refer to being joined by a woman St Johns Ambulance Officer who pushed me

c u z of the way.          I recollected this to have been about 6 minutes after I
had changed places with the male St Johns Officer.                                      That makes a total,

frcta recollection, of 13 minutes joint resuscitation with the St Johns
male.     I would standby these estimates only in as much as I feel we

attempted resuscitation for between 10 and 15 minutes. Within a further two

minutes of both St Johns people working together the man declared "He's

gene" and stccc up.               I referred to and re-affirm that he was "completely

grey" ar.d there is absolutely no doubt in ay mind, both new with the

benefit of further training, and then at that mcmer.t, that the youth I had

tried tc save was dead; certainly dead and beyond any further help-                                            I and

the St Johns personnel would not have stopped if there had been any

glizaaer cf hope at ail - there was none.



I describe the bedy of the youth on p. 8 and 9                                        4 4^) and believe tne

distinguishing features I referred to 12 monthsage are plain to see cn

photographs.




                                                              (^£5)
              D Bruder                                                                       M Sawers Inspec-or
Sigr.ed                                                   Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                             WG *15 (SO C22J
                                       West Midlands Police                                                  (Amsodad 9.81)

                                       STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                        ( C . J . A ct 1 9 6 7 ,« .9 - M.C. Acs 1980, j . 102; M.C. &ule« 1 981, r . 7 0 )


 Ccnur.uaticn of statement of                DEHEX WILLIAM BRUDER (7)




I have seen injuries shewn or. photographs of the neck area, however, I did

nos see then or notice then on the day.



                    D Brucer
                    M Sawers Inspector




                                                                (2     S      7 )


Signed          D Bruder                                 Signature w itnessed by       M Sawers Inspector
                                                                             STATION

NAME; * . ,     CEHFA JANE
                MARTIN

ACCRESS:


age   / CATS 3F BIRTH:___           __________
CCCLTrATICN:    PCL SC221

Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 paces, each signed
tv me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
ir knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I knew
to be false cr do not believe to be true.


DATED: 080589                                                   D J MARTIN (SIGNED)


  (     I aa Debra Jane MARTIN and I live at the above address. I am
                                /



         single.     My occupation is i                  I am also a Special Police
         Constable number 221 based at WXDSEATS (E2 Sub-divisicn) of South

         Yorkshire Police.

         Cn Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I paraded for duty at 9.00am
           (0900) at HILLSBCRCUGH Football stadium where there was a briefing for
         all officers involved in the semi-final between LIVERPOOL and

         NCffZINGiAM FCREST. The briefing was at 9.45am (0945).
         At 10.20am (1020) I returned to the gym at the football ground for a

. ^     separate briefing fcr special constables.
         At 10.35am (1035) I left HILLSBCRCUGn stadium to patrol HERRIES RCAD
         SCX'IH to step the parking of-cars by fans cn the hard shoulders. I

         did this with S.C.206 BAKER. We continued to patrol KEKRIZS RCAD

         SCCIH, which is a very leng read, until about l.ICpnv (1310) that

         aftarr.ccn. At this time we had orders to cc to FE2JISICNE RD to cover

         traffic cutside the main entrance gates fcr the NCTTS FCREST fans.
        At this point I saw about 6 ticket touts.         I saw them selling tickets

        and money changing hands.         I also saw numerous fans bcth Liverpool

 ■/h i:        ts        F-y-k^d: ' j ) T m        ±                    "U          ^
S - ic d &   'n e ^ ir                  _c? 3 .
MAFITN                 DEBRA JANE

 far.s and Notts Forest, who vrere obviously drunk, although at this
stage they were behaving reasonably.
At about 2 .45pm (1445) I started to make my way to the IZPPING5 LANE
entrance, as I passed what I think is the main entrance to the SPICN
KQF, the turnstiles were shut dcwn.
At about 2.50pm (1450) there was trouble at these turnstiles when the        j
                                                                             \
Notts Forest fans, realising they were being locked out, were trying         \
any way they could to get in, this included paying money to the
turnstiles stewards and trying to buy tickets frcsn the torts. The

crcwd became very abusive and angry and I had to assist in the
renewal of fans from the ground.. . I was on the road side and the
police inside were passing fans back out over the turnstiles and

there was a very large number of fans trying to get in still, so much
that mounted officers and their horses were being pushed op against

the wall. The next thing I know is a large blue gate was opened and
a large majority of the crowd pushed their way into the ground.      I
found myself being carried along with the crowd unable to resist. A
ncunted officer grabbed my collar but had to let co, because he would

hava been pulled from his horse.    I got pushed to the floor, but I

managed to get back to my feet by pulling myself up a man's back.        I
then           opening my eyes and finding myself inside the ground,             I

at the bottom of the Spion Kcp and the gates had been shct behind____ _Jl
ae.    I asked the steward on the gate to let me out, but at first he

refused, it was only when a ncunted officer, the same one who had

triad to help me a few manents earlier, put his horse up against the

gats, he opened it a short way and let me out.
Ones outside I found myself surrounded by drunken fans, screaming

abuse, and the area covered by police. An officer used ay radio to

try and call for back up but to no avail because the channel was
MAP TIN                DEBRA JANE

full cf static. My radio was handed back to me and I ran to the
Leppings Lane end of the ground.    Ambulances and police cars were
rusning to that end of the ground.    When I got to the Leppings Lane
end of the ground I saw a vast crowd outside the turnstiles trying
to get in, it must have been about four times larger than the crcwd

I laft at the other end, so that would mean the crowd at the Spion
Kcp end numbered about 1000 plus and I would estimate about 4000

outside Leppings Lane end.
I can't really remember how, but somehow I got inside the ground,       j

through the large blue gate which was open, and I ended up on the j .

pitch.    I did not go through the tunnel.
Onca cn the pitch I saw a lot of people who were obviously injured

and I can remanber a man caning up to me shouting, "THERE'S IWD DEAD

YOU BASTARD". I then saw people who appeared to be dead. People
were screaming and shouting and ambulances were driving onto the pitch
I assisted other police officers with dead and injured people and

heloed to take then on stretchers to the gym, and I can remember

seeing officers frcm E2 (WXDSEATS) everywhere.
I tock about 6 dead to the gym, as well as many injured and whilst I

was trying to revive a young boy I remember something hitting me on
the back of my head, but I didn't really notice until much later when
I f^und a large swelling.    I could see many bodies being put on the
pitch, seme of them appeared to be dying.    I lost count of the number

of bodies I helped carry into the gym.                                      }

I haloed carry a young boy into the gym frcm the pitch nearby.   Ke         j
steeped breathing so I gave him the kiss of life, and heart massage
and a doctor also helped.    He started breathing and opened his eyes,

his only word was "MCM' and then he died.
At 4.06pn (1606) Dr CURPEN certified death and I stayed with him.     I
 MSJRnN               DEBRA JANE                                           4

would describe him as white male, 5'6-5'7, 14-15 yrs, slim build and
 brcvn hair, with a cut under his chin.    He had slightly crooked
teeth, there were no other marks on the body.     He was wearing a white
shirt, green sweat shirt, beige trousers, white socks, white Feeboks
and green and white boxer shorts.    He had a gold metal chain with a
gold horn, a bus ticket, a train ticket and an entrance ticket. He
had no identification or money.     I later found out the number given

to this boy was 51.
I stayed with the body and at 5.20am (0520) Sunday 16 April
(160489) an ambulance arrived and I went with the body together with .

DC PCNT and GRIFFITHS to the Medico Legal Centre, WATER LANE,
Sheffield.   I stayed with the body until he was stripped and details

takan fran me.   I finally went off duty at 6.30 (0630) on Sunday

16 April 1989 (160489).
At about 6.30pm (1830) Monday 8 May 1989 (080589) I saw PC's MORGAN
and GODWIN fran West Midlands Police at my heme.    PC ? shcv^d to me a

partially completed report of death form that I identified as being
the form I filled in whilst in charge of the body, details of name

and other personal details are missing because there had been no
identification made by the time I went hone. All I can say is this
fora relates to body 51.   I new knew this is Kevin David WILLIAMS,

b. 27.5.73 (27051973) of




                                                                               5
        mafhn             DEBRA JANE


                                         D J MARTIN SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
         -FLACE:

         TIME:          DATE:   080589
illNESS ID SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




  (




 (
                                                                           STATION

NAME:           CESFA JAJE
                MARTIN

ACCRES3:

AGS / EATE ZF BI3TH:
CXTCUFATiai:                 POL SC221


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 paces, each signed
by me, is true to the test of mv knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I knew
to be f.aise cr do net believe to be true.


DATED: 1703=0                                                 D J MARTIN (SIGNED)


         Further to rrry previous statements I would like to add the following,

        Cn Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I worked in the capacity of
        Special Constable at the F.A. Semi-Final football match between

        Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham Forest F.C. which was being played at
        the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield.
        My recollection of the events of that day are vague and confused.
        As a result of the disaster I was prescribed medication by my Doctor
        to assist me to sleep.    I was really upset by the whole incident and

        was cn medication for abcut a week.      The result being that I was in a

        state of what I can only describe as semi-consciousness. I felt like
        a 'Zariie.'
        As a result cf this I feel that ny memory, my recollection of that day

        is possibly inaccurate.    I am unsure of what time I arrived at the

        Letpincs Lane entrance to the ground cr even hew I came to be cn the

        pitch but I did.

        Ey time I got onto the pitch it seemed to be mass confusion, there
        wers police officers and supporters all over the place.       I could see

        pecple who appeared to be injured and possibly dead, lying on the

   s f 'h(C      /V    £?chihtC       eX > T m     J2    r e f e r r e d   ~Cc      Ltl

    sCtaU'mO'ct         ' d a - t z d ____
                                DEBRA JANE
             r in

                    i was in a state of shcck.    I didn't knew what to do but my
     p i —    *•

         oral instinct was to help these people in the best way that I could.
     I can't describe to you in any detail my exact movements o v e r the next

     half an hour or so.        I knew that I approached several people lying on
     the pitch and assisted if possible.           I did not give any of these
    people mouth-to-ncuth or heart massage.
     I decided that there were enough people dealing with the situation

    at the Leppincs Lane end of the ground and made my way to the Spion

    Rep end of the ground.
    I could see that bodies ware being carried fran the Leppincs Lane end
    to the Spion Kcp end of the ground and then being placed on the pitch.
    I assisted to carry a number of dead and injured people from the Spion
    Kop end of the pitch, into the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary

    had been set up.         I was talking to some of these people, comforting
    then and trying to reassure then.            I am unable to describe^any of

    these people in the detail.
    .By this time I really was in a state of shcck, I couldn't believe what

    I was seeing.         I seemed to be on autanatic pilot.    My memories are

    very confused and distorted.
    I can recall carrying a youth who I now knew to be, Kevin Daniel
(   WILLIAMS from the pitch to the gymnasium. He was the last person that
    I assisted in carrying.         I first saw Kevin WILLIAMS lying on the pitch
    near to the goal area at the Spibn Kop end of the ground. At that

    stage he wasn't on a hoarding or a stretcher.
    I rasienber that there were several people around where he was lying.

    I can't recall anyone giving him mouth to mouth.           With the help of

    othar people, who I can't recall, Kevin WILLIAMS was placed onto a

    hoarding and carried into the gymnasium.           Someone instructed me to

    stay with the body.



                                                                                    5
      riN               DEBRA. JANE


 I   didn't knew what to do.   I didn't want to believe the boy was dead.
 I   didn't knew if he was dead or not but I decided that I had got to
 attanpt to revive him.    I started to give him mouth-to-mouth but
 scsrscne, I don't knew who, touched me on the shoulder and told me he
was dead.     By this time my head had gone, I wasn't aware of what I was

doing or what was really happening.
At 16.06 hours (1606) Doctor CURPEN examined Kevin WILLIAMS and

certified him dead.
I ramenber a detective officer,                     helping me to
carolete the GEN 18 form (sudden death form).
I stayed with the body until the early hours of Sunday 16th April

(160489) when I escorted Kevin WILLIAMS, who at this stage had not

been identified, to the Medico Legal Centre.
I identified the body b y the number allocated, which in the case was

Nuiroer 51.   I had no further dealings with Kevin WILLIAMS.
This statement is made to the best of my recollection and I believe it

to be the truth.    However, under the circumstances I cannot be

positive that the details are accurate.     I have been quite badly
affacted by the whole incident and I am trying to erase it from my

marory.
I have marked on a plan of the pitch (Reference D.J.M.l) the

approximate location where I first came into contact with the

deceased/ Kevin Daniel WILLLAMS.

D J Martin
                           DEBRA JANE
        PkprH'i

                                            D J MARTIN SIQJED


          FL^CE:
          TIME:           DATE:   170390

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:   WPS 7844 AFFLETCN

OFFICERS SI3©TURE:      JULIE APPLETCN




  (




  (
 //                       2S05S9


                                     f i e   P   E   i - J    D   i X     < 3


       Surname             PHILLI

       forenasaes          GLYN

       Age •                                            •Date of birth                            f
                                                     "J’r: •• :.
       Address;

       Occupation          MEDICAL PRACTITIONER 1

       Telephone

       IC      —           Height                        Build
       Hair colour
Q ^ a i r ty p e
      ^Pes                                               Complexion
      facial hair
      Glasses              Use                           Accent

      Number of Pages
      Dated                1.5G58?                                                 G Phillips Signe

                   I am Dr Glyn Michael PHILLIPS of 36 Queensberry AVE/ Clarkston,
                   Glasgow G76 a fully qualified medical practitioner having qualified

                   from Leeds University in June 198G.            My qualifications are PUS. Ch . 8
                   M.R.C.G.P. D.R.C.O.G.
* (<


                   I arrived in Sheffield at about 2.00 pm (1400) on Saturday, 15th
                   April 198? <150489) with my brother and two friend*.             We parked abou
                   half to three-quarters a mile from the ground and then walked to the
                   Lappings LN end of the ground.            I noticed that the pubs were open
                   with fans- relaxing outside with drinks.             The pubs all seemed to have
                   been open on the route from the motorway to the ground.              I
                   specifically remember thinking that this would not have been the cas
                   in Scotland where I now live and work.




                                             <
                                             3
                                             >
                                   -   -         V. 1   ,     1   '   v V I fctv   iJWirm— ?
                                                                                     KftUt
                                                                                     S771

At about 2.10 pm (1410) we arrived at the ground.                 Many fan* were
                              i            .,
loosely congregated and moving freely about.                The turnstiles were
quite quiet with approximately ten to fifteen people in each q u e u e d

My carrier bag was searched by a Policeman.             Once inside the                  •,>.
                                                                                          'i
turnstile it was again easy tjjPwove abo.ut freely and my young brothe:
bought a programme.     My carrier bag was searched again by a Policema-
inside the turnstile.     I visited th* Gents and then we made our way
Xo the terracing - the centre“section.          Walking through the tunnel t
the terracing was not difficult, there was no pushing o r crowding at
lhat stage.   On reaching the terrace we found that it was already
quite full.   We decided to move to the right (looking at the pitch)
away from the tunnel.


Two of us reached the point about ten yards from the pitch fence'end
realised we were separated from the other two.                On seeing them highe
up we made our way up to the crowd to join them about fifteen to
twenty yards away from the perimeter fence and five yards from the
fence separating the centre end side sections of the terracing.


Between 2.20 pm (14-20) and 3.00 pm (1500) we gradually became more
and more tightly packed.     Much more so than even in a tight crewd^i
the Anfield Kop.   It became so .tight that occasionally surges of
pushing and pressure did not actually cause any movement of note.
Occasional groans of pain were heard.           I specifically mentioned to m
friend “It's so tight in here.that we are not even surging at all,
just oscillating more or less on the spot."


1 noticed that despite this increase in pressure in the centre
section, fans on the other side of the fence (ie. in the side sectic
to our right) v/ere moving about freely and that section did not




                             <D
                      'Ig" 4*-o* '       i wwgum i oi vnMMDcno-’   gji            u
                                                                            S771
appear to be filling at all.
                                     i


I lo c k e d up.   from time to time to the frsnt of the standi above and ■

behind us - there was a Police Sergeant there observing the
                                                                              •   ? .


terracing but not really doi'hjj^much.                                              ~


A few policemen on the pitch side of the perimeter fence did not seer

to have noticed (1) how tight*we were packed and <Z) that the side

section was noticeably more empty.



Fans fiegan to express their discomfort by criticising the ground.                  I
brought no response in terms of action from the police.


I vaguely remember a lannoy announcement asking us to move down to

the front - there were ironic jeers frem the crowd in response to

this.


The game started.         I didn't feel any surge in terms of movement -
just another noticeable increase in the by now abnormal level of bod

pressure all round.          People stood on barriers in front and shouted

*'<Set back, get back.1'         This was impossible, we were all pinned

stationary by the pressure from front, sides and back.


Policemen at the perimeter fence at last seemed.' to notice the
problem.     .The gate was opened*        A policeman tried in vain to pull a
                                                               \
fan out.     I could not see the game which had stari^d never mind what
was happening on the terracing below us.               The policeman looked very

worried and seemed to shout into his radio as he locked to his left

and my right.        I got the impression he was saying "Step it, stop it,

stop it” - I assumed he meant the match.
                                                                   PAGE
                                                                   S771


Of the six minutes of the match (I heard later it was six minutes) X
                                                                        •   •


remember less than twenty seconds.     I was so intent and occupied fif-
eur safety that watching the match was impossible.     I .tried to kee-^
an eye on my young brother wjjc^Ava's pressed firmly against the side

fence a few yards away.    He seemed okay but I couldn't get near him

anyway.


Fans seemed to spill over the front perimeter fences but they were
walking and running although obviously shaken.


The match stopped and many police arrived at the perimeter fence. ^


Fans next to the side fence had begun to climb over in small numbers
to reach the side section of terracing.     A very distraught young fnan
on the other side of the fence (he had previously been in the centre
section) shouted "Get over the fence - they're getting squashed at

the bottom."


One by one fans climbed over. 1 followed my brother over and by then
1 saw the first of the injured or dead being lifted out at the
front.    I immediately headed for the pitch gate.   At the gate there
were two or three policemen inside the terrace and one or two on the •
trackside.     I shouted "I'm a doctor, let me on the pitch."   1 was           j
pushed away as a body was passed through (having been lifted over thet
side fence and carried     to the gate in the side section where I by    ;
                                                                         I
then was situated).     1 put my foot on the wall and a policeman calleoj
                                                                                i
jne as X leapt up.    My head struck the crossbar of the gate with a            I
heavy blow.    Adrenalin   coursing through my body rendered the blow           !
virtually painless but     I felt.unsteady for a few seconds.                   1



                              <£>
                  ■ iw    *♦ s c   i         tiTwovami   oi   w-nM«ocr\o"’         usi   iia o i#   o
                                                                                             PAGE
                                                                                             S771



I made my way on to the pitch end reached a tody near the goal line.
                                                                                              ,     *


Somebody was crouched over it.                 I asked i* he breathing, has he gtHt-

pulse. the answers were no.                 I saw he was cyanosed and was                           ^

pulseless.     I knelt next to tJJKn 'thumped and thumped his chest herd

three times.     I commenced mouth to mouth resuscitation and instructs

the man next to me te give cardiac massage in the ratio 3-1.                               1 made

a conscious decision “This man was one of the first out. therefore,
           i
give him a decent chance at cerdiopulmonary resuscitatioriT"



AS we continued to give CPR I shouted to nearby policemen te find

out if we could get a Defibrillator and some oxygen.                              We continued .

with CPR and I discovered my assistant was a male nurse.


We were by now surrounded by milling figures in black - policemen an-

policewomen.    A distraught teenage fan came over and put his face up

to that of the body and yelled words like "Come on mate, don't die,

you can't die, you're a Liverpool fan."                       I was told that there was n-

Defibrillator but 1 was given an oxygen cylinder and informed that i'
was switched on.         I pulled the flimsy ventimask off the tube and put

the open tube in my own mouth to enrich the oxygen in the air I was

giving to the patient.



We continued with CPR.                 1 soon realised nothing               was coming out of th
tube.   The valve was turned on and I looked at the gauge which

showed an empty tank.              I discarded the tube.


People kept coming up and shouting advice and Z kept informing them
that 1 was a doctor and knew what 1 was doing.
                  ;10“ 4-82 ;     ; DOUGHTY ST CHAMBERS-*      051 225 21351# 9
                                                                           PAGE .
                                                                           S771

A gentleman with a blazer end tie indicated he was a doctor and gave

encouragement.

                                                                           ■■   ^
Ten minutes passed.      The patient seemed te have lost some of his

cyanosis but he was still pul^'yl'ess.      At ten minutes I said "Five

more."     By now there was a cacophony of sound around me and from tfte

terracing.     However, as 2 was surrounded by people mainly standing,

I could    not see anything that “was happening      at the front of the
centre section.     A distraught young fan      was making it difficult for
me te concentrate and I asked a policeman to "Get rid of him."             He

gently escorted the fan away.



At about fifteen minutes 1 was ebout to say to a policeman to cover

the body when his heart sprang to life and he developed a good

pulse.     He was still not breathing so I continued to ventilate him.
A policeman asked if I needed a stretcher and I said yes.            One

arrived    andwe lifted the man bn to it.        We lifted and started

towards    the ambulance which had arrivedbehind the        goal.



As I stood up I saw for the first time some suggestion of the scale
of the casualties.      To get to the ambulance we had to step over abo4^
ten bodies.     They mostly looked like young men, some had their heads

covered with Police raincoats.



We had to stop every few paces so 1 could give the patient a breath

into his lungs.     As we lifted him into the ambulance I saw the bodies
of two young men already in there.       I continued to ventilate him witf
mouth to mouth resuscitation         he began to make his own breathing

efforts.




                                Q
               ill)-               1 DOUGHiY 51 CHAMBcKi-*      V&1   Z135I#10
                                                                           PAGE'
                                                                         ■ S771
It is almost impossible to express my thoughts at that time.             No
                               t
words will do but it felt like a chaotic nightmare overloading all *

senses.
                                                                                 r*.
                                                                                 Y.
I told the ambulance man and;Jar police sergeant that the man was

seriously ill and needed a hospital "Nov.*.'*         The ambulance man said

he couldn’t get out.      This added to the frustration - not helped

by my thoughts that in view of the length of time he was pulseless,

it would probably be kinder if he died.           I am sure he must have been
severly brain damaged by that time.



I left him lying on his side breathing on his own and asked a

policeman to try to get him to hospital as soon as possible.             I said

I would go to see if 1 could help somebody else.             It seemed at that

time that the perimeter fence was obscured by policemen and some fan-
trying to get people out of the terraces.



I searched for somebody needing help.          I stopped a group of fans

lifting a body on a makeshift stretcher, some of them seemed to be

trying to do CPR.      I saw that it was a boy aged about 14.         I said to

them that if they wanted to give him a chance, they should stop and

do the resuscitation properly.



They put him down and I started mouth to mouth - filling hit lungs
with air.   A girl next to me did the heart massage..          His face was

covered with vomit and he was obviously dead so we stopped within

about 60 seconds.


I looked desperately for somebody not dead but seriously ill who neec

help.   I could not find anybody, in that category in the goal area.




                                Q
                             a-a/       • UUIKjMIY ST CHAMBERS'*        051 225 2135;#11
                                                                                     PAGE *
                                                                                     S771

They were all either dead or skay with nothing in between.                       I looked
                                    »
up end saw three or four      groups of people at the other end of the
pitch giving CPR.    I ran    to the other end.

                                                                                           *•*«
                                                                                     •Y.
The first body 2 came to was'^m'an about 25 year* old.                     A dark haire*
young woman in a Celtic football shirt was trying to give him CPR. '

asked "Has he a pulse," she said “I don’t think so."                     I started

giving him mouth to mouth as tfhe did the cardiac massage.                     After a

short -while we swapped over.           Opposite me his friend (or brother?)

was beside himself with overwhelming grief and distress.                     He was

snouting words like "Come on, you're not dead*1 and looking at me

shouting "Keep going, don’t stop, don't stop.”



I said to the girl quietly "He's gone."                She replied calmly but
obviously very sadly "I know."             His friend (brother) was so much in
despair.    Another young doctor took my place doing heart massage,                          n

was hopeless.


I went to the other two or three bodies,,                People were doing very goo«
cardiopulmonary resuscitation but it was obviously too late for them^


Z said to a photographer      that Ihoped that the papers                were going to

"H-ammer this ground for what happened today."                 I told    them my name ai

about the absence of equipment.             They took a photograph despite me

telling them not to.


1 went to the side of the pitch (opposite the players tunnel) and sa«
quite a few people propped up against the hoarding with somebody
helping them all.    Z shouted that I was a doctor and did anybody neec
any help.   All I heard in reply was that they were ail okay.                     The




                        (D
                n o - 4-92 ; « . ^ 8 ~ T D O O B H T Y ST CHAMBERS-*       051 ZZF1135;#12
                                                                                      PAGE
                                                                                      S771 *
only people I had seen carried up the field were deed so I heeded
                                     i
beck to the Leppings LN end.              I pasted through the line of policemen
                                                                                      «•*    »   \


.across the entrance (whet were they doing, I thought - not much !)

As I went through I asked four or five of them if they could tell i^e

where there might be injured $|ople I could help.                        The general reply
was that they couldn't end that they were sorry.



I am fairly sure that I went'tfack into the goal area at the Leppings

LN end.    I have to admit that by now I was angry, confused slightly
and feeling quite helpless.              I did definitely ask a policewoman "1 ar

a doctor, can you tell me where the injured may have been taken so I

might help?"   No she could not.



There did not seem to be much I could do at that end.                        Some people
lying down with people helping said they were okay.                        I could not fim-

anybody seriously ill nssding help.                Just dead or seemingly minor

injuries and shaken people.


I headed towards the other end again.                 Quite a few people asked me

how I was - I remembered my head              and my face was now covered in
blood.    I kept saying "I'm okay"            but I really didn’t feel okay.                         J



1 aksed the police again where I should go.                      They did not know*                  j*
                                                                                                     i
                                                                                                     I
9y now the combination of having              been in thecrush, trying to do                         \
                                                                                                     i
                                                                                                     l
                                                                                                     i
resuscitation on hopeless cases, trying to find others to help, the                                  j
                                                                                                     *
absolute cacophony and confusion, the lack of information from the

police and the bang on my head became too much.                        Z felt very angry

at the way we had been treated.              Z knew who was to blame - the
Police.   Z felt compelled to jtjgjl some senior Liverpool football                         --




                                                                                             1
                  510- 4-92 ; 9:38   I DOUGHTY ST CHAMBERS-*      051 225 2135;#13
                                                                             PAGE
                                                                             S771
club official not to let them blame the fans for this.



I went up the players' tunnel saying "I'm a doctor.              I need to see1*--

somebody in authority from LFC."         These words opened the police

line.   Outside the changing rjpti'my it wa-s very confused.. Lets of men
in suits, blasers and ties.



I saw Jimmy HILL (BBC) and forced him tc listen to my account of wha

happened*     He looked pale and very concerned.           Then a man said "Will
you come and say that on the air?"          I said "Why?" but agreed to.         He

took me a few yards to the laundry.          He put headphones on and wro^l^^

down my name.     He shouted into a microphone “Tell Peter to hand over
to me now!"



Next he was talking and introducing me, and then shoved the big

microphone up to my face.       X felt awful, angry and upset but I Just

started talking.     The last words I said were "It's an absolute

disgrace."     I meant the way we were allowed to get so tightly packed
and on the pitch the total lack or organisation and equipment after •

disaster struck.     I said on the air that I had seen eight to ten

deed.   In retrospect I had probably seen about fifteen so I thought
probably twenty to thirty were dead overall.             The radio men said
thank you in a very sombre voice.         I said "Was that going out live."

He said thank you again and shook my hand.



I went out and saw Kenny DALGLISH.          I told him what had happened and
that he must not let the fans gel the blame.             1 told him that, the
ground (Hi 1lsborough) was "Shit."        He told me that LFC were not happ;

about the ground being used but these things were out of their
control.    He was very shaken.                                                  T
                ;10- 4-92 I 9 =38 .* DOUGHTY ST CHAMBERS-*       051 225 2135i#14
                                                                             PAGE
                                                                             5771


A linesman or the referee showed me into their room to get cleaned

up.   2 did this and inspected the split in my scalp - it needed tw#

or three stitches but that could wait I thought.              I remember         ;v

apologising for getting bloodJ-^n/a towe-1 - how ridiculous!



I went back on the pitch.       All the bodies had gone.         I climbed back
on the terrace up to my brother and friends,            I saw policemen in the
now almost empty centre section collecting belongings.              I told the

lads what had happened on the pitch.          All of a sudden for the first

time I felt a searing pain in my head and said "God, my head hurts."



At no time at Hillsborough did I realise people had died in the
tunnel.   At no time did I see anything to substantiate claims that
policemen were assaulted or bodies were looted.              I saw brave young

fans trying to save lives hopelessly.          I saw brave lads organise

themselves to make makeshift stretchers to carry the dead.               I saw

seme police desperately trying to save lives.            I also saw some pol'ici

standing idly - not knowing what was happening or making any attempt,
to find out.


I did not see at any time any fan (whether before or after the brief

game) misbehave deliberately in any way.



After the game had been abandoned we left the ground via the centre

section on the tunnel.     Remembering the fan we had resuscitated I
gave a policemen my name and address.          I felt it very unlikely that
                                                                                      J
he would have survived and reconciled myself by the fact that if he
had he would have been brain damaged.
    SENT BY:                     n o - 4-92 ;   9:39   ; doughty st chambers-     051 225 2135;#15
                                                                                    ■       '^PAGE
                                                                                               S771



                                                                                G Phillips SIGNAC
         STATEMENT TAKEN
                   PLACES
                   TIME:               DATE:
         WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:
         OFFICERS SIGNATURES
     END OF REPORT




C<




<    (
DR. ASHTOKl
                   Hillsborough, 15th April 1989
                            Dr John Ashton



I am a medical practitioner and senior lecturer in Community (Public)
Health j - - -      -    - --     - ^ 0n Saturday 15th April I went to
the FA Cup semi-final match at Sheffield with other members of my family.
This year we travelled by way of the M62 and Ml because for the same event
last year we had travelled on the direct route through the peak district
and there had been very bad build-ups of traffic on the way home.   We left
Liverpool at about 10.15 am and arrived in Sheffield at about 12.15 - 12.30
pm. We had a meal at a pub some distance from the ground and afterwards
walked perhaps 2 miles to the match. While we were at the pub a coach-load
of Liverpool supporters came in. They were boisterous but well behaved and
there was good humour between them and the local people who were eating in
the dining area.

We arrived at the Leppings Lane end of the ground at around 2.30 - 2.35 pm
(myself__________________________________________________________
It was immediately apparent that itwas going to be difficult to get in.
We had four tickets together for row 2 of the West Stand, above the
Leppings Lane terrace. I had been particularly relieved to obtain seats
this year because at last year's game in the semi-final we were in the
terrace itself (in the right hand corner behind the goal) and it had been
terribly crowded and unpleasant.

On Saturday we found that outside the ground there were a large number of
supporters trying to get in to a small number of turnstiles and that the^e
was verY little police presence. I saw no stewards outside the ground.
There appeared to have been no attempt to marshal the supporters into lines
in advance of our approaching the turnstile areas.

We managed to get nearer to the turnstiles but the crush was becoming
unpleasant. I heard a police officer telling the supporters that it was
their own fault for coming late.
I decided, that I did not want to go on because it was so unpleasant. Carl
said it would only get worse and that he was going in.          Matthew and
Nicholas insisted on going in with Carl and they stayedwhere they were as
I withdrew to the wrought-iron fence.


After a few minutes I thought I would try again. I could not see my family
and assumed that they had managed to get through the turnstiles. When I
approached again it was now much worse and again I withdrew. I was aware
of an officer trying to close one of the wrought iron gates, but he had no
chance on his own. I noticed that there was now a police landrover in the
lane just outside the gates and my instincts and experience of 30 years as
a Liverpool supporter told me that things were going badly wrong. I went
to the police landrover and obtained the attention of one of the officers.
I said to him, "you've got to get a grip of this situation, it is out of
control, there is going to be a tragedy."         He seemed bemused and
unresponsive. People were closing in around the landrover and I withdrew
to the other side of the road to see if it would ease off and I could try
again. The time now must have been 2.45 - 2.50.


After a   few minutes   I suddenly realisedthat everybody had gone in and I
was able to walk up to the turnstiles and gain admission without difficulty
after tendering my ticket.


Once inside the turnstile it was at first unclear where I should go. Thece
were no stewards in sight and the section labelling was -confusing- I
realised where the entrance was to the West Stand and went to get in after
buying a programme. At this stage I had no idea that things had actually
now deteriorated to the extent that they had done. It must have been just
after 3.00 pm.


When 1 went to the gate into the West Stand there vere a few other people
in the process of getting in and two policemen were checking their tickets.
I then became aware of a man crying and beseeching the police. "There are
kids dying in there," he said, "you've got to do soaething." He seemed to
have come out of the terraced area. The police were unresponsive to him.
They checked my ticket and let me in.



                           (& > '
Once inside the stand area I turned up the stairs, now worried to check
t   h    a   t   w    e   r   e     alright. As I got to the top of the
stairs it was difficult to make progress because there were so many people
in the aisle.    At the top of the stairs I could begin to see why.   Many
people were being pulled up out of the terrace and into the front of the
Stand.

I could neither attempt to get down to row 2 nor see the boys. I decided
to make my way along the adjacent row. Everybody was helpful and I was
able to do this without difficulty. It must have been about row 20. When
I got some way along it I looked     down to see if I could see the boys.
First I saw                                 I was able to make ray way down
to them over the seats.

When I reached them I could see that there were a large number of people on
the pitch, people trying to get out of the terrace on to the pitch and
people were continuing to come up in to the stand. There seemed to be few
St. Johns Ambulance people attending the people who were lying around the
pitch and I could see people lying on the pitch unattended. There was a
large line of police officers across the pitch at the centre circle. The
tannoy told the supporters who were on the pitch to get off it.


The pressure was bad where we were so I made my way back some rows with
Matt and Nick. Carl stayed where he was to help pull people up from the
terrace. When we got further back we had a clear view of what was
happening on the pitch; it seemed incredible.     The time must have been
about 3.15 pm.

The overwhelming impression was of a large and growing number of casualties
and not much response. The supporters were now inpatient and angry at the
slowness of the response to the emergencies. There appeared to be only one
or two stretchers on the pitch and one ambulance was making its way around
from the far corner. The supporters were chanting for assistance to be
brought to the injured who were lying on the pitch. The next thing was
that many of the supporters who were on the pitch began to tear down the
advertising boards and organise themselves into stretcher parties.      This
all happened very quickly.


I heard the tannoy appeal for doctors to help.       I could see that the
situation was really bad and could count six people who appeared to be dead
near the goal mouth. I made sure that ..       . ._        tfere safe with
     and that I knew where they were and made my way out down the back of
the Leppings Lane Stand.

On the stairs a policeman was attending somebody who was injured.        The
injuries did not appear to be critical so I asked the policeman where I
should report to help. He did not know. I went back into the stand and
brought the boys out and down the stairs to place them somewhere safe and
in sight. I then tried to find somebody in charge to tell me who to report
to. I asked several officers, but none of them knew. There were people
lying everywhere in the yard area between the Stand and the turnstiles. I
asked the officer who was in charge and he indicated a senior officer. I
approached this officer and told him that I was a doctor and asked him who
was in charge of emergencies and where I should report. He said he did not
know and that he had just arrived. By this stage I realised that there was
no organised response and I was angry. I asked the officer for his number
but he did not appear to have one. I asked for his name. He said he was
Inspector Grace. I left him and went to see what I could do.


All around were people either dead or unconscious, or seriously hurt. The
supporters were fantastic. They were all helping each other and trying to
resuscitate people. Individual police officers were also doing what they'
could.   At no time did I see anybody attack a police officer, nor did I see
anybody who was drunk.

I came to the conclusion that somebody needed to take an overview of the
situation and began to go round all the casualties to appraise them. There
did not seem to be any St. Johns Ambulance workers around at all. I became
aware that some casualties were being taken out into Leppings Lane itself
 and I went out there.     There was one ambulance.   The time must have been
 about 3.30 - 3.35 pm.
The policy were beginning to put people into the ambulance and I realised
that a system of prioritising by triage was needed. So I did this. I went
around and either checked people myself or asked the person who was
attending them.   There were two or three other health workers in evidence
who were assessing, resuscitating and doing what they could.         There
appeared to be no medical or emergency equipment.


The dead were taken to one side and I allocated the other casualties to
category one or category two. I told the police who should be despatched
by ambulance next and who could wait. The officers were mostly very good.
They took my instructions and acted on them immediately. By this time
there was a steady flow of ambulances. It must have been 3.45 or 3.50. I
became aware of a local general practitioner who had arrived at the scene.
Over the next half an hour we worked together as a team, sorting the
casualties and despatching them in the ambulances. An anaesthetist arrived
from somewhere and fir6-engines came with resuscitation equipment, but all
of this was really too late. By 4.25 pm it was all over. The serious
casualties had gone to hospital and what remained were people with minor
injuries, shock and distress and a line of dead people. I went to check
that my family was alright and when I came back a police officer asked me
to certify the deaths. A general practitioner had already started this at
one end of the row of bodies.    I started at the other.   I think the time
was 4.27 or 4.29 and I think I certified five or six dead.Only one of
whom could be identified from documents on   his body.


During this whole period the public were fantastic, although shocked and
angry. On one occasion at the end a group of young mencame past the
dead, and one of them expressed his anger at police who were standing
there. I told him to "cool it", that it was not helpful and he stopped. I
saw no other episodes like this at all, although there was a general
atmosphere of anger at what had been happening. I remember thinking how
restrained everybody was.

It must have been about 4.30 - 4.35. There did not seem to be anything
else for me to do behind Leppings Lane.     I checked chat
         were alright with       and then made my way to the gymnasium
around tt\p side of the ground to see if I could be of any help there.     I
had become aware that other casualties had been taken to the gymnasium.


At first I had difficulty finding it as nobody could give medirections.
When I arrived there I went in and found that it   was all over.Atone end
there were tables (I think three) which must have been used for processing
details of the injured.   There were now no casualties in this area.   At the
near end of the gym were rows of bodies. On my way past I noticed a large
display of photographs and information on thevail of the       gym showing
Liverpool supporters who were thought to be pickpockets, etc.


I left the gym and returned round to the Leppings Lane end to check my
family again. They were alright. I thought that I should go back to the
gym to see if there would be a debriefing of people involved in the
emergency response, so all four of us went round.     This time it was
difficult to get near the gym because there was a large cordon of police
around it.   I spoke to an officer and he let us through when he knew I was
a doctor and I left Carl, Matthew and Nick safely behind them and went to
the gym.   This time it was very difficult to get in. There was tight
control on the door. I explained vhy 1 wanted to go inand was allowed to
enter.

I asked about a debriefing but nobody could help. Those who had been
helping were being cleared out of the gym. Just then a senior officer
called all the officers together at one end of the hall for a police
briefing.    I don't know what it was about.   I left.


On our way back to Leppings Lane we encountered a police officer who was in
great distress and being comforted by another. I put my arm around him to
comfort him as well. He was sobbing uncontrollably and saying that now the
police would get the blame. Another officer was angry and fo.14 me that he
felt that they had been let down by the .senior officers. He said that
nobody had taken charge and that when senior officers had come they had
been of little use and just got in the way.
We left £.he ground and returned to the car to drive home.   We must have
left the ground by about 5 o'clock.

I would like to say that I have been following Liverpool Football Club for
over 30 years and that I am familiar with the normal range of behaviour of
club supporters. Before the match on Saturday the crowd mood was buoyant
and generally good humoured.    I feel that since the Heysel disaster an
attitude of mind has been cultivated which regards all football supporters
as members of a sub-human species to be contained. As a result crowd
safety has taken second place. On Saturday I believe that this belief
about football supporters contributed to the apparently slow initial
response by the police to what was happening. It seemed that they mistook
the tragedy for crowd trouble.


It is difficult to know how many lives might have been saved if the
emergency response had been more effective, but in my opinion on this
occasion it was woefully inadequate.
                    ±




DR J R ASHTON
Wednesday 19 April 1989

JRA/SMC/statement




                                      7
                                                          HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

                                          Appendix l:                       Eyewitness Accounts




                             7R- FQOTBALSCC**! lV.
              150489
                             CH AlLENGE                                    w *''"'
                 WS3
                                                        UV'Kl ■-                                                   WEST      STAND
                                      ^    ..........        !    .   ..    s, r
                 2                    AiO J I i :%■O H A '^                 “‘                             '•O'A      2
                 105                     at w,;                              .,C5.?.v.
                                                                                                           5=AT        106
                                             WEST          STAi
                                                                                                           :\rr,A.\c£      c
t                                                                                        105
                                                                                                           o -novyav       y
                 12.00
                               H2.00                                                     "* r?
                                                                                                           £       12.00
                                                            V«4j*          ’*'*


THb FOOTBALL A S S C ^ , ,                                                         THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
CHALLENGE CUP SEsVU-riMAL                                                          CHALLENGE CUP SEMI-FINAL
                       LIVERPOOL                                                              LIVERPOOL
                    v                                                                              v •
            NOTTINGHAM FOREST                                                             NOTTINGHAM FOREST
                  a r H'ts-Sacr. ico.- stac.;.. .                                            AT HILi.SSCSC.-JGHSTADIUM
        cA Ti.'«?:^v ;    APJU *5C'; -;•■ ;c.~ »S-j *.V                               SAT’
                                                                                         wSrtAY 15t« hPRIL 1989 •XtC< G?F 300 PM
                     WEST    S*( AND                                                             WEST     STAND

    GAV.V.V>'V   Y                               ^           2                     GANGWAY - Y                             ROiV;     2
£
                                                 ‘••SAY     104                                                            SEAT:     103
£      12.00                                                                      £   12.00
                                          E3!!M«ae                                               THIS PORTION TO BEHEtAWEDr
noR e c c l e s t o n J
                                                                          MHAGER)
  P.     €CC(_€^Tof ^0                    Address:   I                       I

I arrived at the approach to the Leppings Road end of the Hillsborough
Stadium at 1L.2$ hours.    I was accompanied by xsy 27 year old son and
a youiig nan of 17.   ’"'® all   a valid ground ticket.    The immediate
approach to the turnstiles, a distance of some 70 yards, was full of
a jostling crowd of ticket holders tiying to make their way to the
turnstiles.    There vas no semblence of orderly cueues, with some kind
of order trying to be maintained by three mounted police officers.
Despite the lack of organisation and frustration the mood of the fans
remained reasonably co -operative.   To emphasise this, one of the horses
was vexy close to me and accidentally alnost knocked my spectacles off.
The officer apologised and we e.changed smiles and I stroked the horse’s
nose.


The nearer one got to the actual turnstiles the pushing and crashing
became severe.   After approximately ten minutes all three of us were
literally catapulted through the turnstiles.    Over the last ten yards
one had no control whatsoever over our movements.


Once through the tumstile all three of ny party cane together.    Ify son
attempted to remonstrate with a police officer regarding the lack of
organisation on the approach to the turnstile.   He vas warned by a
steward standing alongside the officer to keep quiet because other fans
who had made similar protests had been forcibly ejected from the ground.


Ve then moved away and vent to use the toilet situated in front of us
under the stand.     As we came out of the toilet we vere directly facing
the rear of the turnstile area and were immediately aware of the
opening of one of the gates alongside the turnstiles*     The time was now
just after 11..U0 hours.    Anticipating the ensuing rush I took my
companions to the right, aiming to take our place high up on the terracing
to the left of the Lepping Road Stand facing the playing area.    The
previous year*B experience had alerted me that this was a sensible area
to stand, both from a safety viewpoint and it also provided an excellent
view.      I have a vivid mental picture, as we hurried past the now
infamous tunnel leading to the ill-fated sections, of turning my head
and noticing there vas nobody to be seen, either spectator or official.




                              <£>
The high up area we entered was very full, but with no crash.        We

positioned ourselves within feet of the blue boards.       Looking down from

my high vantage spot I could see the two middle pens immediately behind

the goal were jammed to capacity with a seething mass of people.      To ray

surprise, the pens on the left and right were half empty.       The area on

the far right around the electronic scoreboard was also half empty.

The time of this observation was 14.50 hrs.



%   attention then became diverted when the Liverpool teas) took to the
field, foilowed-a couple of minutes later by the opposition.       At the same

time I was conscious of a few people entering our section behind and

alongside me.     There was no large influx just before the kick-off where

I was standing.


The gane had been in progress for some five minutes with Liverpool pressing

home an attack at the far end, with a corner followed by a shot which hit

the woodwork.     I believe this shot to be significant because it meant

a tremendous surge down the pens behind the Liverpool goal to try ar:d see
what was happening.    This is the normal reaction on the terracing at any
football match.        From my vantage point I was then immediately aware
of fans trying to cone over the metal fence behind the goal.      Some had
been successful and were being led down the touchline by the police*        Others
were being stopped climbing out of the pens despite their obvious protests.
At the sane time a senior police officer ran from behind the Liverpool goal
and approached the referee. He immediately stopped the game talcing both

teams off the pitch.       By this time a few more fans had managed to

escape fro m the pens.    One fan on the field of play appeared to be

pleading whilst he was being forcibly led to the side of the playing area.

Behind the goal the two oens were a seething mass of people with little

or no movement either backwards or forwards.      A few people were being

passed from the "back of the pens to the front.      " The front of the pens
      next to the fence seemed to be flat without the usual bobbing heads.

      Within two minutes of the teams leaving the field I realised something was
    . very wrong.     On reflection I have come to the conclusion that my alarm was

      confirmed due to a combination of medical experience combined with an
      intimate knowledge of years of attendance at football matches on the

      terracing.


      I quickly realised that help would be required on the pitch.      I informed my
      son what I was doing and because I was so close to the entrance to the

      terracing I had entered I quickly made my way down the stairs to find a

      Steward to get me to the side of the pitch.       I quickly found a Steward who
r
    g accepted what X was telling him and he took me through a tunnel under the main

      stand vhere a Police Officer again accepted my explanation of being a trained

      nurse and let me on to the pitch.

      I raced to the area immediately behind the goal net.      The narrow gate belonging
      to the pen behind the net was open with police officers trying to pull flaying

      bodies through the narrow openinr.       Other officers appeared to be trying to
      instruct the fans to trash back ir. the pens.     I helped officers pull people
      through the gate.       We were pullins ar.y part of their body we could get hold
      of.   On reflection X realise now because their bodies were level with the
      bottos of the gate that they must have beer, lying on top of people because
    ^ t h e gap between the bottom of the gate to the floor of the terracing was some

      three feet.


      The first casualties I helped pull through the gate were conscious, but very

      shocked.      I attended to them at the back of the goalmouth on the netting.

      Their recovery was comparatively quick and simple were moved away from the

      immediate area.       Very quickly I was aware that we were pulling out

      unconscious bodies.      I can next recall working on a young man who once he
      was conscious seemed to have chest injuries.      I looked around the goalmouth

      for a stretcher or something to remove him to a place for him to get treatment.
     The scene around me remained completely chaotic with everyone trying to do

     their ovn thing, fans and police all mingling together.       I eventually found

    ' a stretcher lying on the pitch with which I quickly returned to the injured man.

     I literally ordered three police officers to help me lift the patient on to the

     stretcher.   By this time he was complaining about the pain in his chest.          We

     quickly nade our way to the comer of the field between the main stand and the

     Kop and took the young man behind the stand to the St. John’s Ambulance room.

     I then ran back on to the field to the goalmouth.      In that short interval of

     time a lot more bodies were lying behind the goal.       People of all descriptions

     were attempting mouth to mouth resuscitation and cardiac massage.       On the right
(    *and side of the goal net a young girl was being worked on by a man who stated
      e was a surgeon.      I moved to the body next in line and worked with a young

     police officer until the patient appeared to be starting to cone round.           I
     then moved on to the next person who was lying unconscious and unattendedin
     the goalsouth.      I was working alone in this instance giving both mouth to mouth
     and cardiac massage, an impossible and hopeless situation.      The patient started
     vomiting to complicate the issue.      I was conscious of an elderly white haired

     St. John’s Ambulance man working alongside me.      I requested some swabs to clear
     an airway, all that was forthcoming was a dry sponge.        By this time it was

     after 1>-30 hours and we still had no equipment of any sort to work with.         It
    £ is just after that that I was conscious of the first ambulances beginning to

     cake their way on to the pitch.       Eventually I realised that I had lost the

     battle for this young man’s life.        I looked around but I could not see anymore
     unattended "bodies.     By that time our ranks had been swelled by ambulance crews

     and firera-en with some oxygen.

     I next left the field making my way l5ehind the main stand to the gymnasium where
     I understood some of the injured were being taken.      Again I found another scene
     of chaos.    The only entrance to the gym was a door of similar dimensions
     to that found in any household room.       Directly outside this door was the
     St. Johrc*s Ambulance Room.       The space was becoming jammed full of people
     with comparatively minor injuries.       The area was also rapidly filling with

     people presumed dead.
I next assisted police to make some sort of pathway to the floor of the gym by
helping and organising the movement of "both the prospectuve dead, and the

seriously injured.       Inside the gymnasium the space was roughly divided

into two, half for the dead and the rest for the living, with tables set up

to interview the relatives.     I began to work with the injured in the

gymnasium at around 15* 5*5 hours.   I was conscious of around three doctors in

attendance, but when I arrived there there was still no medical equipment of

any sort.     One doctor shouted across the gym for some drugs to treat an

injured fan who was in obvious pain.     There was nothing available so I
volunteered to go to the St. John’s Ambulance room.       I was informed that
they were not allowed to carry any drugs.       I rushed back to the gym asking
some Senior Police Officer on the way if they could obtain some equipment
for us.     Quickly three small plastic boxes arrived with medical equipment
plus an emergency case with drugs in it.      I began passing out the meagre

items of equipment to the doctors present.     There were still only roughly

a dozen injured in the area.     I prepared ten intravenous lines ready for the
Medical Officer to set up, and we commandeered police officers to hold the

I.V. packs because we had no stands to attach them to.         3y then some

semblance of order was being maintained in the part of the gymnasium given

over to the injured.       The other side of the gymnasium was rapidly filling

with the pr-2-C ^ M ^ ^ dea£.   One of the doctors present had taken one of the

three stethoscopes available to enable him to declare thesa clinically dead.

I next tidied up the medical equipment as most of the injured were being
rapidly removed to hospital.     I then began to realise the full extent of
the disaster for there were already over fifty bodies lying on the floor,
f^jr final act in this carnage vas to comfort and stay with the husband of the

young girl whom I had seen attended to behind the goal.     At least I kne\*

she hafl had the best of attention that had been available in the
circumstances.     I stayed with him whilst he gave the necessary details

to the police, and then a local vicar took over from me.

When I left the gymnasium, to my amazement it was.still only 16.45 hours.
Hie longest hour and a half of my life.
PERSONAL OBSERVATIONS


1.   Comparison of the organisation with the previous year.

     The previous year I arrived at the same area of a&nispion at 14.50 hours

     with my daughter.   Before we reached the turnstiles at Leppings Lane

     we had to go through a police filter system, whereby it vas ascertained

     that we did have the appropriate match tickets.

     This year no such system was set up.


2.   Both years I was delayed because of travelling difficulties.     The

     appropriate Authorities had decided to initiate roadworks on the H62
     to commence around a week before each game.      Surely the matches could
     have been taken into consideration when setting up these roadworks.


3.   When we cane throughthe turnstiles for the 1952- game we were met by a
     line of stewards and police officers who gently but fimly prevented us

     from entering the tunnel to the middle sections.     It had been decided
     that these sections were already full to capacity.

     This year no such precaution was in operation.


4»   I can understand thePolice Officers at the turnstiles wishing to open

     the gates to relieve pressure and avoid injury to life or limb, but
     in these days of ultra modern and sophisticated personal communications

     surely it could have been done in conjunction with their central police
     control area at the side of the electronic scoreboard.



5.   Very recent national publicity has assured us that surveillance cameras
     at football grounds means that any problems can be dealt with within
     two minutes of their occurrence.
     Surely with the police central control post with all its battery of

     T*V. monitors available, they should have been able to ascertain the
need t o clo se th e middle se ctio n s when they became f u l l .


6,   Observing from the outside it appears to have taken far too long
     for the authorities to decide that it vas not a security problem and

     that the fans genuinely needed help.          Working with and alongside

     the individual police officers in the immediate disaster area, I

     have tremendous praise and admiration for their efforts.            Overall

     at the scene, however, there appeared to be a lack of co-ordination

     and genuine leadership.


7 « 5br an extremely long time we were without any form of medical

     equipment of ar.y description.         I still cannot tmderstand why the
     local Health Authority’s Major Medical Disaster Teaa was not called
     ■upon.   I understand that all Health Authorities in this country

     have a major disaster policy.        It is inpossible to accurately
     estimate the difference this would have made in saving life.

     I do, however, believe that the Liverpool fans should have been
     given the chance.



                                                                     U
keTreaar mi? a mRs   jo n &s
I   j t n t    u t *                   .   iu -   .   »-04   . uuuunir di wnMMDtna-*      U3I I t ' S


h        .




                                                                    12th February, 1991




              Dear Dr. Popper.

          At the mini inquests we attempted to ask a series of questions concerning
          the aftermath at Hillsborough, we were left with the Impression that the
         Iquestions would be dealt with at a later stage.

              However since then you have ruled that it is not necessary to proceed after
              15.25pn and it now appears that our questions will not be addressed, you
              did say that in an ideal world everyone would have ended up in hospital and
              you suggested that we were naive In thinking that the medical response was
              inadequate, that sort of answer 1s not conducive to the facts as shown in
              the video, and reports from Medical Personnel who were trying valiantly to
              assist the injured.

              The video shows it took till at least 15.35pm before all the casualties
              were removed from the pens, a fairly lengthy delay which obviously did
              nothlnf to help their chances of survival.

           Reports and recommendations from the Medical Personnel (please find
           enclosed) certainly imply that in their opinion, the response left a lot to
          (be desired.

              Ve also know of people who were removed 1n an unconscious state, a prime
              example being Mr. Edward Spearrltt who according to Mr. Spearrltt was not
              admitted to hospital until 17.00 hours and who subsequently recovered, that
              It was possible for people 1n the crush who suffered severe Injury to
              survive with a reasonable amount of aftercare.

              At tho very least this raises questions In the eyes of the fsullies that
              the Inefficiency of the major incident response could have contributed to
              the ntaeber of deaths occurring at Hillsborough and therefore we consider
              that this should have been part of your enquiries Into the reason for the
              deaths.

              You have promised to look into individual questions of concern, therefore
              it would not take a great deal of your time to enquire into this matter.
                          . lu- 4 -8 i   .   8-J4   • uvuuniT 51 wrvwDifw




     £sy   2-




    JVJ!0    suggest the two most qualified Medical Personnel niamely Dr. John
    Ashton and Or. Glynn Phillips be called to give evidence at your Inquests,
    so they can be questioned as to their medical opinion of whether the
    response contributed at all to the amount of fatalities.

    We think you realise the seriousness which we place on this matter, and we
    feel that If you fall to address this situation, that this failure will
    obviously form part of a case for Judicial revldw no aatter what verdict is
    reached

    Trusting you will give this matter your earnest consideration

                                    Yours sincerely




                                    L. & D.M. Jones


    LOHJ/CO




«
                                   OFFICE OF HM. CORONER FOR       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                   WATERY STREET
                                           SOUTH YORKSHIRE         SHEFFIELD
                                                (WMt District)
                                                                   S37ET
       STEFAN L POPPER. U-B-. B.MED.S6.. B.M.. B.S.. M.R.C.Q.P.
                                                  CORONER

                               TahtM iw: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738781      I?..£ebruary.«....19.91

     Our Ref: SLP/LL
     Your Ref: LDMJ/CD

     Mr L & D M Jones




     Dear Mr Jones
     Thank you for your letter dated 12 February 1991, the contents of
     which I have noted and have read with care.
     Whilst I would not for one moment question the seriousness with which
     you view the points raised, I do not think that it is either right
     or appropriate for me to enter into a dialogue with you regarding
     the issue which you have raised.
     However, in order to avoid any possible misunderstanding, I do have
     to say that it is not my intention to call either Dr Ashton or
     Dr Phillips.
     I have also read your penultimate paragraph. Whether or not you
     apply for a judicial review is a matter entirely for you and/or your
                 ' ’ do not think that I should comment on this either.




1/
DR SuRlsIS
                                                                                 IMPORTANT
                                                               Pitase rote that from ^ Augutt 1S00 ‘he Ro/ei
/                                            erpool            L;-.tf!ioo!Hospital'*new numoer willbe.—
                                                                       TEL: 051-706 2000 (all depla.)
                                                                   or for ^ o r .e ? iai.4 ? . . ^ ? t .l?o3:c>f iy
                                                                     d irec t o n 0 3 1 —706 i1.? ? .1.
                                                               Ffsif uis •a'lfectnurr.sirjro.Ti:Mcabove data to
                                                               pri:5*'tsw;,.cKbcarc)ccngef.tic''

                                                                         TEL; 051 - 7090141 EXT. 2800
                                            ;OTSTREET                     TELEX NO: 627095 UNILPLG
                                                                                    FAX: 061 7086502



JB/SA                                                                      11th March, 1991


Mr. M. Humphreys,
Brian Thompson & Partners,
Solicitors,
5th Floor,
Richmond House,
     ord Place,
•Liverpool,
•” 9SW


Dear Mr. Humphreys,
                           Re: Hillsborough Disaster, April 1989

     Thank you for sending me the relevant documents in this matter, comprising the
post-mortem examination report of Professor Alan Usher in respect of his examination
of the body of Richard Jones and the transcript of part of the medical evidence given
in the early part of the Inquest, at Sheffield, in April, 1990.

     I have not seen any of the video evidence of the events which took place at
Hillsborough on the day in question, although I did, like millions of others, see
television pictures transmitted on the day of the disaster. The comments I make are
in answer to questions raised by Mr. Leslie Jones, father of Richard Jones, one of the
HJ^'borougSs victims, when he spoke to me by telephone last week:-
    .   I am fully in agreement with Professor Usher with respect to his conclusions
         regarding the cause of death, in the case of Richard Jone3 . The post-mortem
         finding® are exactly those one would expect-in someone who has died from asphyxia
         consequent upon compression of the chest and Professor Usher’s conclusions are
         logical and objective. I might add that Professor Usher is a very experienced
         forensic pathologist, of international high repute.

2.      It is quite impossible to state exactly how long it will take a healthy young
         adult t o die if his cheat is being severely crushed, thereby producing asphyxia
         by restriction of chest movement, but I would concur with Professor Usher's
         estimate that consciousness would be lost after 30 seconds of significant
         continuous restriction of chest movement and that death would occur after four
         to six minutes of significant continuous restriction of chest movement.

3.      If significant continuous restriction of chest movement began at 3.00 p.m. on
        the' fatml day, then It would be reasonable to conclude that a person so sfrected
        would be dead by 3-06 p.m., an# unquestionably so by 3-15 P.«. However, it cay
        well be that in a particular case, perhaps in many cases, significant restriction
        of chest movement did not begin until several minutes after 3.00 p.m. and that
        the restriction of chest movement was n o t continuous, but intermittent. If that
        were so, and there is reason to b        that it was (see Professor Usher’s
Mr. K. Humphreys                     - Z -                         1 1th March, 1991


     testimony), death, when it occurred, may well have taken place several minutes
     after 3.15 p.m. furthermore, in the case of a person removed from the enclosure
     at, say, 3.10 p.m. and who     unconscious, but not brain dead, and was then
     placed in a position other than the correct "recovery" position, or who, having
     been placed in the correct position, such a position was not maintained, a
     feared consequence, an inadequate airway, may well hav6 produced a prolonged
     state of unconsciousness, with death eventually occurring at a much later-time
     than 3.15 p.m.

                                 Yours sincerely, ^




                                     James Burns,
                             Home uTfice Pathologist.




   #
■TCANSCftlPT DAy > .
     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE H 1LLSBOKOUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER
         ON THE 15TH APRIL. 1989




                 Before

S.L. POPPER. LL.B. B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MKCGP
        (Her Majesty*s C o r n n ^




                   At
            The Town Hall,
              Sheffield.
                  On

    Monday, 19th November,    1990 ,




      TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDTNn<z




From the Notes of J.L. Harpham. Ltd
 cc J?ff'icial Shorthand Writers,
   , Queen Street,^Sheffield Si 2DX
                         INDEX TO T R A N S C R I P T




OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER

APPEARANCES

LEGAL SUBMISSIONS

STATEMENT BY THE CORONER

SUBMISSION BY MR. ISAACS

STATEMENT BY THE CORONER TO THE JURY
     S. BROWN Sworn

        By The Coroner
     M. LAYTON Sworn

        By The Coroner
        Cross-Examined   by   Mr. Payne
        Cross-Examined   by   Mr. Isaacs
        Cross-Examined   by   Mr. King
        Cross-Examined   by   Mrs. McBrien
LEGAL SUBMISSIONS
     MR.   CALLAGHAN:    Sir, you know the representation on
previous occasions and I should say it is my intention to stay
only for today and in the case of one or two witnesses.    I
will not take any major part in the Inquiry.

     THE CORONER:   I have got no particular objection to
you being here.   I thought you probably would not be here
continuously but I wanted to be sure about that.    Perhaps
the best thing would be if we started with you really and
if we started with appropriate legal submissions.    It may
be easiest if we start with Mr.. King and then we will move
across the table, so to speak.
     MR. KING:    Sir, my primary legal submission is
directed to your preliminary ruling on the last occasion
that this Inquest should be concerned only with events up
to about 3.15 pm.    As I understand your ruling, sir, it
was designed to ensure that this Inquest would only be
concerned with events leading to the crushing on the
terraces and the first arrival of an ambulance.

     As you know, sir, the families whom I represent are
very anxious that this Inquest should deal with what to
them is a very major issue, as to how their loved ones came
by their deaths, namely how the services and the rescue
services, and those attending with the emergency, coped
with it immediately after people were brought off the
terraces because death was not certified in many, if not
most, cases until after 4 pm.   Sir, I do not know if you
have had an opportunity to read these.    I did ask those
instructing me to send to you statements from each of the
families whom I represent setting out a number of
individual questions directed to their own Inquest but also
incorporating in their individual cases why they were
anxious to learn of what happened between the time there
was a first sighting of any loved one being brought off the
terracing and the pronouncement of death.    I do not know
if you had an opportunity to read them.

     THE CORONER:   I have briefly because these did not
arrive until Friday afternoon but I have looked at them.

     MR. KING:    What I would like to do is take you
through some individual examples in order to persuade you
that this is a question which ought to be gone into at this
particular Inquest.    I do not know whether that is a
format you want to follow or whether you want first to hear
some other representatives as to their attitude to my
submission.    I am happy to go into considerable detail
about it.
     THE CORONER:   There are several points which have
occurred to me and the first point I would like you to deal
with is this; you were not present but you will be aware
that in April/May this year we sat for two-and-a-half weeks
approximately and we dealt with the 95 deceased and we
dealt with three issues which Coroners deal with; who the
deceased was, when he/she died and where he/she died.    I
specifically excluded from discussion at that time the
question of how he or she died because as you will
recollect the DPP was still actively considering the matter
and we did not want to trammel his investigation but, on
the other hand, I felt it was right we should allow people
to hear what we could deal with.
     I will raise the second point at the same time because
it may be easier for you to deal with the two things
together.   At those hearings we dealt in considerable
detail, in fact infinitely more detail than we would
normally deal with in an Inquest, with events after the
pathological cause of death and I did it because I realised
that the families were desperately anxious to know what had
happened immediately after the incident.   My question to
you is - and I think this is what we need to deal with and
get right - bearing in mind we have only dealt with the
question of who, when and where and that we have done it in
considerably greater detail than one would normally expect
to do, why is it necessary to review that very activity
again which I think is what you are really asking me to do?

      MR. KING:     Sir, as I understand the individual
Inquests there was not an enquiry into, in the individual
cases, the impact of the organisation rescue on the
survival or otherwise of the particular loved one.        All
that was done when one looks at those Inquests was to
identify the time of a first sighting, that is to say,
somebody who seemed to be unconscious, and of a time when
effort was made to resuscitate in any given case and then
death was certified.       In many of the cases there was a
large gap of time after 3.15 pm when it was not
investigated at the individual Inquests the nature of the
services available to deal with those being brought off and
if I can just give one or two examples of that, you have
examples of people who are brought off at 1522 and it is
said that there was an effort to resuscitate by a lay
 individual and then that particular lay individual is not
heard of again, or the officer is not, and it is said that
 the given loved one arrives at the temporary mortuary.
 There has been no investigation directed to the_ alobai.
organisation_of          happened -immediately after they were
brought off _the to’rar.es._ certainly I have ueen through
 the" inaxvxadaj. transcripts and there does not seem to be
 any evidence directed to that issue and those witnesses who
 were called could not deal with those issues, sir.
      THE CORONER:   Are you suggesting that the cause of
death in respect of these individuals is not in fact the
pat hological cause of death w h i c h we have been given but due
to a novus actus in effect by person or persons whose
evidence you have not yet heard?

       MR. KING:    Certainly the families, and I put it as
openly as this, sir, and p utting it bluntly, cards on the
table, are not convinced at all that had there been a far
more sensible, logical organisation of the rescue services,
of the major disaster team b e i n g brought in, of proper     ,
medical equipment being available, of proper triage being
ca r rie d out, that those measures, h ad they been there, in
several cases, would not have resulted in the survival of
their loved ones.      They cannot - obviously they were not
there - produce through me c oncre te evidence of that at this
stage but at every stage of an Inquiry into this disaster,
and this certainly is true even in the Taylor Inquiry, that
particular aspect of the disaster has never properly been
gone into.

       Again putting it very simply to you, sir, most of the
families I represent feel there has been a complete blanket
(not a deliberate blanket) bee n held down over what happened
after they were brought off the terraces and before
individuals were certified dea d and there has been no effort
ma d e systematically to analyse what was the organisation at
the time for the rescue, what mi ght have been, and what could
have made a difference.     A v e r y simple example again is that
I am instructed there is evidence of Dr. Gumpert given       at the
Inquest that without an electrocardiogram we can never be
sure whether or not there is a p u l s e and when dealing with
individual loved ones taken off the terraces and simply dealt
with by lay people, the absence of such sort of equipment
means that one would never k n o w whether or not that
individual was alive or dead a t that stage.       It is a
matter - and I do not mean this pejoratively - which is swept
under the carpet as if to say, "All we are interested in is
the immediate crushing leading to those being brought off the
terraces".     I cannot put it a n y more firmly than that, sir.

     THE CORONER:    You have p u t it very plainly and I
appreciate it.    I will give a ruling on your application in
a few moments but do you want t o develop it further?
Obviously I want an opportunity to hear from your colleagues. '

     MR. KING:     Have you the individual statements which
were supplied?

     THE CORONER:   I do have those in front of me.          I would
not want to go through all of the m but if you wish to pick
one or two as examples I am p r e p a r e d to listen to you and
indeed it also makes it easier for everybody else.
     MR. KING:     Sir, if you were to turn to No. 11 to start
with, which isthe submissions to you of the Jones family,
Richar d Jones, I do not know w h e t her you have b e e n given one
or two documents.     I have two documents in r ela t i o n to Mr.
Jones one headed "Dear Miss Steel" and one h e a d e d "Dear Mr.
King".

      THE CORONER:     No. 11, did you say?

      MR. KING:    Yes, sir.   I beg your pardon,    sir,   it is
No.     10. Sir, if you look ---

     THE CORONER:    Mr. King, m a y I just stop you for one
moment because something has o c c u r r e d to me, a nd I have been
reminded, which I ought to say to the Press b e f o r e we go
further?    The session this morning is being h e a r d without
the Jury and the reason we have not got the J ur y is because
we are dealing with legal points.          That means no doubt that
you can report we are in session b ut you should not actually
report what is being said.     You will no doubt b e familiar
with the provisions of Subsection 2 of Section 4 of the
Contempt of Court Act and I say you must not r e p o r t what we
are discussing.    If we had w ante d the Jury to h ea r we would
have had them present but we do not wish them to hea r at thi:
stage.   You may, when we have finished the Inquest, if you
still feel it is a reportable and interesting aspect then, oi
course, that is a different matter but for the m o m e n t please
do not report the content of the legal matters w e are
discussing.    Mr. King, I am sorry to interrupt you, would
you continue?

     MR. KING:   Sir, the document I am looking at and I
appreciate those alongside me are not looking at a ny documenl
but it is just to help you is one headed to myself, "Dear Mr.
King".

     THE CORONER:   I have a document headed "Dear Miss
Steel" dated 22nd October.

      MR. KING:      Sir, this is dated 7th November.

     THE CORONER:   I have not got it I am afraid.          It is
not in front of me.

     MR. KING:   I apologise for that and I will take you
through, if I may, through five points which are r ai sed by
Mr. and Mrs. Jones.   Sir, they mak e the basic p o i n t that th«
report into the death of their loved one, Richard, was
certified at 1600 hours in the temporary mortuary and,
therefore, so far as the family are concerned, so far as
evidence is concerned, they presume, as they say they must b<
entitled to, up to tha t time the evidence of death is not
clear as having a l r e a d y occurred.

      Point No. 2, sir, is extracted from the evidence given
b y Dr. Gumpert at the Inquest already held here and in fact
it was evidence g i v e n on the occasion of Kevin Tyrrell and,
sir, it is a q u o t a t i o n from his evidence which you may
recall:

     "I would like to observe that feeling the carotid pulse
     is quite d i f f i c u l t in someone who has a low blood
     pressure as w o u l d have been here.       In fact it can be so
     difficult it is impossible and you have to have an
     electroca rdiog ram on to know whether the heart has
     stopped or not;"

     Then there is t he statement of Mr. Eccleston, which is
certainly a s t ateme nt in the large bundle of statements given
to the West M idlan ds Police, and indeed Mr. Eccleston gave
evidence to the T a y l o r Inquiry in which he says this:


                                      /"For an extremel y long.
 j                                                        8




     "tor an extremely long time we were without an/ form
     of medical equipment of any description. I still
     cannot understand wiy the local health authority's
     major medical disaster team were not called upon. I
     understand that all healtn authorities in this
     country have a major disaster policy. It is
     impossible accurately to estimate the difference this
     would have made in saving life. I do, however,
     believe that the Liverpool fans should have been
     given tie chance".
And the question raised by Mr. and Mrs. Jones is this,
sir: tnere was a major incident vehicle. Why *as it not
called? Lack of equipment undoubtedly resulted in deaths.
     Sir, I pause there. Of course, Mr. and Mrs. Jones
were not there and of course they are not experts, but you
will .see, sir, from the basis of that evidence they are
firmly of the belief th3t one cannot just ignore an
inquiry, an inquest, into that aspect.
     Sir, number 4 point made by Mr. and Mrs. Jones comes
from t*ie statement made, again in the large bundle, sir,
from Dr. Glynn Phillips, particularly where he says that
after 3.15 p.m. he gave mouth to mout resuscitation to a
man for 15 minutes, and just as he wa c giving up the heart
sprang to life, and after that the man started breathing
on his own. We know that this does not prove this man
lived, or if he did he may have been brain damaged, but
the point we are trying to put across to the coroner is
that after 3.15 p.m. not all the people who were later
certified dead were necessarily dead*
     Sir, finally Mr. and Mrs. Jones direct your attention
to the long statement which I or. sure you have seen, sir,
of Or. John Asnton in which tnere is a series of reasoned
critical comments on the disorganisation of the medical
and the rescue attempts, honest and in good faith tnough
they were, after the people were brought off the terraces.
     Sir, tJiat is Mr. and Mrs. Jones in tnose comments and
in the short letter, sir, which you have, which you have
already referred me to, sir, they emphasise an issue as to
the failure to implement triage after the disaster
happened, again, concentrating on what Dr. Gumpert has
said as to the fact that without an electro-cardiogram it
is not possible to know wnether a heart has stoppped.
     Sir, can I move on from Mr. and Mrs.‘Jones' comments
and just give you one or two more examples - I appreciate
that in many ways it is repetitious but it is making the
point - to number 14, sir, which is in the case of William
Roy Pemberton.
     THE C030NER:   And this one is addressed to you.
                                                                     9




     MR. KING:   Sir, it is not often that instructions to
Counsel are given in advance to the Tribunal, and I
suspect, sir, that it is not a wise move in most cases.
     THE CORONER:                You are probably right.
     MR. KING:   Sir, it was an effort in tne relatively
short time since we were before you to put before you the
various matters which tfie families wisned to place before
you and it was felt this was the easiest way to do so,
sir.
     Sir, if I can than turn to Mr. Pemberton, you will
see that he makes the following points: tne report into
the death of his loved one Roy that life again in his case
was pronounced extinct at 16.00 hours lours, and again in
tne absence of medical evidence to the contrary, the
family can only assume that tneir loved one was alive
until that hour, and sir, if you then go to paragraph 3 of
that document you will see tnere is a reference to tne
statement of Mr. Saxton of tne St. John's Ambulance
Service, because he refers to tne resuscitation of a young
man at 15.50 hours, indicating in the heart-felt view of
Mr. Pemberton, as with all the other families, fnat deatn
must have occurred after 3.15 p.m.
     Again he refers you, sir, in paragraph 4, to tne
statement of Dr. Byrne wnen he quotes tnat he was
approacned by a senior Police Officer and asked to start
certifying the dead as there may be some still alive, and
sir, again, the point has been made that as we only know
for certain that death was at 4 o'clock, to ignore these
concerns as to the adequacy of the attentions and the
rescue efforts after 3.15 is to not investigate wh 3 t could
well have b^en a major reason for why somebody died and
did not survive.

    ^ The final point on Mr. Pemberton, sir, in paragraph
7, is the question he asks: why was it that the very
seriously ill and dying, and those who appeared to be
dead, were not taken to the hospital in the very first
available ambulance, and ne raises himself the issue as to
why the serious accident response vehicle was not called
out to tne stadium, as he understands to be the case.

     1A 9 .   rtf
                    3 ca?,th?" deal with pernaps one example of
                    H a f ai I    4T   a   ^A   ._
                                                a ________   .   r
                                                            10




     Mr. Hicks has drawn to your attention, sir, that he
has drawn to the attention of this Inquest the evidence of
a gentleman, a Mr. Taylor, whose evidence is that he was
on tne very terrace where Victoria was after she had been
"rescued" by P.C. McGuinness, and that for some six
minutes he did not, in fact, resuscitate because the poor
man did not know what to do, and one can understand that,
but as Mr. Hicks says, those six minutes could have been
vital to the survival of his loved one Victoria, had she
received tne proper attention.
     Sir, that is just an example of matters which, in Mr.
Hicks's submission to you, through me, ought to be
investigated.
     Sir, if one turns to Sarah Hicks at number 8, again
if one looks at the timings we know that at 6-minutes-
past-3 a Miss McCaffery sees Sarah, who clearly has
fallen, and we know at 21-minut2s-past-3, helps the fallen
Sarah tnrough onto the pitch. Again, the time gap there
between o-mi.iutes-;jast-3 and 21-mi.nutes-past-3. We know
it was not until 20-past-4 that Dr. Bull examined Sarah
and certified ner death, and we know from the summary that
it is said that at some time between 15.38 and 15.50 an
unidentified member of the medical team stated in his view
that Sarah was at that time beyond help.
     All those times, sir, go beyond 3.15 and they again
illustrate the need in the submission of the families for
tne times after 3.15 to be thoroughly investigated.
     Sir, those are just four examples but, sir, if you
read tne papers which I understand and I as sure you have
they express tne flavour of all the other submissions
that, in fact, we cannot know that a cutoff point at this
stage is the right cut off point at 3.15 and it is
premature, sir, so to do, in tny submission to you. That
is how I put it.
     THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed, Mr. King.
I think what we will now do is to give the rest of you an
opportunity to make points. I think we ought to start
with Mrs. McBrien. I think you would probably support
what has been said, but is there anything in addition to
*hat Mr. King has said that you feel you wauld like to
tell me. Mrs. McBrien can I say if you are more
comfortable sitting down - indeed, that goes for all of
you - if you are more comfortable sitting down, sit down.
I don't mind - it does not make any difference. I know
some of your legal colleagues sitting around you are used
to standing so they will tend to rise, but you do what is
comfortable. Mrs. McBrien, is there anything you want to
aJd to what Mr. King has told me?
      MRS. McBRIEN:   No, I go along with everything that
 Mr. King has said, thank you.
                                                              11




  ' rMt COROW&R:    If I start at that end and work my way
down the row, is tnat satisfactory to you, gentlemen and
ladies? It is easier for me.
     .MISS HAMPTON:    I have no submissions, thank you.
     THE COROrtER:    Mr. Hale?

     MR. HALE:    I am sure that at an appropriate time you
will instruct tne Jury and presumably also instruct tne
advocates as to how far you are prepared to-go. As we all
know there were well over 3,000 witnesses. Obviously you
can't call them all. You will have to exercise some sort
of selection and you will have to restrict the areas into
wnich you are prepared to enquire further and further, on
top of tie enquiries made by tne Taylor Report. I may be
over simplifying matters a little, but I think it is very
well known by everyone concerned that the Police, for
example, have admitted negligence. There is no secret
about that at all. There have been civil proceedings,
other people iiave been joined in them, so it therefore
seems to me to be a waste of your time and a waste of
everyone's time if we are just going to go over and over
again points tending merely to prove that things could
have been done better, and ought to have been done bettor,
even allowing for hindsight, so I am sure you will bear
that in mind.

     There are areas, however, which were not explored by
the Taylor Inquiry and sny learned friend Mr. King has
mentioned one. There is also the area of ....
     THE CORONER:     Wnich one in particular have you 'ot
in mind?

      MR. HALE:   A blanket was pulled down over the rescue
services, but tnere was also a lack of inquiry into t i e
pre-.natch conduct of the fans and that I know - I h3 ve
seen tne list of witnesses - that is something that is
going to be gone into, but I hope we are not going to
waste a lot of time on negligence alone, because one item
of negligence is the same as a thousand items of
negligence, and you will no doubt instruct the Jury on a
verdict of misadventure.
     What we are looking for, I am sure, is something
going beyond that, and I would hope that people are not
going to waste their time, but to concentrate on looking
for recklessness, something that would enable you to
instruct, the Jur/ to find a verdict other than
misadventure, and I would merely mention that.
     There   is one other aspect and that is entirely a
matter for   my learned friend Mr. King, but I see that he
represents   43 families whose circumstances may not all be
the same*    There was a problem at the Taylor Inquiry when
ther Police were represented by one representative and it
subsequently transpired that it could well have been
better if thsre had been separate representation over
certain aspects. Happily, tnose aspects have not
materialis 2 d and no real harm was done.
     I would like to see an end to this Inquest when it
over and I would not want somebody coming back again and
asking for it to be re-opaned and started all over again
because of lack of representation separately by some
people wio may be alleged to have played a part in t.ie
deatns.




       /That is a matter which my learned friend
                                                           13




That is a matter wh i c h my learned Friend will. I am sure, fully
understand.  I merely mention it now so it is not said that it is
mentioned with hindsight afterwards.     There may, indeed, be a
great deal of d ifference between the responsibility or lack of
responsibility on the part of some of those who died, and
separate representation would in normal circumstances be requirec
because it may be that one family would make an allegation
against another.   Again, I give as an example, and I am not
saying that any such person exists, but if it were shown that
someone who died had come at the very last minute with a great
deal of alcohol inside him and had made his way right down to th«
front, pushing and crushing, and had caused some deaths, then
that would be a matter where he or his relatives might well
require to be separately represented.

     THE CORONER:   Yes. Mr. Manning, if I may say so, the issue
of representation is (a) for the families, because that is to
whom you were applying your mind, and (b) for the legal
representatives who obviously have to weigh whatever conflict of
interest there may be between their clients.  So that is really,
not a matter for me, and it is not probably even a matter for
you.  It is a matter for Mr. King and his instructing solicitors
and. of course, primarily for the parties themselves.

     Perhaps I should say one other thing.     You have mentioned a
couple of verdicts and matters like that.     I am not getting into
an argument at this stage as to what verdict if any the Jury
would bring in, or even what directions, if any, I am going to
give them, because the objective of this Inquest as far as it haj
one is to hear the evidence and to enable the Jury to reach a
verdict on the evidence.  I have the advantage of having seen
loads of statements.  I do acknowledge that, but experience has
taught me in much simpler Inquests than this that it is not
infrequent that what you think is go i n g to be the verdict does
not turn out to be because the evidence when it actually comes,
or the nuance, if you like, or the innuendoes, or any word you
care to use, is different to what I had anticipated from just
looking at the statement.  So I have ma d e it as far as I am
able a rule not to predetermine the answer but to wait until I
have heard the evidence.  I say this not as a criticism of you
but just as a clarification for everybody.     I do intend to
listen to what is said, which is the reason why we are here
this morning. Obviously, I have read statements and I have
ideas myself, but the crucial thing is the Jury, they have got
to make up their mind, and they do it in the light of the
evidence, and I will do my best.  I can't do more than that.      I
am sorry, Mr. Payne.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, with regard to the submissions by Mr.
King, the position of the Chief Const able is that he is neutral.
I have got no submissions to make about what Mr. King is asking
you to do, but I wish it to be heard that the position of the
Chief Constable is that he wants to do everything he can to
assist you in the conduct of this Inquest, and certainly does no
wish to do anything to put in the way of Mr. King any obstructio
into any enquiry that he wants to make on behalf of the relative
of the people who died.  Sir, that is the position.
                                                             14




         As a comment on what Mr. King has said, strictly it appears
to us that he is saying that there is the possibility, to put it
in a legal term, of a novus a c t u s , i.e. something which
intervened after the crushing and before the deaths, which caused
or contributed to the deaths of at least some of the people, and
the response of the Chief Constable to that submission, if I put
it correctly, is that we can quite see that is something which
people would wish to see investigated on the question of how it
came a b o u t . I only make that comment in an endeavour to be
h e l p f u l , but the position of the Chief Constable is that he has
no submissions one way or the other.
                                #



     May I just say while I am on my feet with regard to what Mr.
Hale has just said, as a matter of fact it is not correct that
the Police have admitted negligence.  It is well known and has
been well publicised that what has happened is that the Police
have agreed to make payments to those people who were injured anc
to the dependents of those who died, and that such payments are
in the process of being made.  Also there has been a civil action
in respect of apportionment of liability in respect of those
matters.

      THE CORONER:   Thank you very much, indeed.  I accept
ent irely what you say and in a sense I accept what Mr. Manning
says as well.   It is not really relevant to my proceedings
whether or not negligence has been admitted or not admitted.    It
is neither here nor there.   So I did not comment on it, but I
appreciate what you have said.

     MR. ISAACS:   I think, sir,    in fact, that is Mr. Hale.    Mr.
Manning sits to my left.

      THE CORONER:    I beg your pardon.   Forgive me, please,    both
of y o u .

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, I have no submissions.  It is entirely a
matter for you having regard to the breadth or depth which you
consider appropriate for this particular Inquest.

     MR. MANNING:   Sir, I have exactly similar comments as far
as my client is concerned.

     MISS SINCLAIR:      I have no submissions on this matter, sir.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I add to that.  The natter is entirely for
you.  You are the best person, having read all the evidence, to
make that judgment, and no doubt that was the reason we had, as
you have already pointed out, sir, a fairly detailed
investigation into the earlier Inquests.

     MR. CALLAGHAN:   Sir, this is not an application of which I
have had previous notice, and which in the circumstances of the
application is some surprise to me.  All I think I should, sir,
is this is not the time and place for some sort of Public Inquiry
into the activities of the Ambulance Service and the Emergency
Services, and it is not appropriate to bring such a matter into
        7
                                                                            15

            A

                the arena as a sort of side wind.   Beyond that, sir,   it is
                obviously a matter for you.

                     MISS ADDELMANN;   Sir, I have no observations or submissions
                about the point, and I can do no better than echo those remarks
            B   made by my learned friend, Mr. Catchpole.

                     MR. RUSSELL:   I too endorse those remarks.     None of us,
                other than my learned friend. Mr. King, has seen the original
                statements, and so are being invited to comment upon a course in
i               the dark because we have not seen the nature of an example of the
                material he now seeks to rely upon.     I recognise it is a matter
                for you, and if you decide I d 6 n ’t take a stance one way or the
                other.
            C
                     THE CORONER:   Shall I then deal with this point? Is there
                anybody else wants to say anything on this issue? Mr. King?

                     MR. KING:   Sir, only to emphasise that it is not a side
                wind which I am embarking on.  I am seeking to address causes,
                contributory causes to the deaths, and I am concentrating on
                that, and it is in that context I have invited the Court to look
                beyond 3.15, and certainly we are dealing with it from the point
            D   of view of possibilities of novus a c t u s , yes, I accept that.
    i
                     THE CORONER:   I have listened hopefully with attention, anc    >
ri
                perhaps I ought to say this to you, Mr. Russell, before I go on.     [
                I know you have not had the advantage of seeing the letter, but
    i           it is only fair to say Mr. King in his summary of the points as
                far as I can see summarised the points which his clients were
i               making entirely fairly.  There is nothing extra in the letter, sc
i               to speak, except connecting words, basically.  That is for your
                reassurance, if 1 can put it like that.
        )
            E
    /                Throughout, and in fact almost front the word "go" on the
                15th April, 1989, when I first learned about this incident, one
                of the underlying criteria which I tried to apply in thinking
                how to set about dealing with the Inquests was to as far as
                possible treat the Inquests as if they were completely
                standard, if I can put it like that - it is a horrible word -
                but completely normal Inquests.   The fact that it was national
                news, that it was 95 young people, that it created a terrible
            F   amount of anxiety, pain and so on, in some ways is unique
                because of the numbers, but each individual death I dealt with
                families are in exactly the same situation, and I tried to
                think and I still try to think, what and how would I set about
                if I had had a road traffic incident or a works accident as
                opposed to an incident in a football stadium.   I have thought
                back on many occasions to say a road traffic incident where
                somebody might have suffered a serious head injury.   That
                person may well have been at the road side for X number of
            G   minutes while one was waiting for the ambulance services to
                attend.   They may then have been taken by an ambulance to a
        }       hospital.   They may have gone into the resuscitation room.
                They may have been worked on by the doctors. They may have gone
                into hospital and they may have then died two, three days, may
                be longer after the incident.   Or alternatively, you could have



            H
                /here by chance the road traffic incident occurs on
                .a doctor happens to be.  He walks up to the
               /ks and says, "I am sorry, the injury is so severe
              Zrson is dead".   Or you could have a situation where
             /has this road traffic incident and is taken into
            Aid is certified dead on arrival.

    I       /one of those instances would 1 as a matter of routine
    ■      /dence lof what happened after the incident ;itself was
          Id, and indeed, the pathologists in the e x a m p l e which i
         /ed would have given as cause of death serious head injury,
       /stance,for multiple injuries with fracture of the skull, 01
       hing of lhat nature.     It seems to me that the fact that the
      on may sutvive an injury for a number of minutes or hours or
       d a y s , isnot the question which I as Coroner have to
   £ i d e r . Mytask is to establish who the person was - I am
   jT    to repet this - where he died, when he died and how he
           It is rom my understanding of the pathological evidence,
 te   overwheling pathological evidence is and was that the people
 led as a re lit of crushing or traumatic asphyxia.           Different
 words were uid, but the sense was always the same.           The
 underlying p^blem which these poor men and women were subjected
 to was an iroility to breathe.

      That d<s not mean to say that some of them did not in fact
 respire for period of time or even have a heart beat
 thereafter, it the damage was done, and indeed, both Dr.
 Gumpert, Dr 51ater, Prof. Usher, who dealt with this question ii
 an overall £nt of view, all in fact said, as I understand theii
 evidence, e fitly the same.

      One         points, Mr    King, which you have m a d e is that
 because                                                                  ir
                 or                            _______________         With
 tne greate espei        ____________________
 ’’reasonabl   s a v e r y URH!Ytf,"0Sl!a’“=_ as a p« p p s 3 3 r ^ *frhich I
would take ndeed, if you think about it for a moment I am sure
you would    |ee with me, if a body were to be found in a
macerated . te one would call a doctor who would
certify de$, but it would be a little bit illogical to
assume thafthat particular body was actually alive
until that>oint.

      The i5 ue of death certification and the timing of it is
 important, jecause one wants to have if possible certainty.   Tha­
is the firs, thing.   Secondly, the conventional way of
establishing a person is definite dead is that a medical man say.' •
so. but to draw the conclusion that until a medical man has said
so a person is alive is in my view an impossible proposition to
maintain.




                      /I do understand the anxiety.
     I do understand the anxiety which a lot of the families
have about this issue, but as I have already said the
overwhelming medical evidence, the pathological evidence,
and that is the crucial one I am interested in, is the
damage that caused the death was done due to the crushing.
     Now I picked the arrival of the first ambulance not
because there is anything magical about that but because
when we look at the videos we can actually see that and it
is aajoonvenient markerf that is all.  If the first
ambulance had arrived at 3.30 I would have picked that time.
It is simply intended as a marker, but, and this is an
important point, I considered the medical evidence. The
medical evidence was that once - I am not quoting verbatim -
but the sense of what Professor Usher said, .and,„ indeed, the
                _ _                . .-. . — ,             IiA   m   IIH   -----£ —£'1




                                                  -
others as well,j

                                                 ufeaais

     Now I felt that the evidence which I had heard and in
the light of what I had read that HBIHHlHTil I I Iiii|ju the


assume six minutes past, a(
that isjy
                                                                                         In
otner w o r o s f v n a x i am i                       ______




     I have already indicated that at the - I will call them
the interim inquests if I may just for the sake o f a name -

  Vat sense I “IBFolce^rny’own rule Vtraight away because I said
I wanted to treat this matter as if it were a completely
standard normal road traffic incident, if you like.        I
didn't, I gave a great deal of information for various
reasons which I don't need to go into now.
     As an aside I can assure you that within the limits of
our ability the summaries and the evidence which was given
was an accurate reflection of what people said and if there
was a gap, for instance, as has been suggested in some cases
which is unexplained,                           seT-ther^d^s
^ma.Jiidden..evidence whioi we nave put under*the curtain,
but because'wer‘rdldn* t know of it or couldn't find it or it
doesn't exist. The truth of the matter, of course, is that
people weren't being watched individually continuously by
somebody else   recording what was happening.    It is entirely
fortuitous as   to whether or not there -is a witness or
witnesses who   happens (a) to have been with a person, (b)
who remembers   who he is and (c) has some idea of the timing.
     Some of you who were there will remember that in some
cases we had a great deal of evidence with regard to what
had happened post-crush, shall I say, and in others we had
next to nothing because it is very sad particularly for
those families where we have got so little to share with
them, but we are living in the real world and in some cases
there was overwhelming - for instance, there were dozens of
photographs as you know - some of the people were all over
the newspapers and in others we could not find any.     It
can't be helped, it is just one of those things.

     Bearing in mind that faflnfTirflir* it1*!** — -p-..ta-dejjl-.*
       e.m uestion frof^hoy, and I do intend to deal with it
reasonably comprehensively, I have to remember two things:
that my powers are limited.      I don't have an open ended
authority to carry out an investigation.         The Rules and the
Act, indeed, are quite clear as to the limits of what the
coronal inquiry should be.      I admit that the word "how" is
a little bit flexible and assuming we call all those
witnesses on that preliminary list which I have circulated I
hope you will agree that I have been reasonably flexible
with that word, but nevertheless I do have to draw a line.
Indeed, this was done in other inquests.         If you think back
to the Zeebrugge inquest, for instance. The learned Coroner
there drew a line.     He was judicially reviewed on where he
drew it and in that particular case the Divisional Court or
the Court of Appeal, I can't remember now, clearly said that
a line has to be drawn and in the Zeebrugge case they agreed
it was right*    I am doing my best.      I am trying to draw a
line as well.
      If you think of the other major disasters where
inquests have already taken place, you will find that lines
were drawn there as well and I think you will find that the
line with regard to the question which we are now thinking
about was very, very much tighter than what we have already
done.

     In answer to your submission, I still consider that as
a general proposition we are going to accept - I am going to
take these inquests and deal with the question of how on the
basis of what happened to about 3.15 or thereabouts.    I
have explained it to you so I am not going- to repeat it and
I base it mainly upon the pathological medical evidence.
     Having said that, I think it is probably right to say
because we will be calling witnesses it may be that wameaabf
         s ,u    h    i    c     h    t  i th -1o -a -minor* •
     I have also got to say, it is only right, that whattt&fe
                 ,1A-yariTr**'1»^<l< »«agaHaw » } Mr. King, UH683S¥@ld«
understand it, Are^utside^tnf^uthorl^^atid8^ ? ^ .    I also
seem to recollect, although Lord Justice Taylor s Inquiry
isn't • as I have already said to you at the business
meeting, I don't really want to spend too much time on it -
but I do recollect that the emergency services were very
well represented at that Inquiry and, indeed, a lot of
discussion, from my reading of the transcripts, did deal
with the issues of the medical response.
     Whether or not that was satisfactory, whether Lord
Justice Taylor should have done more, whether somebody else
should look into that when we have finished that is nothing
to do with me.   However, as far as I am concerned, my
intention is to stick with what I gave you as my initial
preliminary intention.
     I have, of course, already looked through the documents
which you sent me and insofar as in one or two instances
witnesses are mentioned, if I think, and, indeed, I have
thought that one or two of these in fact I think three at
the moment, you have got a point.   It would perhaps be
advantageous to.call those persons and we are making
appropriate arrangements.   Please don't think that I have
said, "Good grief, fifty pages, I am not dealing with that,"
I have already spent quite a bit of time thinking about it
and I will hopefully have another look.   If I were - which
is highly unlikely - in any particular instance to feel we
ought to go a little bit further down that line because
there is a specific point to be made in any particular
instance, then I will if I think it necessary, tell you.
However, I think it is unlikely from what I have seen and
what I have read and for the reasons which I have given you.




           MR. KING:      Sir, thank you for that...
                                                               20




    ' MR. KING:       Th a n k you for that. Can I raise a
separate matter, sir, wh ich is not connected with the issue
of cut off b u t is c o nnect ed with the issue of 50 pages
whi ch you ha v e r e f e r r e d to?

     THE CORONER:     I was not saying that as a criticism.

     MR. KING:        N ot at all, sir.   One only has to state
the number of families who m I represent to know that.
Sir, a number of the families have raised specific
questions rela t i n g to the summaries w h i c h were put before
you in their individual Inquests.         I just give one
example, sir; in the case of No. 13, Jonathan Owens, you
will note they ha v e a particular concern as to the timing
when their son ca m e to the ground and a particular concern
to the fact that the summary suggests he joined the crowd
at twenty to t hree when, in fact, they point out to you
that the p osi t i v e vid eo evidence shows they were standing,
not having join ed the crowd at all, round about ten to or
eight minutes to three.         I put that as an example.

     Are you willing, sir, to go through those individual
questions - not n o w - and indicate at some stage, perhaps
even in writ ing to us, whether or not you would be prepared
to reopen those individual Inquests to deal with those -
may be small p oi nts in the whole b ut to the individual
families - important points of factual e r m r s which seem, to,
have crept xn b y reference to positive evidence whicn can
now be laid b e f o r e you?

     THE CORONER:        M y recollection of the papers is that
they affected v e r y few or where I feel it is justified.       I
think those t wo things go together.        As I say, I have not
had sufficient t ime to study it in detail but if I were to
think there was a genu ine error a nd that that error was
actually rel evant - the incident w h i c h you have given me
indicates w i t h respec t to the family it is an anxiety to
them * but the c r u c i a l point is not whet her he was standing
in a crowd or w h e t h e r he was standing aside but where was
he or at least a t w h a t time was he still outside the
ground?   One has to ask the question, does it actually get
us any further forward?

     MR. KING:    M ay I just interpose to say that the
example I gave w as directed as much to the timings outside
the ground in fact.

     THE CORONER:       If we have made a mistake, and we will
be checking t h a t ...

      MR. KING:     I am obliged.
                                                                   21




    ' THE CORONER:     When points have be e n made of actual
error we have been trying to check.      If we agree with
them, as Hr. Fraser and some of the others will remember,
w e have made from time to time a£ hoc amendments when
points of error w e r e pointed out to us.     I am not averse
to that, not in princi ple anyway, and if it helps somebody
b y clarifying something then I will be pleased to do so but
I would not want necessarily to spend endless time on
clarifying mi nutiae which, in the final analysis, do not
matte r so far as the Jury are concerned.       I am sure you
accept t h a t .

     MR. KING:      I understand that, sir, but I am sure when
families are supplied with an "agreed" summary and they see
matters wh i c h are of great concern to them which appear to
be incorrect then obviously they are desirous that that
should be r ectified as quickly as possible.

     THE CORONER:        I take it none of you have any adverse
comments on that?

     MR. KING:     W h a t I am going to suggest is that those
instructing m e e x t rac t from those documents which do
confuse two issues, those which are directed specifically
to individual questions and they can be then sent to you in
a more orderly ma nner which enables us the more quickly to
obtain help from you.

     THE CORONER:        That would be very helpful indeed
because then w e w o u l d really know what we are looking at
and what w e have got to concentrate on.

      MR. KING:       Yes,   sir.

     THE CORONER:        A r e there any othe r comments from
anybody?

        MR.   ISAACS:    Yes, sir.   I just wondered how we are
going to      deal wit h these matters.   I k n o w that you started
w i t h Mr.   King and I thought proba bly what you would do is
run down      the line so to speak.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, we will do that.           Have you got
any submissions to make?

     MISS HAMPTON:    I have no submissions raised by Mr.
King, though he has raised one particular matter which
concerns the City Council with regard to the agreed summary
of facts.   They hav e been through the proposed s.ummary
prepared for today's hearing and there are one or two
matters, they have instructed me on, which concerns them,
sir.
      ' THE CORONER:    I think I will be able to short circuit
this submission.      You wil l recollect, ladies and gentlemen,
at the business meeting a suggestion was made that we
sho uld try and extract various paragraphs out of Lord
Ju stice Taylor's Report as an a gre ed statement.     I was not
partic ularl y enamoured of the v i e w and for some reason
w h i c h at the moment I cannot account for I forgot to
menti on at the meeting that we w e r e actually in the process
of preparing what we thought was an actual non-
controversial, entirely neutral, account of various
activities which we h o p e d it.would be possible to put to
the Jury so that they h a d an underlying base on which one
co u l d build the edifice, so to speak.

       In the events w h i c h have happened, we have he a r d from
most of you, if not all, but w h i l s t quite a lot of y o u have
actually come back and said that y o u are reasonably happy
wi t h the summary there have bee n quite a number of y ou who
have had substantial points of criticism to make wi t h
regard to the content.         Unfortunately some of these points
- and I do not think I am criticising anybody and I a m not
going to name any names either - wer e not made until Friday
or even later.     When I say Friday, I mean Friday late
afternoon.     I have come to the conclusion that we are not
going to use these summaries at all.         We will build, if
that is the right word, what we nee d as we go along.

      I mention that now, and I w ill mention it when the
Jur y are here, but wh a t we are g o i n g to do is that we have
got some two dozen slides which w e are going to show.
They are shots of the ground fro m the air and so on in
order to give the Jury some idea of what we are talking
about and then we will just b uild the evidence on it as far
as is necessary for the purposes of the Inquest.          I think
that probably deals w i t h your point.       I know that m a n y of
you thought it was a jolly good idea but in the event it
has not wo rked out.     I thought it was a jolly good idea as
well which is why I intended to do it but I woul d rather
not.    Some of the points which w e r e made, I could see what
was being said and some were ver y good, but I would rather
not have anything which people w e r e not entirely hap py on.
Some of you might feel you have b e e n pushed b ecause you
have been asked to agree to something.          If you are not
ha ppy with the evidence, that is another matter altogether.
I take no responsibility for w h a t the witnesses say.          We
have to accept the evidence that is given.          Are there any
other submissions you want to make, Hiss Hampton?

      HISS HAMPTON:     No, thank you,    sir.

      THE CORONER:     Mr. Hale, what about you?
                                                                 27


    A

        The first, of course, is Rule 22 of the Coroners Rules of     ♦
        1984, dealing with self-incrimination, sub-Rule 1 - and
        tnis is the matter that I referred to:
             "No witness at an inquest shall be obliged to answer
    B        any question tending to incriminate nitnself."
        And then Section 14 of the Civil Evidence Act, wnich in my
        submission is to the same effect but I refer to it for the
        sake of completeness. That is the Civil Evidence Act of
        1968, sub-section 1:
                                   •

             "The right of a person in any legal proceedings,
             other than criminal proceedings, to refuse to answer
    C        any question or produce any document or thing if to
             do so would tend to expose that person to proceedings
             for an offence or for the recovery of a penalty, (a;
             shall apply only as regards criminal offences under
#            the law of any part of the United Kingdom, and the
             penalties provided for by such law and (b) shall
             include a like right to refuse to answer any question
             or produce any document or thing if to do so would
             tend to expose the husband or wife of that person to
    D        proceedings for any such criminal offence or for the
             recovery of any such penalties."
        I mention sub-section (b) only because it is there not
        because, of course, it is in any way relevant to this
        case.
              So, sir, that is the position. Mr. Duckinfield, as
        with any witness before you and before the Jury, has that
    E   privilege not to answer any question which may tend to
        incriminate him. So, sir, what does that mean? Could I
        then ask you to turn to the bundle? My submission is that
        therie are two cases, one in the Court of Appeal one in the
        House of Lords which followed, in which the House of Lords
        confirmed the decision of the Court of Appeal, which gives
        you a great deal of guidance as to v lat constitutes a
        risk, a tendency, of incrimination. The first one is that
        in the Court of Appeal, the case of Re Westinghouse
    F   Eloctric Corporation Uranium Contract Litigation MDL
        Docket No. 235 (No. 2), reported in the third volume of
        the All England Reports of 1977 at page 717, and I would
        ask you at this stage, sir, to find that, which is at
        folder 6.
             Sir, the fact . of that case are wholly different to
        tMe facts of this, but of course it is the statement of
        principle, the ratio of the case to which I wish to refer.
    G   May I first of all read that part of the preamble to the
        headnote:
             "Evidence - Privilege - Incrimination of witness or
             spouse - Belief that evidence would expose witness to
             proceedings for offence or recovery of penalty -



    H
                                                          28




     Reasonable ground for belief - Sufficient to show
     real and appreciable risk that proceedings would be
     taken or increase of an existing risk of proceeding
     • • •



and then it goes on to deal with discovery of documents,
production of documents and I don't weary you with that
now, sir.
      Sir, I don't think it will be helpful to you or to
those who are listening to this submission to deal with
the facts of that cas , oth^r than to say that it was
action involving an American corporation against RTZ, Rio
Tinto Zinc Corporation Limited, and there was an
application for discovery of documents which Rio Tinto
Zinc did not wish to produce because they said that to
produce those documents would give rise to the possibility
that they may well face prosecution or a penalty within
European Community law, but I now deal with what was held,
and this, sir, is at page 718, and these are the
statements of general principle wnich in my submission
a,>ply to the giving of evidence in any Court, and
tnerefore before you, sir.
     THE CO.KONER:  May I just stop you - the page numbers
are missing off mine.
     MR. ISAACS:    It is the second page - the next page
after the first.   I do apologise, sir.
                                                               I
     "Held - A witness was protected from incriminating
     himself by the production of documents ...."
- and, it therefore follows, by the giving of any answer
to any question -
     "... if he could satisfy the court that there was
     reasonable ground to believe that production of the
     documents would furnish evidence against him which
     would be used in proceedings for a penalty ...."
- and again, that was, of course, relevant to that case,
but it applies to proceedings for a criminal offence, and
indeed it could be said, having regard to the wide ambit
of tne Coroners Rules, for example proceedings in relation
to disciplinary matters, waic'n of course you, sir, know
Ur. Duckinfield along with others still faces.
     "Reasonable ground for the belief might appear from
     the. circumstances of the case or from matters put
     forward by the witness himself, but the witness was
     required to show only that tnere was a real and
     appreciable risk, or an increase of an existing risk,
     that proceedings would be taken against him for an
     existing penalty offence, and not that proceedings
     were likely to be or would probably be taken."
You will see, sir, as we go through the reports, that one of the
points made by those who objected to the claim to the privilege
was that. "Well, the European Commission already know about this
and so you are not going to make your position any w o r s e ” . We
shall see, sir, I hope, how both the Court of Appeal and the
Ho u s e of Lords dealt with that proposition, because that might b
a point that is taken here.

      Sir, knowing that you d o n ’t have page numbers could I ask
you to turn to the next page over, page 721, the right-hand side
of the first judgment which was that of the Master of the Rolls.
Lord Denning.   It is the right-hand side of the page, and he
de als with the common law as to self-incrimination.     I ask you t<
look first of all at between D-E:

          ’’Today we are not dealing with a party to a cause, we
          are de aling with a witness.  At common law, when a
          witness is being examined in the witness box or is
          subpoenaed to produce documents to the court then,
          quite understandably, he may have something he
          wishes to keep secret to himself so that his
          neighbours or his competitors should not get to
          know of it;   something which he might reasonably
          believe he ought not to be compelled to disclose.
          Not, at any rate, if it exposes him to risk of
          some ill befalling him.   The common law does in
          some circumstances cast its protection over him.
          It adopts the maxim nemo tenetur seipsum p r o d e r e .
          No ;one is bound to furnish evidence against
          himself. It says:   'If a witness claims the
          protection of the court, on the ground that the
          answer would tend to incriminate himself and there
          appears reasonable ground to believe that it would
          do so, he is not compellable to answ er’’.

Then th^re is some reference by the Master of the Rolls to a
certa in number of cases which I shall not weary you with, because
they are all dealt wi t h in the judgment itself and the statements
of principle in the judgment.

     Could you go do w n to H on that same page:

           "But if it appears to the          judge that, by being
           compelled to answer, a witness may’* (I stress the "may*
           sir) ’’may be furnishing evidence against himself, whic*
           could” (I stress the ’’co u l d ” sir) ”be used against him
           in criminal proceedings or in proceedings for a
           penalty, then his objection should be upheld.

           There is the further point:         once it appears that a
           witness is ?t risk, then ’great latitude should be
           allowed to him in judging            for himself of the effect of
           any particular q u e s t i o n ’: see R. v. Boyes".
                                                               30




I would ask you to pay particular attention to the next few
line^. sir.-

          •'It may only be one link in he chain, or only
          corroborative of existing material, but still he is
          bound to answer if he believes on reasonable grounc
          that it could be used against him.    It is not neces
          for him to show that proceedings are likely to be t
          against him, or could probably be taken against him
          It may be improbable that they will be taken but
          nevertheless, if there is some risk of their being
          taken, a real and appreciable risk as distinct from
          remote or insubstantial risk, then he should not be
          made to answer or to disclose the d o c u m e n t s ” .

I stop/there for my purposes in relation to this authority, a
least'in the judgment of Lord Denning.

     Could I then ask you to turn over to the next page.  We i
move to the judgment of Lord Justice Roskill, which is pages
and 725, and I ask you to look at page 725, the right-hand sit
of the page at D.

          ”It has long been a rule of English law, as Lord
          Denning MR has pointed out, that a person cannot ...
          be required to answer questions or produce documents
          which may lead to his being, if I may be forgiven a
          colloquialism, ’convicted out of his own m o u t h ’. Tt
          is a long line of authorities dealing with this topi
         'of which the earliest cited to us was R . v . B o v e s . a
          decision of the Court of the Q u e e n ’s Bench subsequen
          expressly approved by this court in Re Reynolds, ex
          parte R e y n o l d s . Those two cases, and there are othe
          to the same effect, show clearly that a mere asserti
          of a claim for privilege on the ground of an alleged
          risk of self-incrimination is not e n o u g h to enable t
          privilege to be successfully claimed.         Nor, of cours
          will the court uphold such a claim for privilege whe
          it is made in bad faith."

May I stop there for a moment, sir.  An example of that would
this, and there are reported cases to this effect, where a man
has for example, given a statement to the Police.     He goes int*
the witness box as a prosecution witness.  May be because he h.
been given immunity he says, ”1 do not wish to answer these
questions because the answers may incriminate m e ” , when in fac1
he does not wish to protect himself but what he is trying to d<
is to protect another by not giving that evidence, for example
previous employer or a friend.  In those circumstances he woul<
not be acting in good faith but in bad faith and the privilege
would not be u p h e l d .

At F:

          "The first question which a court must ask itself is
          whether the facts proved in evidence disclose the
          commission of an offence, in some cases a criminal
                                                              31




           offence.         The first quest ion here is whether those
           facts disclose that there is a liability on Rio Tinto
           for what counsel for Rio Tinto called ’a penalty
           o f f e n c e ’......

           What, then is the d e gr ee of risk of penalty proceeding;
           following?  It seems to me that once a party to legal
           proceedings who is resisting production of documents
           can show facts which establish the existence of a
           penalty offence (or in other cases the commission of a
           criminal offence) the courts should be slow to deprive
           that party of his privilege against self-incrimination
           which the common law now for some three centuries, and
           s 14 of the Civil Evidence Act 1968 today, accords hin:
           In the absence of bad faith, to say that there is no
           risk of proceedings may in all but the plainest cases
           involve a court claiming for itself a d eg ree of
           prescient foresight to which it would not be wise to
           pretend for it its forecast were wrong and if
           proceedings and penalties were to follow, damage will
           or at least may be done by an erroneous decision of th<
           court which it would not be easy thereafter to undo or
           redress.”

I ask you to turn over the page again to what would be 726. the
left-hand side of the page at D.  Again, after a review of the
authorities. Lord Justice Roskill says:

           "It cannot, I think, be right in these cases for
           the court to attempt a quantitative assessment of
           the probability one way or the other of the risk
           of proceedings ultimately being taken, and then
           to seek to draw the line one way where the
           probabilities in the view of the court are
           thought to b e more or less evenly balanced and
           the other where the balance is more disparate.
           It is not for the court to resolve problems of
           this kind by calculating odds.   I think that the
           right question to ask is that posed by Shaw LJ; can
           exposure to the risk of penalties (or in other cases t«
           the risk of prosecution for a criminal offence) be
           regarded as so far beyond the bounds of reason as to b«
           no more than a fanciful possibility?”

In fact,   later on Lord Justice Shaw said exactly that.

     Could I ask you to turn from that case to part 7 of the
folder you have been handed, because the case ended up in the
House of Lords, where as I say the Court of Appeal's view was
upheld, as were the dicta of the Master of the Rolls and the
learned Lord Justices.   It is interesting to note when the House
of Lords dealt with the case what was said in relation to this
question of the information already being in the possession of,
let us call them in the context of this case, the prosecuting
authorities.   I anticipate you are lacking in numbers again.  If
I could ask you to turn over the first page and go to the second
This would be page 437 on the right-hand side, sir, dealing with
that part of the case as to what was held by their Lordships..    I
would draw your atte ntion to (ii) starting with "The RTZ
companies".


          "(ii)  The RTZ companies were entitled to claim the
          privilege from the production of documents given by s
          14(1) of the 1968 Act notwithstanding that the
          commission had knowledge of the cartel and had not
          taken any action in respect of it, for if the documents
          were produced under the letters rogatory the RTZ
          companies would be exposed to a greater risk of
          proceedings being brought against them by the
          commission for recovery of a fine than they were
          exposed to at present, since production of the
          documents might authenticate and support the existing
          information in the hands of the commission and afford
          conclusive proof of a breach by the RTZ companies of
          the prohibition against cartels, and might cause the
          commission to decide to take action against the RTZ
          companies".

So, sir, we have there the House of Lords dealing with the point
that may be raised in this case as to the decision that has been
taken by the Director in this case, but who knows what will
happen in the future.

     Could you then turn four pages on to what would be page 445
between B-C, still the speech of Lord Wilberforce.  He says at C

          "I base that conclusion in part on evidence which was
          before and considered by the High Court and the Court
          of Appeal and in part on the proposition that the
          tendency to expose to a penalty would be increased if
          the documents in question were to be validated and
          connected with the RTZ companies by sworn evidence,
          as opposed to being, as they are now, pieces of paper
          found in a file".

Sir, it w o n ’t have escaped you the difference between, albeit th<
evidence that was gi v e n before Lord Justice Taylor was all taken
down, it was not evid e n c e that was given on oath, but of course
the evidence before you would be given on oath.

     Then, sir, could you turn another six pages, pages 456 and
457.  "To give any evidence".  This is the speech of Viscount
Dilhorne. between G-H, and you appreciate, sir, I am only pickin;
those parts which are germane to this matter:

          "Secondly, it was argued that the discovery of the
          document would not in the circumstances tend to expose
          the RTZ companies to such proceedings". (That is for a
          penalty)  "It was said that as the commission had
          knowledge from the 'Friends of the Earth* documents fo
          a considerable time of the existence of the cartel and
          had taken no action, there was no real risk of such
          proceedings if the documents in the possession of the
                                                                 33




           RTZ companies were disclosed".


Then he deals with the arguments and reference to certain
authority.

     If you could m o v e to page 457, the right-hand side, between
C-D. and he refers to what was said by Lord Denning in the Court
of Appeal to which I have just referred you, he says :

           "With these observations I respectfully agree.      It was
           suggested that the reasoning in the Triplex case had
           reduced the burden which formerly lay on a person
           claiming p r i vileg e but I do not think that that is the
           case.  In his judgment du Parq LJ reviewed the earlier
           cases and based his conclusions on them.      Lord Denning
           MR contrasted a real and appreciable risk w i t h a remote
           or insubstantial one, and once it appears that the risl
           is not fanciful, then it follows that it is real.      If
           it is real, then there must be a reasonable ground to
           apprehend danger, and, if there is, great -latitude is
           to be allowed to the witness and to a p e r son required
           to produce d o c u m e n t s .

           If the RTZ companies are compelled to p r o duce the
           documents wh i c h they were asked to produce, I
           cannot reach the conclusion that it would be
           fanciful to suppose that that would e xpo se them to
           no greater risk than at present of proceedings for
           the recovery of a penalty being brought against
           them.  The documents might well authenticate and
           support the information now in the hands of the
           commission".

So what the learned Law Lord is saying, sir, in my submission,
that even though the Co m m i s s i o n nad evidence before it wh ich the^
had decided to take no action on, the production of these
documents, the p r o duc tion of additional information, m a y well be
sufficient to cause them to take a different view.

     There is just one further part I would ask vou to look at,
and that is in the s p e e c h of Lord Diplock. Page 4 6 5 on the
right-hand side of a page which begins, "The privil ege claimed b:
the RTZ companies".    Could you go to the right-hand side, sir, a*
B:

           "I do not think that your Lordships are entitled to
           dismiss as fanciful the risk that if the documents
           relating to the cartel were produced at the trial in
           the Virginia proceedings and came, as the y then would,
           into the public domain, the resulting p u blici ty in thi:
           sensitive p olitical field might result in pressu re on
           the co mmiss ion to take against the RTZ companies
           speedier and severer action than they might otherwise
           have d o n e " .

Sir,   having regard to both past and recent events,      some events s
recent as to be only a matter of days ago in relation to pressui
which, properly placed, perhaps, is being placed upon the
Director of Public Prosecutions, sir, those observations, those
dicta of Lord Diplock, have a particular relevance to this
particular case.

                            /So, sir,   that is the law
                                                                 37




misunderstood the situation so far as the Director's
decision was concerned*   At that stage they indicated that
Mr. Duckenfield would then be prepared to make a statement,
or might be prepared to make a statement, for the purposes
of the disciplinary proceedings.   They received by letter
of the 6th September, 1990, this reply:
     "You are correct when you say that the DPP has decided
     that there is insufficient evidence to prosecute your
     client for any criminal offence arising out of the
     Hillsborough tragedy.   It is also correct to say that
     the disciplinary issues now have to be considered by
     South Yorkshire Police in consultation with the Police
     Complaints Authority.   I believe you are also aware
     there are outstanding civil actions being brought by
     various parties with an interest in the matter and that
     there are ninety-five Coroner's inquests to be
     reconvened.
     I am aware that at the interview on the 3rd of July,
     1990, your client intimated that once the DPP had made
     his decision in respect of the criminal issues he would
     consider being interviewed in respect of any
     disciplinary matters.   If that is still his wish then
     I am ready to conduct that interview, but it must be
     understood that the disciplinary matters are very
     closely related to the criminal issues so any interview
     would have to be conducted under a Police and Criminal
     Evidence Act caution and the transcript of the
     questions and answers would have to be sent to the DPP
     for further consideration of the criminal matters.
     That is the position in respect of any new or
     additional evidence which comes to light, for example,
     that which may arise out of the civil actions or the
     Coroner's inquests.   It is not for ae to advise you or
     your client as to how you, or he, should proceed, but
     it seems to me that you should be aware of the
     foregoing information."
     Sir, one could not have a clearer statement, in my
submission, of it being said that anything that is said by
any witness in these proceedings, but my concern is Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield, who after all is the only police
officer in this matter who was suspended and remains
suspended as a result of this tragedy, that anything that is
said by him will, as a matter of course, be sent to the
Director and, who knows, it may be that the Director on
receiving such information will reconsider his decision.
     In my submission it cannot be said that the risk   to
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield is a fanciful one as   to the
likelihood of proceedings taking place.   Indeed, one   knows
that only a matter of days ago, and I ask you to look   at
something I mentioned earlier, and this is at section 3 of
the bundle:
     "Mr. Duckenfield, as with some other Officers, still
     has hanging over his head the disciplinary proceedings
     pursuant to the making of complaints under Regulation 7
     of the Police Disciplinary Regulations of 1985."
Though documents have been served on him pursuant to
Regulation 7 dealing with those matters.




               Of course, anything he says...
     offence had been committed and that for other
     verdicts (except an open verdict) they had to be
     satisfied on the balance of probabilities.
     Furthermore, when directing a jury on
     manslaughter comprising unlawful killing alleged
     to have occurred because of neglect on the part
     of police, the coroner was required to direct the
     jury on four matters..."
I pause there.    My submission is this, against the
background of the submission I have already made, namely
that any question which Mr. 'Duckenfield was asked would
have the tendency to incriminate that in relation to those
four matters that the Divisional Court referred to, if any
question is asked of Mr. Duckenfield which touches upon any
of these four matters, or of any of the four ingredients of
the first matter to which the Divisional Court refers,
there will be a tendency to incriminate him in the very
nature of the question itself because these are questions
which would be directed to the possible commission of a
criminal offence.    Those matters are these:
     "...firstly that they had to be satisfied, on the
     evidence, of four ingredients, namely (a) that
     the police were under a duty to have regard to
     the health and welfare of the deceased..."
So any question to Mr. Duckenfield as to his duty in
relation to the spectators at Hillsborough, or those who
tragically died, would require an answer which would have a
tendency to incriminate. It continues:
     M ...(b) that in the circumstances there was a
     failure to do what should have been done for the
     health and welfare of the deceased..."
So any question asked of Mr. Duckenfield as to what he did
or did not do that day which touched upon the health and
welfare of the deceased would be a question which would
require an answer which would tend to incriminate him. It
goes on:
     "...(c) that the failure amounted to a
     substantial cause of death..."
So any question asked of him - of course this is only a
privilege of self-incrimination - as to causation between
what he did and any death or deaths, or the deaths of those
who died in general terms, would be a question which would
tend to incriminate, that is, the answer'would tend to
incriminate and:
                                                        44




on that particular question Mr. Duckenfield or perhaps
myself saying, "Sir, I object to answering that question.
I rely on privilege".   The risk of prejudice so far as the
Jury is then concerned is overwhelming both in so far as
Mr. Duckenfield is concerned and indeed the position so far
as the South Yorkshire Police themselves as a body are
concerned (and here I intrude a little on to Mr. Payne's
territory).
     One can perhaps, no matter how carefully you are
directing, see the difficulty that would be in the mind of
the Jury if to every question the position of privilege is
claimed. They would be bound to think, "What has this man
got to hide?" You, sir, know and my learned colleagues and
I know, that such a privilege is said not to be taken
against a man but lay people and lawyers are quite
different and there comes a time when they say to
themselves, "There is something funny here. He are not
being told the whole truth and whatever".   My concern.is
that even in the asking of a question that may be
disallowed by you there will be sufficient in the question
to prejudice the Jury against either Mr. Duckenfield or
others.
     I come back to the point I made earlier about the line
being drawn.   Everything at the moment is above the line.
I am concerned there should be nothing below the line which
may prejudice Mr. Duckenfield.    May I go back to the
analogy you drew as to the straightforward case of the
reckless driver and the fatality?
     I anticipate that it would be your practice - let us
say no PACE interview had taken place - that the driver had
relied upon his right not to answer any questions, as has
taken place in this case so far Mr. Duckenfield was
concerned, and you would not in those circumstances with
the driver facing the possibility of prosecution say to the
driver, "You must answer these questions as to what you did
and what you thought" etc. You would not expect the driver
to answer those questions in those circumstances. Mr.
Duckenfield is in exactly the same position.
     It may be said that Mr. Duckenfield is such an
important participant in the events of that day that
without him what is the point of going on at all but in my
submission that would be misconceived because the privilege
is only against self-incrimination. There are many, many
people, both police officers and civilians who can give
evidence as to the facts and the factual decisions that Mr.
Duckenfield took on that day and so the Jury will not in
any way be deprived of the opportunity of hearing about
what happened. They would just be deprived of not being
told by Mr. Duckenfield.
                                                        45




     I come back again to the point that I made at the
outset.   Whilst this is a high profile Inquest, it is
important not to disregard the rights of any individual who
has interests of his own and important interests which are
affected by the law.
     I finally say this - and I know I have been on my feet
for quite some time and I do not want to weary you
further - that if it be felt necessary by you, and both you
and I know, sir, that there are no PACE statements or
interviews by Mr. Duckenfield, that the Jury must hear
something about what Mr. Duckenfield said about the day
then, sir, upon instructions - and it is only on this basis
that I put this - I have no complaint with what Mr.
Duckenfield said to the Taylor Inquiry going before the
Jury. I say that because that is all above the line as
opposed to anything new below the line.
     That has already been considered by the Director and
my concern is that there is something else. It may be
said, "We can ask him the same questions and if the
Director has already considered those matters, well then,
frankly what has he got to worry about?" Sir, the asking
of the question (a) is unlikely to be in the same terms and
(b) the answer is unlikely to be in the same terms and it
does not have to be an answer which is an admission of any
offence.   It only has to be, on the authorities, a step
possibly towards this, and again, sir, you have the dicta
where that is made abundantly clear.
     I fear, and I know you are mindful of this, sir, that
this is really the last opportunity for the families (and
one can understand their concern and I do not criticise
them at all) through my learned friend, Mr. King, or Mr.
Bytner who may well be brought in, as Mr. King mentioned on
the last occasion to, cross-examine Mr. Duckenfield or
other witnesses, to produce extra evidence to get that
which they have, which we see, been pressing for. It is in
those circumstances that seeking to protect Mr.
Duckenfield's interests, to be fair to him whilst being
fair to others, and being mindful of the restricted area of
Inquests as this is not a Public Inquiry, this is not the
Spanish Inquisition, this is not the Star Chamber, not only
should be the questions which he is to be asked that he
should not be obliged to give evidence at all. Those are
my submissions, sir.
     THE CORONER:   Can I just make two small points before
I call anybody else? Perhaps it was my fault, I do not
recollect, but if I instanced an RTA where the driver was
reckless then I made a mistake because if a driver had been
reckless he would have been charged with causing death by
reckless driving and under Section 16 of the Coroner's Act
I would have had to adjourn it sine die. The point I was
trying to make was that under normal circumstances it was
the ordinary driver.
     MR. ISAACS:   Let us say, it is probably my fault,
careless driving or driving without due care.
     THE CORONER:   It makes no difference to the argument
but I just wanted to be clear that we were talking about
the same thing.
                   «

     MR. ISAACS:   It is important. The seriousness of the
crime is neither here nor there. It is a privilege, as you
and I know, against self-incrimination in any offence. I
am obliged to you, sir.
     THE CORONER:   It is 1236 and in twenty minutes we
will be rising because at two o'clock we are starting with
the Jury. Can you indicate whether any of you feel you
wish to address me on the point which Mr. Isaacs has made?
What you are saying is that there is clear authority that a
person does not have to answer questions which tend to
incriminate him, to use the text of the rule, and you cited
the rule plus several cases. Do any of you feel you want
to address me on the point which Mr. Isaacs has made? As I
understand it, what you are saying is that there is clear
authority for saying that a person does not have to answer
a question which may tend to incriminate him and you cited
the rule plus several cases. It is exceedingly difficult
to formulate questions where people are in danger of
prosecution which are meaningful and in the circumstances
what is the point of getting the man or the witness to come
into the box at all? You are not suggesting that a PACE
statement, if there is one, or anybody else should be
excluded?
     MR. ISAACS:   No, sir, not at all.
     THE CORONER:   Have I summarised very, very briefly
the heart of your submission?
     MR. ISAACS:   Indeed you have, sir. To call him in
those circumstances would only serve to disadvantage him as
well as others in addition to the prejudice which would be
caused. You have summarised it absolutely correctly.
     THE CORONER:   The fourth point you 'have made is that
the damage of refusing to answer the questions is out of
proportion to the benefit of having him here as a witness?
  — MR. ISAACS:    There is no benefit in having him here
because any question he is asked is bound to have the
                                                         47




tendency to incriminate him on the basis of the principles
I have put before you.
     THE CORONER:   I look to Mr. King, first of all,
because he is the most likely person to      address me onthe
issues. Are you likely to address me on this?
     MR. KING:   Sir,   I would wish to. There are two
matters. One I would wish to hear if anybody       else has
anything to say in support and, secondly, in the light of
what has just fallen from my learned friend's lips as to
the use of the transcript I Would like to take certain
instructions from those whom I represent.
     THE CORONER:   Mr. Isaacs, it seems to me that it
would be wise, before I give a ruling on your submission,
to allow other people to have their say so that I can hear
different points of view and secondly, it gives me a chance
to think about it as well. If you do not think it rude,
what I intend to do is not proceed with the point at this
stage because we cannot deal with the submissions on what
is quite an important point actually in twenty minutes and
we will deal with it either at four this afternoon, subject
to your agreement, when the Jury go or if it is more
convenient to you we can deal with it at four tomorrow or
any other day.




                /Mr. Duckenfield is not going...
Mr. Duckenfield is not going to be called in the immediate
future, so in that sense it is not urgent that we have got
to have a ruling this morning.
     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, save for this, that I am afraid -
and you may have gleaned tnis from some of tne newspapers,
I think - that I will not have the privilege of being
before you on most days during this Inquest.
       THE CORONEA:   I had not appreciated that.
     h A. ISAACS:  You had not, sir, but no, I an: afraid
that is the position. Without going into any details I am
afraid that the cost of representation would be so great,
and there is no sufficient funds for him at the present
time. The Police Authority have unfortunately failed to
agree that he or others in a similar position should have
their representation paid for, so I am afraid that he will
not be represented during the course of this inquest, sir,
other than on the days when, if you do decide that he
should be called, he is actually giving evidence.
     THE CORONER:   And presumably on the days when any
statement - in fact, I think there is one, it is not very
long but I think there is one - were to be dealt with?
     HR. ISAACS:   That may or nay not be the case, sir,
but one can understand the difficulties. Hay I say this,
in relation to what you said lust amoment ago, and this
perhaps is a little special pleading? You said a moment
ago you did not want to be rude - I think I can speak on
behalf of all my learned friends, it is a long tine since
we have been before a tribunal wtich is so courteous and
we are very grateful to you for that. Ue are not perhaps
used to being treated so well*
       THE CORONER:   Will you be here this afternoon?
       MR. ISAACS:    I shall be here this afternoon, sir*
yes.

     THE CORONER:   In that case shall ve deal with it
this afternoon? Is that agreeable to all of you? I know
it makes it a longer day but I did say at our business
meeting that the lawyers nave to put up with the strain.
I don't like to subject my jury to too heavy pressure,
because it is not fair on them, but we have just got to
put up with it, so to speak. Is that agreeable to
everybody? Good.

     Is there any other —   perhaps you could outline the
nature of your submissions, so I know what we have got in
sCore, so to speak.

     HR. HANNING:   The first thing I am going to do, if I
may, is to pay tribute to the way in which my learned
                                                        49




friend Mr. Isaacs has put the matter before you, and the
second thing I am not going to do is to repeat it. It
does not get stronger or better by repetition.
     You know that I represent Superintendent Murray. Ue
has made a statement under the Police and Criminal
Evidence Act. I expect that in one form or another that
will be brought before this hearing at some stage, and
having done that I find myself adopting, and -.li the more
so, the views that have been canvassed before you.
     At*the end of tnis hearing the verdict will be one
for the Jury and as learned as we hope we may be in the
ways in which a Coroner's Inquest is to proceed, the fact
of the matter is that the probability is that most of the
people wto will be on the Jury have never been on any
jury, and I shall certainly be surprised if they have ever
been on a Coroner's Jury. With t*ie best directions in the
world, the fact of the matter, as we know from juries and
experience, is that some people can take one what seems to
be minor and inconsequential, point and make that the
deciding and turning factor upon which everything else
falls
      It is impossible, in the words that have been read to
you by my learned friend, for it to be conceivable that a
Jury will not in its mind's eye say, "What on earth is
*oing on here under this rule against self-
incrimination?*', and "Why are we not being allowed to see
the person?**, and therefore there is damage beyond measure
in even going to that stage which suggests that a person
should be called into a witness box, give their name and
address, and somebody, whether it is you or whether it is
the witness or the lawyer for that witness, referring to
the Rule, and w.iether then the Jury is asked to retire,
 trie fact of the matter is they have got the whiff of
something and wnen they have got that scent the brain
begins to run wild and we can have no control over what
part that is likely to play in the ultimate decision
making process.
       Therefore, in adopting tne legal submissions and in
 not seeking to put them before you over and over again, I
 have to say that considering what questions may be raised,
 and considering those criteria which have been put before
 you as to the sorts of questions which clearly have to be
 in the mind, and have to be enquired into, if those are
 the questions whicn normally would be asked and there is
 the Rule and the law, and that is what we, and you, sir,
 are here to uphold, the law, if the law says that a person
 s.tould not be put in that position, categorically should
 not, then it seems to me, with respect, that you should
  therefore make a ruling that you are not going to have tne
 witness put into it, and you can make whatever explanation
 you want, because you can simply read the law to the Jury
                                                                  50

A

    and, make them clear that they should dismiss that from
    their minds.
         THE COKOME;::  Mr. King, I will skip you, if I may -
    not out of discourtesy.
B
         MISS SINCLAIR:   Sir, I do not adopt the submissions
    made by my learned friend, Mr. Isaacs, and indeed, I have
    no other submissions to make at this stage.
        • THE CORONER:      You do not?
          MISS SINCLAI.;:     I do not.
          MK. CArCHt’OLE:  Sir, can I say* on behalf of tne
    Officers of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, that we
    came nere prepared and expecting to see every witness
    called to give evidence, subject to the normal rules, and
    indeed, as I hope has been made clear, we are anxious to
    help throughout. I would like, however, to reserve my -
    position in the light of any ruling you may make. If the
    senior Police Officers are not going to be giving evidence
    at this inquiry naturally that is something I would like
     to have the opportunity of discussing with ray clients. I
    cannot predict what the outcome will be of that, and if
    necessary I will make an application at a later stage. At
    present I have no observations actually on the
    applications made by my learned friends.
         MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, I would personally be very
    pleased if Mr. Duckenfield would appear in this Court so
    that I can put questions to him directly. As he was t*»e
    main participant in the disaster I was looking forward to
    meeting Mr. Duckenfield so that I would be able to meet
    him face to face. That is all.

          MR. CALLAGHAN:     Sir, I have no observations to make.

    .ha „MJ?S AJJDJ-EMAN*   Sir, as you are avare I represent
    the Police Federation and the ruling that you are about to
                        have * generalised application and apply
    thit        yitne?5es w-}0® 1 represent. Sir, in short, at
    fin!   5 g a ?0Uid wish to say that in Principle I also
    echo and adopt those submissions whicn have been made by
                friend, Mr. Isaacs.    Clearly individual
    decisions are going to have to be made by certain
    individuals, dependent upon your ruling.

          What 1 would say, sir, in particular, is that in my
\   respectful submission it would indeed be preferable for
1   such individuals not to give evidence at all if that
                you; de®ision, rather than running tne risk of
     'av^whi^hShaseb L n ^ idescribed
     «y which has been       Prej^ iSeuin  th?
                                      by ray   Jury's friend
                                             learned   minds Mr.
                                                             in the
     \oqSInatlJ.my fCi6nd M r ‘ Manni"*> “   I - J say so, so

                              H3
                                                           51




   , For my part I would submit that it must be right that
there is very little indeed which could be asked of such a
witness, the answer to which would not have a tendency to
incriminate. Siry I won't repeat all the submissions
which have been made by my learned friend but I would
specifically wish to reinforce those particular ones.
      MR. RUSScLL:   Sir, as you will recall I represent
Superintendent Greenwood and I would endorse uhat has been
said principally by my learned friend, Mr. Isaacs. Sir,
it may be that you would prefer me to add my two penny
wortrh to those arguments at 4 o'clock.
     THE CORONER:   It depends how long you will be. Yes,
I think tnat might be wiser because I don't want to rush
you. Is anybody at this end going to want to ....
     MISS HAMPTON:   I have no submissions.
     MR. HALE:   I will say that in principle I would
support Mr. Isaacs because his arguments are so very
soundly based and based on precedent. Whether I avail
myself of them will be a different matter. Mr. Marshall
may wish to give evidence but that, of course, will be his
choice.
     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, the position of the Chief Constable
is that he supports the position taken by individual
Officers, and accordingly, therefore, supports the
submissions made by Mr. Isaacs.
     THE CORONER:   Very well. Ue will leave this
submission tnen, at this stage, in order to particularly
enable Mr. King to consider it and to put anything he
wants to me.
     May I just ask whether you will have any other legal
submissions which are burning and which need to be made
today? Please don't think that I wish to stifle you in
any sense of the word. I am just trying to assess
timings. No? Good.
     We in this room - you know how to get in - as far as
tne legal representatives are concerned there is quite a
large room - it is called the safe and I think it has got
steel doors - the key to it is under the control of the
local authority and arrangements have been made for it to
be open between 9 and 10 and A and 5, so that if you wish
- and 1 stress if you wish - you can deposit any of your
papers - this goes for you as well, of course, Mrs.
McBrien - in that room, but you cannot assume that the
local authority will take responsibility for them. The
roonr~will be under the charge of one chap with a key and
he will open and shut it, but you have to accept the risk,
so to speak. You don't have to use it. It is a facility
which we have tried to pr wide.
                                                         52




    / Secondly, those of you who were here for Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry, we have been provided with the big rooms
on the other side of the main staircase - one is called
the Mandela Room, the other I have forgotten the name of.
The Mandela Room has been laid out with a big screen like
this, so if taere is an overflow or somebody wants to know
what is going on but does not want to be in the Court,
they can go and watch and near. As I understand it, if we
use, for example, a video, you will see tne video but you
will not be able to see the Court, because we have only
got one camera. In the normal course of events you will
be'able to see and near what‘is going on in Court but. in
certain circumstances you may have a slightly limited
recording, because of the facilities - we have had to draw
 the line somewhere.
     The other room has been laid out and is intended
really mainly for the families, if they want to withdraw
and sit and be quiet. That is one half of it and in the
other half we have built small partitions, cubicles, so if
any of you wish to speak to your clients you have got a
measure of privacy but they are not so.ndproof, so you
have to judge how good they are and whether you want to
use them. They are there for your use if you wish.
     At the baik of the hail I think there is a list of
restaurants, which has not been put up by me, so if you
want to go and look and see what is what and where you can
go - and ho doubt there are dozens of otners as well - we
are rignt in the centre of town so it should not be too
difficult to eat and have refreshments.
     We have had quite a long session. I hope you will
forgive me, but I wanted to get on with it. We are going
to rise. Is there anything - yes, Mrs. MeBcien?
     MRS. McBRIEN:   1 just wanted to say something
relating to the other matter earlier in the day. I was
wondering if the time limits could be extended, in the
individual inquests, the time limit of 3.15 for the day in
question could be extended for individual inquests but not
apply to the generic inquest?
      THE CORONER:   The answer to that is that I took Mr.
 King's submission to incorporate that point and I have
 said what 1 want and am not going to change my mind on it.
 I am going to stick to what I have said, 3.15 or
 thereabouts, so I am not extending it but-we did say that
 if there are any specific errors which you were going to
 bring to my attention in the summaries, that I would
 consider it, and that would apply to you as well, of
 course, as far as your boy is concerned.
      MRS. McBRIENs   Thank you
town so there are plenty of facilities, including a restaurant
upstairs. So we are going to say to you. fend for yourselves.'
and my Jury Officers will sort out the financial reimbursement.
There are rules and limits, but they will have told you that. I:
they have not, ask, so that you know how much you can spend
without being out of pocket. It is adequate, you will find.
     One advantage of giving you sandwiches, was that we had vou
nicely segregated from everybody else, and we won't have that if”
we allow you to run free, but after all, you go home in the
evenings as well; don't you. so I can't see any good reason why
you should not do whatever you wish, but please remember the rul<
is no discussion with anybody about the case. It is very
difficult, but you must follow it, particularly in a building
like this where you can see there are quite a lot of people here
1 have met quite a lot of these people and I still don't
recognise most of them, and so it is very easy if you start
talking to strangers you may find you are talking to people who
you in no circumstances you should have opened your mouth to. S<
don't talk to anybody. So will you please do that for me?
     If you find I am going on for too long, because we won't be
rising quite as frequently as we did at the Medico Legal Centre
because it is slightly different now, but if you think I am goin;
on too long you are near enough now to attract my attention and
to say, "Can we stop and have a cup of coffee", or something, an<
of course, if any of you need to stop because you are not feel ini
well or because you were indisposed in some way then obviously
you must let me know. It is exceedingly important that vou are
all here, because if we are not we have to stop * We have no
control over our lives completely, but unless there is a really
compelling reason why you cannot be here please be here. It doe.
not actually inconvenience me, because if I am not here I am
doing something else, but it inconveniences everybody else,
because we would have to adjourn it until we are back again, so
to speak, as a group.
     I think that is all I need to say on domestic matters^ May
I ask, were any of you in Court this morning, because somebody
suggested that you were? None of you were in Court? That is
good, because we did not want you in Court. That is right, none
of you, members of the Jury, were in Court in the morning? That
isimportant,   because if we have legal submissions and I ask you
to go out you must stay out. It may be when it is all over and
we have finished I will explain to you why we do that, but I
don't think I will do it now because we have not got much time,
and it can wait, I am sure.
     I am notgoing to tell you the potential verdicts which you
will have to consider because we are going to hear the evidence,
and when we have heard the evidence I am going to sum it up.
hopefully, and I will direct you with regard to the law and
anything else I need to tell you. and then you will retire and
tak€Tyour time and so on.
     I do want to draw one or two rules to your attention,
because it is exceedingly important that you should understand i
                                                             56




now and that everybody else should understand it. This is not
actually a rule but it is a general point. We are doing
Inquests. There are 95 of them but we are doing them together.
This is not a trial. Nobody is accused of anything in my Court.
It is not a Public Inquiry, so we d o n ’t roam beyond ay brief. I
is not adversarial in the sense that the parties can introduce
their own witnesses and put them up to me to listen to and then
make a judgment. I introduce the witnesses. That is not to say
that if parties want to draw my attention to a particular witnes
or witnesses whom they would like me to consider, they can do
that and have done because a lot of water has flowed under the
bridge since we last met. but in the final analysis it is my
decision whom we call, rightly or wrongly, and it is an
inquisition.
     The next thing to understand, and this is very, very
important, is that this is an inquisition not on behalf of the
relatives, not on behalf of the South Yorkshire Police, not on
behalf of the club, not on behalf of Eastwoods, not on behalf of
the supporters generally. It is an Inquiry by me. and if you
like because I am called Her Majesty’s Coroner you may take it i'
is on behalf of the State or Her Majesty the Queen. So it is
important to understand that, and I have to keep on reminding
myself of this as well, because otherwise we get misled into
thinking we are doing this for others, and of course you realise
and I am conscious and so are you and everyone else, of the
families, so it is important that the evidence which we call
should seek to be intelligible and relevant and answers as far a:
one can some of the things which concern and worry them. It is
very important to know that this is not done because they are
bereaved people. It is because somebody has died and the Act
says that when that happens the Coroner should hold an
inquisition either on his own or with a jury. Well. we are with
a jury, of course.
     I have already indicated to you the ove**»ii limitations of
an Inquest, so i am not going to repeat that, but there is
another very important corollary to this, and that is Rule 22.
am going to read this rule to you because you have got to
understand it, because it may be relevant at some point. It
won't be relevant today, but I want to get it right at this
stage. What it says is:
          "(1) No witness at an Inquest shall be obliged to
          answer any question tending to incriminate himself.
          (2) Where it appears to the Coroner that the witness
          has been asked such a question the Coroner shall infon
          the witness that he may refuse to answer” .
Now, this is a fundamental principle of Coronal Inquisitions, an<
it may well be a fundamental principle in a load of other courts
but I am not interested in what happens elsewhere. I am
interested here. An important thing to understand is that if
somebody exercises their right it is a right. It is not that
they may or may not. They have a right .not to answer questions
which may incriminate them. You must not draw inferences from
the exercise of their rights.
   s
     That does not mean to say that you nay not hear evidence
from other people which nay tend to incriminate them. That is
not the point, but you cannot expect somebody to stand up and
say, "I did it". It happens in TV series, but it does not happer
generally speaking in real life, but it is part and parcel of the
overall structure of Coronal jurisdiction, and it is designed (a)
to protect the individual or individuals who may be involved, anc
(b) to ensure that if it were to be that some other proceedings
were to take place in some other court we have not muddied the
water.




                         /So there is actually a dual
       ' MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, and members of the Jury, I am
    Joan McBrien and I appear on behalf of our family in this
    matter.
         MR. CALLAGHAN:   Andrew Callaghan, solicitor, on
    behalf of the Ambulance Service.
         MISS ADDELMANN:   My name is Andrea Addelmann of
    Counsel.   I am instructed by Russell, Jones and Walker
    and I represent the Police Federation.
         MR. RUSSELL:   I am Christopher Russell.   I am a
    barrister.   I am instructed by solicitors called Barlow,
    Lyde and Gilbert and I represent the interests of
    Superintendent Greenwood.
          THE CORONER:  You might ask, having told you all
    about this inquisitorial system and how I do it all:
    what are they doing here?   The answer is that the rules
    which I have already referred to permit interested
    parties to be present, obviously.   The rules permit them
    to ask questions which is why Mrs. McBrien is there, and
    the rules also provide that people can be represented by
    their legal representatives and that is why they are
    here.
         Of course, if it is correct and opportune they will
    ask questions of the witnesses and within the limits
    which-1 have outlined to you they will be permitted to do
    so.
         Now without any further ado, all I will say is that
    these inquests are concerned with a disaster vhich :
    happened at a football stadium known as Hillsborough
    Football Stadium, on the 15th of April, 1990.   You will
    learn as we go along more details about it.
         Now I think the first thing is we will call Steven
    Brown.
                      STEVEN BROWN Sworn
                        Bv THE CORONER
    Can you give me your full name? - A. I am Police
    Constable Steven Brown of the West Midlands Police.
    Is it right, Mr. Brown, that you have with you some
    overhead photographs of various scenes? - A. Yes, sir.
    These are photographs mainly of the stadium ..and its
    surrounds? - A. Yes.




n
                                          S. BROWN

     ✓
        THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen9 I hope you have
   got good eyesight, the model is over there:
Q. These photographs, most of them      were taken after the
   incident?   In fact all of them    were taken after the
   incident? - A. Host of them, yes, sir.
Q. Can you put them up one at a time and we will number
   them.   Let's put the first one up.   We are going to
   give these all "C" numbers in our usual way.   This is
   C.249.   That is what? - A. Aerial photograph of the
   ground, sir.
Q. Can you put the next one up?   This will be C.250. - A.
   This is a photograph of the south stand and the Spion
   Kop.
Q. Can you point on the model?   OK.   Next one.   What is
   this? - A. This is a photograph, sir, of the north stand.
   (C.251)
Q. It is taken across the Leppings Lane terraces, is that
   right? - A. That is correct, sir.
        THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen of the jury, in
   football parlance, apparently, the stand is a place where
   you sit and the terrace is tne place where you stand:
Q. Yes, next please*    What is that?   (C.2S2) - A. It is a
   photograph, sir of the west terrace and west stand.
Q. (C.253) - A. This is a photograph of the perimeter gates
   at Leppings Lane end of the ground.
Q. Some of the perimeter gates.   In fact it is a photograph
   in two bits, in effect? - A. That is correct, sir.
Q. Can you put the second one up as well?   (C.2S4).   The
   next one please*   This is another aerial view*   That
   gives a better impression of the Leppings Lane end? - A.
   Yes, sir.
Q. (C.255).   Next please.   This is very similar to one you
   have already seen, but what are we intending to see on
   this one? - A. Sir, this shows the turnstiles 1 to 16.
Q» Turnstiles 1 to 16?   (C.2S6).     This is what? - A. This
   shows the turnstiles A to G.
Q. (<G%257).  Can you see the A to G on there?   There are
   the big "Bs" and then underneath it there are the
   letters, A, B, C, D, E, F, G.    Next. - A. This shows
   the courtyard area beyond the perimeter gates and also
                                       S. BROWN

t)\e metal perimeter wall and turnstiles which have the
letters A, C, B, from left to right.
Can you point to the A, C andB? - A. A here, sir.      C
and B.
That is how the turnstiles were numbered.   That was
C.258.    What is this? - A. Sir, this is gate B.
(C.259)
     THE CORONER:   Are you sure, Mr. Jones?      What is
turnstiles 1 to.16?
     DCC JONES:   C.256.   Two photographs, sir, C.255
and C.256. Turnstiles A to G, C.257.    Courtyard and
metal wall C.258 and C.259 is gate B. We have missing
turnstiles A, C and B.
     THE CORONER:   No, we had that*
Can you put that back?   That is turnstiles...   What is
that? - A* That is turnstiles A, C and B, sir, also the
courtyard and the netal wall*
I see, these are bracketed*   Now put gate B up again,
please* . That is one of the exit gates* (C.259)*    What
is that? - A* That shows gate C to the left of the wall*
Can you point at it? - A* Yes, sir*
(C.260). - A* Sir, this photograph shows the gate locks :
and the observation panel in the gate*
The observation panel is that little square thing? - A.
Yes*
(C.261)* - A* Sir, this shows a view of the concourse
beyond the turnstiles and a hole in the wa 1.1 which leads
round to the north-west terrace*
(C.262). - A* This shows the tunnel leading to enclosures
3 and 4 and also shows the standing sign and the letters
B and A above the tunnel*
This is behind the turnstiles.** - A* Leading from the
concourse into the enclosures*
Down towards the terracing*   (C.263) - A* This
photograph shows th« standing sign on a pillar at the far
*ight of the photograph.
Can you again point to it up there please?   If you had
followed that you would have finished up in enclosure 1.
                                                            62


                                           S . BROUN


     (C,264). - A. This shows a double gate at the end of the
     concourse end of the tunnel.
Q.    (C.265). - A. This    shows the gates at the terrace end of
     the tunnel and the radial fence which separates the two
     enclosures.
Q.   End on9 of course9    the radial fence? - A. Yes.
Q.    (C.266). This photograph was obviously taken very soon
     after the incident.   What is it? - A. This shows the
     gates at the rear of the enclosures giving access to all
     of the enclosures in the Leppings Lane terraces.
Q. Can you point where they are?   I can see them because I
   know where they are.   (C.267).   Just point to the
   tunnel exit*   Yes. - A. This photograph shows the
   barriers in enclosures 3 and 4.
Q. (C.268) Could you point out which is enclosure 3 and
   which is enclosure 4? - A* This is enclosure 3 and
   enclosure 4.
Q. It is just an overview. - A. This photograph shows the
   perimeter fences separating the terraces from the pitch.
Q. (C.269).    The people on that photograph had nothing to
   do with it.    It just happens that they were there. - A.
   This shows the top of those fences where the wire bends
   inwards towards the enclosures.
Q. (C.270). - This shows the radial fences separating the
   enclosures in the Leppings Lane terraces.
Q. (C.271). - A. This shows the police control box and the
   electric clock and display board above it.
Q. Just show us where the clock is* - A. This is the
   electric clock.
Q. Switched off? - A. Switched off, and the display board
   here.
Q. The police control box is that building with the word
   "Skips" written on it, or that structure? - A. Yes, sir.
Q. (C.272). - A. Finally, sir, this is an internal view of
   the police control box.
Q. That will be C:273.
      —   THE CORONER:    Any questions of this Officer?
                                                                    63


                                                 S. BR OW N

             MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, have you a photograph of the
        area past gate C, the no man's land area, where people
        were not supposed to go but they went for safety reasons,
        I think?   Have you any photographs where they could have
        gone in that passageway?
B
             THE CORONER:   I know what Mrs. McBrien is after.
        We will have a look and see whether we have got a
        photograph of that area.   It is in fact on the aerial
        shots if you look.   We will see whether we have got one
        which might show that area for you.
              MRS. McBRIEN:    Thank you, sir.
              THE CORONER:   Thank you, Officer.   PC Brown will
         be back probably tomorrow morning with the videos.
              Next Michael Layton if he is here.    You are sworn
         actually, Mr. Layton so you don't need to be sworn again.
              Ladies and gentlemen, witnesses who have already
         been sworn I can see no advantage in re-swearing. Are
         you happy with that or did you wish to hear him sworn?
D        I cannot see any point in it.
                          MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                              By THE CORONER:
             THE WITNESS.   Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
        Inspector, collar number 9364 of the West Midlands
        Police.

    Q. Now you have prepared a summary on video and photographic
       evidence? - A. That is correct, sir.             -
    Q. Would you please give it to me?   It will be perfectly in
       order for you to read it to ne because I don't expect you
       to remoter it. - A. V.s, sir.    Sir, following tfce   X
       Hillsborough disaster, a video and photographic section
       was forned as part of the nain inquiry team to look at
       *   ®8P®cts of visual evidence available from various
       sources.

      £ L 8U& n beiWeen the        APril* 1989 and the 9th of
    \             1                on a full-time basis for the
    \ supervision of this particular team of officers.

        \         51
                                       e011*for
                     J U?C H ? n ,Ya8rthe   1100theandJudicial
                                   1*inl5ially
                                                       examination of
                                                               inquiry   and
        \latterly for the Coroner s inquests.

        Vi4eo recordings, both prior to the event, during and
        iltimately showing the aftermath were obtained from a


    \
                                        M. LAYTON


  number of agencies.   This material which varied both in
  content, quality of picture and evidential value was
  viewed by members of the team, copied and scheduled.
  Each film and photograph were given a unique reference
  number.   The schedules prepared were in themselves a
  precis of the events shown on film.
   Ultimately, sir, a composite film was prepared in
   conjunction with the Treasury Solicitor's Department,
   which was shown at Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.   This
   film was designed to show what was felt to be the most
   important scenes and sequence of events.
   Sir, that film was given the reference number MRE.2.
Q. Is that the one that I... - A. That is the composite
   film, sir.
Q. The compilation? - A*.The compilation, sir, yes.
Q. I think it is right - you have said it but I just want
   you to confirm it - this wasn't prepared solely by the
   West Midlands, it was done in conjunction with the
   Treasury Solicitors? - A. That is absolutely correct,
   sir.
Q. They had. somebody there who was looking? - A. Physically
   present, yes, sir.
   Likewise photographic material was obtained from various
   sources which was examined and scheduled in the same
   manner.    Continuity in respect of all this material is
   not necessarily complete since the person handing over
   the saaterial to the police is not necessarily the person
   originating that material.




               In an effort to analyse...
                                                                                              65




                                                                                   M LAYTON
In an effort to analyse the contents of the visual evidence
for the purposes of the Inquest some of the material has
been grouped into a number of key areas. As such the
sequence of events as referred to here in this statement do
not run in strictly chronological form, rather it deals
with a number of specific points.
   First of all, sir, having regard to the movements of
people at the Leppings Lane end of the ground I can make
the following observations with regard to the visual
evidence. On a video film reference TB2 which was filmed
on the South Yorkshire Police CCTV system using an operator
set database, in other words, this shows the date and time
on which the film was recorded, this camera has pan
facilities.
   It should be noted that videos RJH1 and RJH2 have no
such time clock and these relate to Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club's own video system. In order to try to
establish the times of events shown on these tapes a
comparison was made from events that occurred on the RJH2
tape which are also shown on the video referenced TB2 taken
from almost identical positions and which show almost
identical footage.

   To be specific at 14:47:38 hours on the tape referenced
TB2 a youth is seen to jump from the roof of Turnstiles A
to G into the concourse area. This same scene can be seen
on the tape referenced RJH2. On the tape referenced TB2
again at 14:52:30 hours a youth is Seen standing against a
wall near to Gate C with his arm raised and an identical
scene is shown on the tape reference RJH2. The timings of
other events as they appear on RJH2 can then be calculated
using what is called a real time counter on a video player
from either side of these fixed points.
    THE CORONER:               J u s t p a u s e f o r a m in u te .   ( To t h e J u r y )
H av e y o u u n d e r s t o o d w h a t h e i s s a y i n g ?

Q. What you are saying is that two of these tapes did not
have a time clock on them? - A. That is right, yes.
Q. An operator one?               -    A.     Yes, that is right.
Q. Then you try to match scenes which were identical and
   once you had got a time for that scene* you could
   calculate backwards and forwards? - A. Yes, that
   is right, sir, using a real time counter-.
Q. "Please carry on? - A. By using this method of
    calculation it is estimated that the tape, referenced
                                                                                        M LAYTON
    R JH 2, w o u ld h a v e b e e n s w i t c h e d o n a t a b o u t 1 2 :5 6
    h o u rs.      T h e sa m e w i l l a p p l y f o r a l l t h e t a p e s g i v e n
    t h e r e f e r e n c e RJH b e c a u s e I u n d e r s t a n d t h e y w e r e a l l
    s w i t c h e d o n a t t h e sam e t i m e b y PC 1421 G u e s t o f t h e
    S o u th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e who I b e l i e v e h a s s i n c e
    re tire d .

            On a v i d e o t a p e r e f e r e n c e d TB2 a t 1 2 : 0 0 : 4 8 h o u r s ,
    s u p p o r t e r s a r e sh o w n a r r i v i n g i n a s lo w t r i c k l e a n d
    e n t e r i n g t h e g r o u n d a t t h e L e p p in g s L an e e n d . A t
    1 3 :4 0 h o u r s o n t h e sam e v i d e o a s t e a d y f l o w o f
    s u p p o r te r s a re - s e e n e n t e r i n g th e g ro u n d a n d a t
    1 3 : 5 6 : 3 3 h o u r s o n t h e sam e t a p e t h e v o lu m e o f
    s u p p o rte rs h a s in c r e a s e d .       A t 1 4 : 3 5 :3 0 h o u r s t h e r e i s
    a v e r y d e n s e cro w d i n t h e c o u r ty a r d and t h e p e r i m e t e r
    g a te a r e a .     A v ie w o f t h e c o u r t y a r d i s a l s o show n o n
    t h e BBC t a p e w h ic h h a s b e e n g i v e n t h e r e f e r e n c e
    n u m b e r Map 9 .       T h i s i s a d i g i t a l r e f e r e n c e o f 0602
    a n d t h e e s t i m a t e d t i m e o f t h a t i s a t 1 4 :3 5 h o u r s .

Q . C an y o u j u s t p a u s e t h e r e f o r a m om ent?            -    A.       Y es.

       THE CORONER:           M em bers o f t h e J u r y , a r e y o u h a p p y w i t h
th a t?      I j u s t w a n t e d t o b e s u r e t h a t we know w h a t we a r e
t a l k i n g a b o u t.

Q . I w a n t t o t u r n t o t h e d i g i t a l r e f e r e n c e now?          -     A.
    Y es, s i r .

Q. The a d v a n ta g e o f h a v in g t h e d i g i t a l r e f e r e n c e i s t h a t
    yo u c a n f i n d t h e fra m e , t h e sc e n e on th e t a p e , b u t i t
    d o e s n o t t e l l you a n y th in g a b o u t tim e s , i s t h a t -
    r ig h t?
A . A t a p e r i o d o f t i m e w h ic h i n f a c t i h a v e c o v e r e d a t
    t h e b o tto m o f t h i s p a g e b u t i t d o e s n o t sh o w a n
    a c tu a l tin e .

Q. C a rry on? -             A . A g a in o n Map 9 , d i g i t a l r e f e r e n c e
   0 8 4 2 a c r o w d i s g a t h e r e d i n t h e L e p p in g s L a n e e n d a n d
   th e c o u rty a rd i s f u l l .          At a d ig ita l re fe re n c e o f
   0 9 0 6 S u p e r i n t e n d e n t M a r s h a l l i s show n a m o n g s t t h e
   c r o w d . A t a d i g i t a l r e f e r e n c e o f 1034 y o u t h s a r e
   show n c l i m b i n g o v e r a m e t a l r i b b e d g a t e o n t o t h e
   r o o f o f T u r n s t i l e 1 6 . B e tw e e n a d i g i t a l r e f e r e n c e o f
   1 2 1 2 a n d 1 2 3 9 S u p e r i n t e n d e n t M a r s h a l l i s show n
   o u t s i d e t h e g a t e s i n L e p p in g s L a n e , t h e w h o le a r e a o f
   w h ic h i s h e a v i l y c o n g e s t e d . W ith r e g a r d t o t h e t a p e
   r e f e r e n c e Map 9 , a s I h a v e s a i d , t h e r e i s a n o p e r a t o r
   s e t d i g i t a l d a ta b a s e on th e f ilm .           In th e i n i t i a l
   - s t a g e s o n l y a n e s t i m a t e d t i m e c a n b e w o rk e d o u t o n
   t h e b a s i s t h a t t h e BBC c a m e ra m a n , I a n Y oung, s t a t e s
                                                                                 M LAYTON

t h a t f ilm in g to o k p la c e o u ts id e th e g ro u n d a t th e
L e p p i n g s L a n e e n d b e tw e e n 1 4 :3 5 h o u r s a n d 1 4 :5 0 h o u r s
an d in d e e d th e r e a r e a ls o a p p a re n t b re a k s in th e
film in g .       In r e s p e c t o f su b seq u en t f i l i n g in s id e th e
g r o u n d i t i s a c c u r a t e l y t im e d a n d t i m e b a s e d b e tw e e n
1 5 :0 3 :3 0 a n d 1 5 :1 6 :5 8 .


        On a v i d e o t a p e r e f e r e n c e d RJH2 a t a n e s t i m a t e d
t i m e o f 1 4 :4 6 h o u r s a n u m b er o f y o u t h s a r e s e e n t o
c l i m b o n t o t h e r o o f s o f T u r n s t i l e s A t o G fro m
o u t s i d e p r i o r t o d ro p p in g i n t o th e s ta d iu m .        On a
v i d e o t a p e TB2 a t 1 4 : 5 5 : 2 1 , s u p p o r t e r s a r e show n i n
t h e c o n c o u r s e a r e a m o v in g t o w a r d s t h e t u n n e l . A
n u m b er o f t h e s e c h a n g e d d i r e c t i o n to w a r d s a g a p i n
t h e w a l l w h ic h g i v e s a c c e s s t o t h e n o r t h s i d e o f t h e
g ro u n d .

        On v i d e o t a p e RJH2 w h ic h g i v e s a n e s t i m a t e d t i m e
o f 1 5 :0 5 h o u r s , t h e t u r n s t i l e a r e a a n d o u t s i d e
c o u r t y a r d s a r e c l e a r o f in c o m in g s u p p o r t e r s . An
O f f i c e r i n a f l a t c a p a n d tw o P o l i c e C o n s t a b l e s a r e
s e e n t o r u n fro m o u t s i d e G a te C a l o n g t h e p e r i m e t e r
d r i v e to w a rd s t h e s o u th s ta n d .        S econds a fte rw a rd s a
P o l i c e C o n s t a b l e r u n s t h r o u g h G a te C t o w a r d s t h e w e s t
s t a n d c l o s e l y f o l l o w e d fro m a l l t h e O f f i c e r s i n t h e
tu r n s tile are a .

        S i r , i n r e s p e c t o f v e h i c l e m ovem ent a t 1 4 : 0 8 : 2 0
h o u r s o n a v i d e o t a p e r e f e r e n c e TB1, a S o u t h
Y o r k s h ir e P o l i c e v id e o ," t r a f f i c flo w e d q u i t e f r e e l y ~
a n d c o n t i n u e d t o d o s o u n t i l 1 4 : 3 3 : 0 8 w h e re i t ~**n b e
s e e n t h a t no t r a f f i c i s a b le t o flo w due t o
p e d e s t r i a n c o n g e s t i o n i n L e p p in g s L a n e . A t 1 4 :3 3 :2 7
o n t h e t a p e TB1 a b u s a n d tw o c a r s a r e s e e n m o v in g
s l o w l y t h r o u g h t h e c ro w d i n t h e ro a d w a y .
                                                                      ♦
          A t 1 4 : 3 5 : 5 6 h o u r s o n TB2 a n o t h e r b u s m oves
t h r o u g h t h e c ro w d a n d a t 1 4 : 3 6 : 2 4 a c a r . A t 1 4 : 4 1 : 1 5
a c o a c h m o v es t h r o u g h t h e c ro w d a n d a t 1 4 : 4 5 : 0 1 w h a t
lo o k s l i k e a w h ite r o o fe d v e h ic le i s se e n a r r i v i n g i n
L e p p in g s L a n e i m m e d ia t e ly b e h i n d a b u s fro m t h e
d i r e c t i o n o f P e n i s t o n e R o a d . A t 1 4 :4 5 :0 3 t h i s b u s
p a s s e s a n o t h e r o n e c o m in g i n t h e o p p o s i t e d i r e c t i o n
b u t t h e w h ite r o o f e d v e h i c l e re m a in s s t a t i o n a r y in
t h e c r o w d . S i r , f r o m r e s e a r c h o f t h e 'w r i t t e n
e v i d e n c e I b e l i e v e i n f a c t t h i s v e h i c l e w as a P o l i c e
L a n d r o v e r b e i n g d r i v e n b y PC 1863 B u x to n o f t h e S o u th
Y o rk s h ire P o lic e .

            THE CORONER:             He w i l l b e c a l l e d i n d u e c o u r s e .
                                                                                 M LAYTON

P le a s e c o n tin u e .      - a . No f u r t h e r v e h i c l e s a p a r t
fro m t h i s o n e a r e s e e n u n t i l a t 14:55:35 h o u r s a b u s
an d a c a r a r e se e n and a f u r th e r v e h ic le a t 14:57:25
h o u rs.     T h e s e l a t t e r tw o v e h i c l e s come t o a h a l t i n
L e p p in g s L a n e a n d r e m a in s t a t i o n a r y .     In th e ta p e
RJH2 t h e v e h i c l e b e l i e v e d t o b e t h e P o l i c e L a n d r o v e r
d r o v e t h r o u g h t h e c o u r t y a r d a r e a p a s s e d G a te C o n t h e
p e r im e te r d r i v e a t an e s tim a te d tim e o f 15 :0 6 :4 9
h o u rs.

           I n r e l a t i o n t o t h e p e r i m e t e r g a t e w h ic h
s e p a r a t e s t h e t u r n s t i l e a r e a fro m L e p p in g s L a n e I c a n
m ake t h e f o l l o w i n g o b s e r v a t i o n w i t h r e g a r d t o t h e
v is u a l e v id e n c e .      A t 1 4 :3 5 :2 2 h o u r s o n a v i d e o t a p e
r e f e r e n c e d TB2 t h e p e r i m e t e r g a t e s a r e o p e n g i v i n g
a c c e s s t o t u r n s t i l e s a n d t h e a r e a n e a r t o G a te C ..

C an y o u p o i n t t o w h ic h p e r i m e t e r g a t e s we a r e t a l k i n g
a b o u t o n t h e s c r e e n ? C an y o u f i n d t h e o v e r h e a d a n d
p u t t h a t up to o ?       - A. Y es.             A t 1 4 :4 0 :2 6 h o u r s on
t h e sam e v i d e o a l l t h e p e r i m e t e r g a t e s a p p e a r c l o s e d .
A t 1 4 : 5 2 : 5 7 o n TB2 p e o p l e c a n b e s e e n t o b e c l i m b i n g
o v e r th e c lo s e d p e r im e te r g a t e s . A t 1 4 :5 3 :4 0 h o u rs
t h i s s e c o n d g a t e fro m t h e l e f t a s y o u lo o k a t t h e
s c re e n opens and s u p p o rte rs e n te r th e t u r n s t i l e a re a
i n f r o n t o f T u r n s t i l e s A " to G . ....................

I r e a l i s e t h i s i s n o t th e v id e o you a r e r e f e r r i n g t o
a s t h i s i s a s t i l l b u t i s t h a t t h e g a t e we a r e ~
t a l k i n g a b o u t c a n y o u re m e m b e r? -   A. Y es, lo o k in g
a t i t fro m t h e o p p o s ite d i r a c t i o n t h e v id e o c a m e ra i s
th e re .

From t h e i n s i d e o u t a n d s o i t i s t h e o n e t h a t i s o n
t h e r i g h t on t h i s p h o to g ra p h ? - A. T h a t i s r i g h t ,
s ir , yes.

You h e a r d t h e q u e s t i o n fro m M r s . M c B rien a b o u t t h e
s t e r i l e a r e a , i s t h a t t h e a r e a w h e re t h e v a n i s
p a rk e d ? - A. I b e lie v e i t i s s l i g h t l y f u r t h e r in
t h a n w h e re t h e v a n i s p a r k e d .

F u r t h e r i n t o w a r d s t h e g r o u n d a r e y o u s a y i n g ? - A.
( t o t h e Co u r t O f f i c e r ) I f y o u c o u l d j u s t p e r h a p s
i n d i c a t e G a t e C f o r me I b e l i e v e t h a t ’t h e s t e r i l e
a r e a w as m o re o r l e s s t o t h e f a r s i d e o f t h a t g a t e .

       MR. BALE:           Z t i s c l e a r o n t h e m o d e l, s i r .
                                                                                                           69




                                                                                               M LAYTON
                      THE CORONER:            C o u ld y o u p l e a s e c o n t i n u e ?  I am
            s o rry to have in te rru p te d you.                 - A. A t 1 4 : 5 3 : 4 4
    B       h o u rs th e l e f t hand p e rim e te r g a te s a r e o p en . At
            1 4 :5 5 :1 7 h o u r s t h e r i g h t h a n d p e r im e te r g a t e s c a n b e
            s e e n o p e n . A t 1 4 :5 6 :3 2 h o u rs th e a r e a i n f r o n t o f A
            t o G up t o t h e p e r i m e t e r g a t e s a p p e a r c l e a r e r a n d
            P o l i c e O f f i c e r s c a n b e s e e n h o l d i n g t h e c ro w d b a c k t o
            th e ro a d s id e o f th e p e rim e te r g a te s .           A t 1 5 :0 2 :1 1
            h o u r s t h e r e i s a c l o s e u p v ie w o f t h e p e r i m e t e r g a t e
            a r e a w h ic h sh o w s t h a t t h e y a r e o p e n a n d r e l a t i v e l y
            c l e a r w ith s u p p o r te r s e n te r in g th e g ro u n d .

                     F o u r p h o t o g r a p h s t a k e n b y M ic h a e l W a r b u r to n L e e
            o f t h e S o u th Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e show som e d a m a g e t o a
            r e ta in in g b o l t o f th e seco n d s e t o f p e rim e te r g a te s
            a s y o u lo o k f r o m t h e g r o u n d s i d e t o w a r d s L e p p in g s
            L a n e . T h e s e p h o t o g r a p h s a r e r e f e r e n c e d a s D P P 190.
            T h e r e i s n o a c e t a t e a v a i l a b l e a t t h e m om ent f o r y o u
            t o v ie w .

                      In r e s p e c t o f v i s u a l e v id e n c e r e l a t i n g t o
            m o u n te d O f f i c e r s a t t h e L e p p in g s L a n e e n d o f t h e
            g r o u n d t h e v i d e o t a p e s t h a t c o v e r t h i s a r e a a r e S o u th
            Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e CCTV a n d o n t a p e r e f e r e n c e d TB2,
            a l s o S h e f f i e l d W ed n esd ay F o o t b a l l C lu b * s CCTV o n a
            t a p e r e f e r e n c e d RJH2 a n d a BBC TV o u t s i d e b r o a d c a s t
            o n a t a p e r e f e r e n c e d Map 9 .

                    A t a d i g i t a l r e f e r e n c e o f 0602, e s tim a te d tim e
            1 4 :3 5 o n v i d e o Map 9 , tw o m o u n te d O f f i c e r s c a n b e
r           s e e n d i r e c t l y i n f r o n t o f T u r n s t i l e s A t o G n e a r - to         -
I           G a te P .
1       Q. P a u s e a g a i n . H ave we g o t t h e a c e t a t e p l a n o f t h e
           g ro u n d an d i f s o p u t i t up p le a s e ? C a rry on r e a d in g
           b u t s t a r t a g a i n w i t h " m o u n te d O f f i c e r s ” ? -        A. A t a
           d i g i t a l r e f e r e n c e o f 0 6 0 2 , e s t i m a t e d t i m e 1 4 :3 5 o n
           v i d e o Map 9 , tw o m o u n te d O f f i c e r s c a n b e s e e n
           d i r e c t l y i n f r o n t o f T u r n s t i l e s A t o G n e a r t o G a te
           B . A t 1 4 : 3 5 : 2 2 h o u r s o n v i d e o r e f e r e n c e TB2 tw o
           m o u n te d O f f i c e r s c a n b e s e e n a p p a r e n t l y t a l k i n g t o
           s u p p o r te r s i n f r o n t o f T u r n s t ile s A t o G.

                       B e tw e e n d i g i t a l r e f e r e n c e s 0839 t o 0 8 4 7 o n a
             v i d e o Map 9 , n i n e m o u n te d O f f i c e r s c a n b e s e e n i n t h e
             c o u r ty a r d a r e a fro m t h e o u t e r p e r i m e t e r g a t e s t o t h e
             T u r n s t i l e s A t o G. A t 1 4 :3 8 :0 8 on v id e o r e f e r e n c e
             TB2 a m o u n te d O f f i c e r c a n b e s e e n a t t e s t i n g t o e a s e
             t h e c ro w d b a c k f r o m T u r n s t i l e s a n d G a te C . A t a n
            'E s t i m a t e d t i m e o f 1 4 : 4 8 : 2 3 o n v i d e o r e f e r e n c e RJH2 a
             m o u n te d O f f i c e r c a n b e s e e n b l o c k i n g t h e e n t r y o f



                                             <2>
    H
                                                                                  H LAYTON
s u p p o r t e r s t h r o u g h G a te C . T h is c a n a l s o b e s e e n a t
1 4 : 4 8 : 2 6 h o u r s o n v i d e r e f e r e n c e TB2.

          A t 1 4 : 4 9 h o u r s o n v i d e o r e f e r e n c e d TB2 a m o u n te d
o f f i c e r c a n b e s e e n o u t s i d e G a te C c o n t r o l l i n g t h e
c r o w d . A t 1 4 : 5 1 : 5 0 h o u r s f o u r m o u n te d O f f i c e r s c a n
b e s e e n o u t s i d e G a te C . A t 1 4 :5 3 h o u r s f o u r m o u n te d
O f f i c e r s c a n b e s e e n c o n t r o l l i n g t h e c ro w d i n t h e
a r e a o f G a te C . A t 1 4 : 5 3 : 3 2 h o u r s tw o m o u n te d
O f f i c e r s c a n b e s e e n s u p e r v i s i n g t h e f lo w o f
s u p p o r t e r s t h r o u g h G a te C .

          In o r d e r t o t r y an d a n a ly s e t h e v i s u a l e v id e n c e
a v a i l a b l e i n r e s p e c t o f t h e o p e n in g o f t h e c o n c e r t i n a
g a t e s r e f e r r e d t o a s A, B a n d C , i t i s n e c e s s a r y t o
r e f e r t o t h r e e v id e o t a p e s .       V id e o t a p e s r e f e r e n c e d
RJH2 a n d R JH l a r e b l a c k a n d w h i t e v id e o * o f p o o r
q u a l i t y a n d w i t h n o s o u n d . RJH2 r e f e r s t o a f i x e d
s i t e c a m e r a w h ic h o v e r l o o k s t h e r e a r o f T u r n s t i l e s A
t o G and th e co n co u rse a r e a .               R JH l i s a l s o p a r t o f
t h e s y s t e m a n d c o v e r s t h e a r e a o f G a te A a n d t h e
co n co u rse a r e a .       T he p a r t i c u l a r r e f e r e n c e t o t h e
c o n c e r t i n a G a t e C, s i r , i t i s a p p a r e n t f ro m v i s u a l
e v id e n c e on t h e d a y i n q u e s tio n i t w as r e g u l a r l y
b e in g u s e d a s a n e n tr a n c e a n d e x i t p o i n t f o r a num ber
o f re a so n s i . e . th e e je c tio n o f s u p p o rts and th e
m o v em en t o f P o l i c e p e r s o n n e l .

         B e in g m o re s p e c i f i c o n a t a p e r e f e r e n c e d TB2
t i m e d a t 1 4 : 3 9 : 3 1 h o u r s a b o y i s c a r r i e d t h r o u g h G a te
C by P o lic e O f f ic e r s .        The g a t e a p p e a r s t o b e c lo s e d
a t 1 4 : 4 0 : 4 5 h o u r s . On a v i d e o t a p e r e f e r e n c e d RJH2
w i t h a n e s t i m a t e d t i m e o f 1 4 : 4 8 : 0 4 h o u r s G a te C w as
opened t o e j e c t a s u p p o rt.




                                         /A t t h i s s ta g e
                                                       71




At this stage a larze njr>.bec of supporters rushed
•hrough the gate into the concourse arsa.
On the same taoe, at an estimated time of 14:48:31
hours Gate C is closed. On the same tape at an
estimated time of 14:52:00 hours Gate C is again
0 ,.0 ‘
      ied, and a large .lumber of supporters entered
through it i«t<> th* ground. At 14:57:40 hours, as
shown on the tape referenced TB2, Gate C is closed.
On a vidifO tape referenced RJH2 at an estimated tine of
14:i>9:12 nours Gate C is again onenod, with supporters
entering the ground. In respect of Gate A on a video
tape referenced TB2 it is apparently open at 14:58:09
hours witn supporters entering via it. At a time
estimated at 14:58 the same .-cene is snown on the video
tape referenc-r-d tlJHl. On video tape referenced TB2 at
14:58:23 a line of Police are shown supervising the
supporters tn/ough Gate A.
T.iere is no clear evidence, sir, -of openings in
relation to Gate B. The video tape from the camera
that covers tnis araa is one of two that were found to
be missing when they were originally taken possession
of
Sir, I feel it is important to point out in respect of
all tne estimated timings, given that where seconds are
indicated there are alwiys likely to be slight
variations and tnese are dependent on the individual's
interpretation of a particular sequence of film.
Tie events that occurred inside the ground leading up
to kick-off and until the football natch was stopped,
were recorded by BBC television and a nain recording,
together with individual recordings from separate
camera angles, was supplied to the Inquiry, as
previously referred to.
Having vie-.eri the main recording, referenced Map 1,
which is a B8C tape, and in particular the movements of
supporters in Enclosures 3 and 4 of the Leppings Lane
end, I am able to make the following observations. At
14:3tf:4S thsre is a strong surge of people along the
-ividing fence between Enclosures 3 and 4. At 14:40:09
a youtii in a re'! top is seen standing on top of a
barrier in Enclosure 3. At the same time a beach ball
is bei*;g push -d arou id by the crowd in the same
enclosure.
  At 14:40:10 hours there is a further surge of people in
  Enclosure 4 along the *ividing fence with Enclosure 3.
  At 14:40:34 hours a youth in a blue top is seen on top
"TSf a barrier in Enclosure 3, near to the dividing fence
  of Enclosure 4. At 14:45:41 hours a youth in a white
  top is seen dancing on a barrier in Enclosure 3.
                                                            72




     At 14:40:29 hours Joan Motson, a BBC commentator, makes
     a remark about the emptiness of Enclosure r>. At
     14:47:33 nour- a youth in a brown too is seenstanding
     on a barrier in Enclosure 3 and the youth in the white
     top, as previou-ly referred to, is pulled off at
     14:47:46 nours.

     At 14:49:53 hours a hole develops in the crowd in
     Enclosure 3 and people appear to be looking down at *..ie
     floor. Three men who had fallen over are seen to get
     up. At 14:50:26 hours there is considerable crowd
     moveme.it in Enclosure 3 but still no apparent problems
     at L ie '‘ront of the enclosure. At 14:55:49 hours a
     string sur.e from tna direction of tha tunnel, into
     Enclosures 3 and 4, takas .>lace. In respect of
     Enclosure 3 the sur~e is along the dividing fence, and
     in t.ie case of Enclosure 4 the surge is down and to the
     right as you look at the screen.
           At 15:07:.>9 hours
0.         TH.C COiJONES:  You are talking about the video, of
      cou/se. Can you just turn round, and w'ien you say to
      the right, I think on the plan it would be towards the
      l&ft, would that be right, in Enclosure 4? - A. As you
      look at it, sir, it would be to the ri«ht. It is to
      vie left on tne .'lan, yes, but to the right as you look
     .on tne screen.
0. Yes, that is right. Ttus cameras are looking at it from
   t ie ot-ier end. - A. At 15:07:09 hours supporters are
   sh swn being puller* up from th* rear of Enclosures 3 and
   4 into the seated area above. At 15:07:15 nours a
   lMr^e s :r:e takes place in Enclosure 3, from the left
   of centre to '.he right, front as viewed on tne screen,
   and the video ta,>e referenced TB1, which is again South
   Yorkshire Police CCTV, at 14:59:04 hours, Gate 4 can be
   seen open, and at 14:59:20 hours Gate 3 can be seen
   open.
      At 14:59:51 hours Gate 1 was opened to allow supporters
      from tne track area into the enclosure.
      From a photograph taken by South Yorkshire Police at a
      time snown at 15:03 Gate 3 can be seen open.
      Pnotograph referenc d'PRl/lOA specifically refers. At
      a time shown as 15:04 hours Gate 4 can still be seen
      open and pnotograph referenced PR1/22A specifically
      refers,.again taken by South Yorkshire Police.
      I have been unable to establish, sir, any visual
      evidence to suggest that these perimeter gates were
      closed after these particular times. It should be
      notad that tie tines shown on these photographs was set
      by tha individual camera operator by reference to his
      own :atch. They were not synchronised, nor were they *
verified. In other wor«.is, the photograph referenced
PR1/1A shows a time of 15:01, wnilst a clock on the
ph itograph in tne grou d shows 15:00 so there is a
..•••iation, sir.

So that could nean that either ha is a minute fast or
.•je clock is a minute slow, or >oth of t-iero could be
wrong? - A. That is ri?,ht, sir. Having viewed tha main
video recording referenced flap 1 I a.n able to sive tne
following infornation in relation to events on the
 >itch.
     re-,ar'l to the BBC fiins, the Map Is and 9s, I
think l ie computer set the times, is that right? - A.
That is r:s;ht, sir, excent for th* outside. We are
satisfied that tne ti es inside would have been
correct.
T h . tirai gs we are now getting to, on Map 1, these
would be accu-ate as far as you can tell? - A. Yes,
si*. At 14:51:0-; tha Liverpool team was announced,
foll-.<*ed at 14:51:47 by the Nottingham Forest tsaci.
Th se a.inou .c.ments caused obvious excitement amongst
i le vup4»orters. Tne Liverpool team came onto the pitch
at 14:54:0-.? hour.*, followed by the Nottingham Forest
ream at 14:55:22. The two teams were joined on tae
pitch at 14:.57:25 hours by the referee and linesmen.
Tie toss-up took ..lace at a time shown as 14:57:48
h>ur. and it should be noted at this point, sir, that
t \e ' ‘labase actually stopped counting for a short
perio .* 1 don’t know w=iat the explanation for that is
but it restarted again at 14:58:43 hours, and the match
kicke off at 14:5V:30.
At l'>:00:32 a corner kick to Nottingham Forest was .
avtrred at the north west corner of the pilch. At
1::00:41 hours a large group of supporters are seen
being led by Police .'rom tne direction of Enclosures 3
a.id 4 towards tae Nortn Stand. At 15:00:43 hours
 -upporters are seen climbing over tne perimeter fence
from Enclosure .4 to th-.* pitch side. At 15:00:50 hours
t :e corner kick to Nottingham Forest was taken from the
n^rt' west corner. At 15:04:09 hours Gate 3 is open,
supporters are s'lown climbing from Enclosure 3 into
Enclosure 4 via the dividing fence, and people leaning
 in .wer tie periiter fence in an apparent effort to
reach peo le i*: tha enclosures.
 P'ay continued and at 15:04:52 hours a Peter Beardsley
 sh't hit th-2 crossbar of the Nottingham‘Forest goal.
 Shortly afterw:rds, at 15:05:24 nours, Superintendent
 Greenwood ran out th- pitch towards tha referee and
 : ie match '.’as stopped.
 On video tape referenced Hap 5, which is again BBC TV
 coverage, but from a separate camera an?,le,
Su ,er ntend nt Murray can be seen on the football
pitch, gesturing to Liverpool supporters at a time
ref ere.ic id l!>:05:3j hours.
With regard to tho rescue operation, visually on a Map
1 BBC tape at 15:07:09 iiours supporters can be seen
bii    pulled from th* rear of Cnclos-jres 3 and 4 into
 ie seat’d area. At 15:08:54 hours Police Officers can
be seen at tie perimeter fence motioning to war vis people
in Enclosure 3 to move !>ack from the fence. At
1*:0:5.' hours is s<>en tha first sighting of a casualty
and this shou’s him being taken towards t ie Spion Kop on
an atnbul nc stretchsr.
At 1 1»*«03 nours on Ma,i 9 a South Yorkshire Police
Ins n.ctor is seen and heard to request a serial of
Police Officers. At this point he is on the perimeter
t;*:ick near to Enclosure 2. At 15:10:24 hours. Map 7,
whi n is also a BBC tape, shows Police Officers placing
a lad:er against toe perimeter fence at the Leppings
La.ii end. At l.::12:lj hours on Map 1 Chief
Superintendent Ne^bit- is shown on the perimeter track
nnac t-> Enclosure 3. At 15:12:50 hours on Map 7
.supporters are shown sitting and lying on the pitch at
tne Lepp ngs Laae end of the ground receiving
attention.
Th -fi-st sighting of a casualty leaving the stadium is
snown at an estimated time of 15:15:40 hours and is
sh'wn on the tape referenc d RJH2, when a casualty is
carried through Gate C by supporters to an ambulance.
At 1":14:51 hours on Map 1 Superintendent Greenwood can
be aeen on the pitch using his personal radio.
At lr:l!3:li hours on !iai 1 a casualty is seen being
carried from Enclosure 3 into the tunnel by a Police
Officer and a s ipport?r. At 15:15:33 hours on Map 9 a
St. John's ambulance is seen arriving on the pitch and
b?i".g d/ivea towards the Leppings Lane terraces.
Is that 9; or Map 1? - A. Sorry, that is Map 1. At
1 :ls:0 ’ hours on Map 7 a group of supporters can be
seen pulling down tie per Later fence at the front of
Enclosure 4. At 1*.:1-:<:12 hours on Map 1 a large number
of Police Officers move from the Kop end of the ground
t wards tne L e p p n g s La.te end.. On flap 7 at 15:19:24
supporters are s.iown at Gate 3 being carried out of tne
enclosure by Police Officer-*.
On a video referenced TB2 at 15:19:58 Iiours
Superintend nt Greenwood is seen at the perimeter fence
of n e Leppings Lane terrace, apparently using a
Lou :hailer to commu.iicate with supporters in Enclosure
3. A second ambulance arrives at the Kop end, this
b?ing a Soutn Yorkshire Metropolitan ambulance, which
is snown at 15:20:41 hours on a video referenced Map 1.
Evidvnc   of the rescue operation, sir, continues for
some time and is snown on video and photo.>or.iphic
fo6 a?,e.
Vid:o ev dsnce was also obtained from the FA C u > semi-
ti .'jls neld at Hillsborough in 1981 and 198    With
regard to tne 1V8'. semi-.Tinal, this match was filmed by
Yorkshire TV. Tnere is no database on the recording.
However, at a comme.tar/ time, 15:11 p*a«, tha
comnenc :tor remarks about supporters being on the pitch
bsniud tne goai at the Leppings Lane end, and
■supporters can be seen climbing tne perimeter fence
onto the pitch. Th^re than follows views of supporters
sitting on i.te touchline behind the g03l, marshalled by
t ii* Police.
At hatf-time the? supporters on the pitch ran up th-?
: itch towards the Spion S'op. The Police cordon is
sub/eque <tly placed around tha pitch and there are no
fur, ler points of interest.
Witn re.>ai* t? the semi-i'inal held on 9th April 1988,
- lere is video -vi.-'ence available from the South
Yorkshire Police CCTV referenced TB5/2 and TB5/3, and
:*lso BBC television referenced JG1 and JG2. The video
tapes are available and show extensive coverage of the
bui .-‘-up and match coverage. As a comparison exercise,
a composite video tape was prepare-* which shows crowd
.*c.;es at the Leppings Lane end outside the ground
betw«e i 14:00 and 15:02 hours on botn 9th April, 1983
and 15th Aifil, 1989. This, sir, has been s?iven the
reterenc number SDB1.
From this v;deo it can be seen that at 14:00 hours in
1988 -.he perimeter gates nearest tne River Don are
c?o«» creating: a sterile area along the side of -the
tur.stiles A-G, towards Gate C, vnereas in 1989 t^ese
gates are open and people can be seen moving freely in
t.iis area. At 14:16 nours in 1988 there is a build up
of support-rs in front of turnstiles A-G, and back
along Leppings Lane. In 1989 the build up is more
severe and th*; area near to Gate C has become very
crowed. In 1988 at 14:29 nours the roadway in
Lepp;ngs Lam* remai :s relatively clear, although
crowded, whereas at 14:30 hours in 1989 the Leppings
Lane area has become very congested, with supporters
spilling into the centre of Leppings Lane and blocking
the road.
 At 14:45 hours i.T 1988, although it is very crowded,
■ traffic is still able to pass and the perimeter gates .
 are still closed, whereas at 14:46 hours in 1989 th?
 area in Tront of the turnstiles and Leppings Lane is
 t tally blocker!.
                                                                            76

      A
          At 14:52 houri i 1088 t*iv- area adjacent remains
          sterile, whereas at 14:52 hours in 1989 the concertina
          Gate C was opened to allow supporters into the ground.
          Atr 15:Ul nours in hoth 1988 and 198V the crowd m
          Leppings Lane is ver-• similar in size and under
          -ontrol.

      B   Sii*, during th:* course of the preliminary inquests I
          ;*ave «*vi".ence in respoct of locations at which it was
          believed that tn? deceased were either alive or dead or
           >oth in Enclosures 3 and 4. Plans were produced in
          respcct of individual deceased. Subsequently composite
           •ltns were prepared of some of these locations, based
          on my evidenc , by Miss Da**n Goodall, senior plan
          d.*3wer of the West Ni -lands Police. Because of the
          pr *:>lens associated wit i tr.’i g to put all locations of
      C    eceased on t lese two >lans, tney actually only show
          tho las* position established alive, and th* first
          wiere believed • eceased.
          Sir, I produce a composite plan referenced DP.G9 in
< •       res -ct of : le 1 '.ration of the positions of deceased. .
          alive, and a c o m p o s i t e plan refere cen D*G1Q where they
          were beiieved to be eceased in the enclosures. Sir,
          th.-re are over eads avai'able of these two plans.
      D




      E


<•
      F


            /Q. Yes. - A. Tnere is one point



      G




      H
                                            M. LAYTON


     Sir, there are overheads available of these two plans. There
     is one point which I need to raise in respect of one of the
     plans, sir. Since the limited Inquests, Mrs. Traynor. mother
     of two of the deceased, has viewed visual evidence again. At
     the limited Inquest a plan was produced which showed
     Christopher in enclosure No. 3 at 14:45, and that location is
     reproduced on the plan DRG.9. Since that time Mrs. Traynor
     has found Christopher alive at 14:45 outside the ground. So
     in fact I would ask you to disregard the one location in
     relation to the deceased No. 60 as shown on that plan.

Q. What time was he shown on the plan? Would you repeat the
   time? - A. 14:52 outside the ground, sir, and 14:45 was the
   original identification by Mrs. Traynor inside the ground.

Q. So what you are saying is Mrs. Traynor has now reidentified
   him but alive at an earlier time than she originally thought?
   - a . In fact alive at a later time. So in fact, the point I
   am making is on the plan DRG.9 we should disregard the
   location shown for that particular location.

Q. We will deal with this again.

          THE CORONER:   This, MrJ King, is a typical example of
     the corrections one would wish to make with regard to the
     summaries.  I did not know what Inspector Layton has just tolc
     me, but it is clear it needs amendment, and obviously we woulc
     want to get that right.

            THE WITNESS:   I can tell you the original plan which
     was produced at the limited Inquest was given the reference
     No. C.140.
       THE CORONER:   Before you put that up can we number that
     plan of the ground C.274. The plan of the ground is C.274.
     Can you put the next one up:

O. Inspector Layton, which one is this? - A. If we go
   chronologically as far as the statement is concerned it shoulc
   be the other way round. 1 don’t think it matters as such.

Q. You mean the deceased first? - A. I am sorry, is this the
   first one, sir? This is the deceased alive.

O. I think we will have the people alive first. - A. This plan
   is DRG.9.
Q.    That is C.275. These are the people last seen alive as far a:
     you can establish based upon the evidence which yougave at
     the interim Inquests? - A. That is correct, sir, and it is
     this plan which bears the identification which I have just
     referred to in respect of Christopher Traynor.

O.   J-don’t suppose you know where he is? - A, It is to the top,
     just near to the top. (Indicated on plan)

0. Can we get Miss Goodhall to delete it? - A. We can do, sir.


                            (   S   >
                                           M. LAYTON



And we will then reproduce it as an amended version, it give:
you a visual impression of where the people were when last
seen alive on the visual evidence. Put the other one up now,
please. - A. This plan is DRG.10.

That will be C.276.

     THE CORONER:   Members of the Jury, the purpose of this
is just to give you an impression where the people were to
save you looking at 95 individual plans:

That is right, is not it? - A. That is right.

It does not have 95 spots on it because we did not find
everybody on the visual evidence? - A. That is right, sir.
Finally, as I have already stated, the events outlined in thi:
statement are not actually in chronological order, and to
assist with this particular aspect a schedule has been
prepared which has been referenced SB.l, which seeks to place
some of the events into chronological order. I produce that
schedule.

Have we got that on an overhead as well, perchance? - A. I
understand the quality is not....

It is too difficult to read.      C.277.

      MR. KING:      Would it be possible to have photocopies of
it?
     THE CORONER:       We will do that.   Tomorrow morning you
will have them.

      THE WITNESS:      Sir, that completes my evidence.

     THE CORONER:    What we are trying to.do with that
schedule is to pick out some of the major events. You have
given us an awful lot of detail which is useful, but that
picks out' some of the major events in chronological order as
to the outside of the ground and to the inside? - A. That is
right, sir, and where there is an ”E”, that is estimated time
sir.
     THE CORONER:   It is supposed to be an aide memoire so i
somebody says, "What time did that gate open?**, we can tell.
It is difficult to follow because there are so many numbers,
but basically he was telling us events Bhich he and his team
found either on photographs or videos, and relating to variou
things. When you see the schedule it will be shorter. We
will have them available tomorrow morning.

      Any questions of Inspector Layton?
                                        M. LAYTON


                 Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE:

You referred at a point about quarter-of-the-way through your
evidence, to a photograph taken by a photographer called
Warburton Lee. I just did not get the reference. - A. The
reference given is DPP.190

What was that of? - A. It is in relation to damage to a
retaining bolt of the second set of perimeter gates as you
look from the ground side towards Leppings Lane.

     THE CORONER:   Can you point? - A. It is the second set
of perimeter gates as you look from the ground side towards
Leppings Lane:
We will put the overhead on. Show us which one it is?
(Indicated) - A. That is right, sir, the second set of
perimeter gates from the ground side towards Leppings Lane.
Exactly where Mr. Brown is pointing.

That is C.254.
                 Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS:

Mr. Layton, could you help me with just a number of matters.
How many   people in your team? - A.    It varied initially from a
its height I think 12 to as a norm an average of 6.

Let us put to one side for a moment the accumulation of the
evidence. I am only concerned with the looking at the
evidence, particularly of the video evidence, and you have
told us something of your observations, and when 1 say ’’you"
mean you and your team, of, for example, outside and then
inside the ground of certain parts of different videos. Coulc
you help   me with this against that     background. Taking,for
example,   what was seen on the videos inside the ground. Tor
example, the BBC film that was being taken, in order to
produce the observations which you have produced how long
approximately would the film have been looked at for? I don*
want it 5 minutes, 10 ainutes. How many hours? - A.
Countless. The process was never ending. I think it would b
fair to say every time you view a video you see something
else, because there are so many images on the screen that it
is not possible to take them all in at one viewing. It was a
continual process right \ip to the time of the limited
 Inquests. Indeed. I have no doubt since then it has continue
as well, albeit on a sore limited scale.

So could you help us, have you done any of the watching
yourself? - A. I have done some of it,’yes.

But are we talking about a video, for example, inside the
ground where you tell us that certain things were taking
pTace, being watched over 20 hours or 40 hours or 100 hours o
more than that? - A. It would be impossible to put a figure o
it. As I said at the beginning, the initial process after
retrieving the original video tapes, was to copy them.
                                           M. LAYTON



              Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:
 ✓
I would like to go back to the point where the fans enter
the ground at 2:48 p.m. Could you read that part out, pi
- A. Yes, if you can just bear with me a second, please,
you want the whole section again?

The wording you used? - A. Page 10, I think, sir. On a v
tape reference RJH.2 at an estimated time of 14:48:04, Ga
was opened to eject a supporter. Is that the bit?

Yes. - A . Do you want me to go further?

Yes, just a little. - A. At this stage a large number of
supporters rushed through the gate into the concourse are;

Yes, thank you. It is the part that they rushed in, and :
was established at the preliminary Inquest that the fans v
actually allowed in at that time, as Police Officers there
mistakenly thought that Gate C had been opened in response
Superintendent Marshall's request.

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I will phrase your quest
for you:

Mrs. McBrien is asking you whether this was the incident c
the timing as far as you can establish from the video
evidence, where the gate was opened as a result of an orde
opposed to not? - A. No, that is not that particular openi
of the gate, not the one you refer to.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   The transcript of Superintendent
Marshall’s evidence at the Taylor Inquiry....

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I am sorry:

Inspector Layton, read the whole section through again, or
you like specify the openings, because it may assist you.

     THE CORONER:    I think you may have your timings wron
     MRS. McBRIEN:   We brought this point out at the
Preliminary Inquest, and it was altered in the Preliminary
Inquest. It was altered to "allowed", "they were allowed”
"They were allowed in".
     THE WITNESS:   The timing you are referring to is the
occasion on which a person was ejected from the concourse
area via Gate C and out. Certainly it Is apparent when yc
view the video, and that is why I have differentiated with
it were, the official opening when people walked through,
is certainly apparent on the video for this earlier openin
they did not go in in the same fashion.

     THE CORONER:   This was at 15:52, was not it?     So 14-.
was one opening? - A. That is right, sir.
                                                              80

                                               M. LAYTON


         Once they were copied the copies were viewed and a
         schedule, which is a precis of events shown on the film,
         was prepared. From that schedule really the continual
         process then was. as part of our brief, to try to locate
         the deceased either outside or inside the ground, and as
         part of that process we were continually viewing.
B
    Q. To see what events were occurring, any incidents that occurre
       and the like? - A. Primarily our brief was, having scheduled
       the tapes, to locate the deceased for the Inquests. There
       were other specific areas which were dealt with as the inquir
       progressed, but because of our brief to locate deceased it wa
       a continuing process.

    O.    But asyou were saying, as well as doing that you would see -
         when I say ’’you” - you and your tea* would see different
         incidents taking place on virtually each and every occasion
         you were looking at the tape? - A. That is right. One scene
         on one video could show numerous people.

    Q. As opposed to, for example, someone who was looking at that
       scene as part and parcel of the events of the day which would
       be quite different? - A. 1 am not sure I follow you.

    Q.    Let me indicate exactly what I mean. We have on the one hand
         Police Officers for the purposes of Lord Justice Taylor’s
         Inquiry and for the purposes of this Inquest looking over and
         over and over again videos taken of for example a certain
         section of the ground, whether it be outside or inside, and
         seeing something different perhaps or something else in
         addition? - A. Yes.

    Q. On each viewing, and then we have an individual who may be
       looking at. the Leppings Lane end for a fraction of a second as
       part of the day's events? - A. Yes, X accept your point.
       There is a difference between our brief, whicii was to view the
       videos to either obtain evidence or to schedule them so as to
       become a sequence of events as to what to what took place,
       there is a difference between that and purely viewing it
       perhaps on a monitor.

    Q. And it required from your point of view repeated lookings at,
       if I can use an inelegant phrase, in order to get a complete
       picture? - A. Depending on what we were seeking to establish.
       Certainly in relation to the deceased, yes.

    Q. Thank you very much.
                         Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

    Q.    Arising out of that last question, if one is looking for
         precise details, a particular individual,you need to look at
         a video over and over again? - A. Exactly, yes, sir.

    Q.    If you are lookingfor a general impression, a build up of
         fans, emptiness of a pen, the fullness of a pen, the first
         time is sufficient for that, is not it? - a . Yes, sir.


                                \ O   Q   j
H
                                                                     8U

                                                  M.    LAYTON




                           id b v MRS.         M c B R IE N :

                           ^he point where the fans entered
                           *’d you read that part out, please
                             r with ae a second, please. Die
                              in?

                                          10, I think, sir. On a videc
                                         jated time of 14:48:04, Gate C
                                            Is that the bit?
                                         jrther?
                                         I
                                          stage a large number of
    "Vi.,
                                         je into the concourse area.
                                         hat they rushed in. and it
                                         y Inquest that the fans were
                                          as Police Officers there
                                0        d been opened in response to


                                          I will phrase your question
                                   I
                                    r this was the incident or
                                    ?iish from the video
            •Cr"~%r'                5d as a result of an order a:
                                    not that particular opening
                                "■ hr to.
                                3* .
                                         >t of Superintendent
                            -   K"r
                                          Inquiry....
                                1)        I a* sorry:
            ‘
            tf’
              SKr
*                                        section through again, or if
                                         ~ause it may assist you.
                                fcv\ >
                                  j/i    »y have your timings wrong.
                                          >is point out at the
                                           tered in the Preliminary
                       ■    a;           wed**, "they were allowed".

                                     are referring to is the
                                   ected from the concourse
                                  nly it is apparent when you
                                  I have differentiated with, a:
                                when people walked through, it
                            1 fashion.thiS “ r U e r 0peni"e
                           at *5:52, was not it?                 So 14:48
                            right, sir.
                                                                                        81 A

                                                                      M. LAYTON



                 Q. What time was it closed then? - A. At 14:48:31.
                       /


                 Q. How long was it open?   It was only open for 27 seconds? - a .
                    That is right, sir, yes.

             B   Q. And then it was reopened at 14:52.            Is that right? - a. That
                    is right, sir.
"1
                 Q. And then it stayed open for how long? - A. At 14:57:40 the
                    gate is shown closed.

                 Q.     That is about 5 minutes? - A. Yes.         We are talking about two
                       distinct openings there.

                 Q.         MRS. M c B R I E N :     I was firmly under the impression that
                       fans were en c o u r a g e d through that     gate at that particular
                       time.

                             THE CORONER:     We will be hearing evidence.     Inspector
                       Layton has told you what he has seen on the visual evidence.
1                      He c a n ’t say any more than that.  It may be - it may be;     I
                       say no more - that some of the other witnesses might be able
                       to give you some more help on this.     I d o n ’t think Inspector
1                      Layton c a n .

                            MRS. MCBRIEN:       Thank you very much.

                            THE CORONER:      When you say, Mrs. McBrien. there was a
                       correction m a d e at the interim Inquest, are you talking about
                       the interim Inquest relating to your son?

                             MRS. McBRIEN:      Yes.

                                THE CORONER:         I will have a look at it.  I will check it
                       and see what is actually said, but not now becsv'se I have not
                       got it here.          A n y other questions arising out of Inspector
                       L a y t o n ’s evid e n c e ?

                            Tomorrow w e will give you a copy of the abbreviated
                       schedule, and I think everybody will find it is a lot easier
PI                     once we have that to look at:

                 Q.    Inspector Layton, as always I am exceedingly grateful to you.
p                      Thank you for you r help.        The only thing I would ask you is ii
                       you could arrange to have that plan redrawn with the
                       amendments, and also let me have a short statement regarding
                       this matter, and we will either deal with it by way of
                       documentary e v i d e n c e or I will have to bring you back,
                       depending on wha t I think.        It is a poitrt that has got to be
                       corrected. - A . . I think P.C. Brown should be able to assist,
 p.                    sir.

                       —     THE CORONER:      Ladies and gentlemen, we are aiming

 ji                     timewise to start at 10, rise about q u a r t er-to-1, 1 o ’clock.
                        Obviously we c a n ’t be absolutely sure.
                      ' experience already.
                                                                   We know that from
                                                Start again about 2.    It depends what
 1
     .   I
             H
 I
                                                          82

                                            M . LAYTON


time we rise for lunch.      Then aim to finish about 4, and a
there will be a little bit of flexibility.       You may think
i's not too bad, but you will find it is quite sufficient i
you said and listen to evidence for five hours.       Inspector
Layton's e v idence is interesting but jolly difficult to
follow, not because he is difficult but because of the num
and maps and goodness knows what.       A lot of the other evid
which you will hear will be easier to follow because they
be ordinary people.    I d o n ’t mean he is an extraordinary
person - he n a y be - but it will be just people telling us
about things.

      Now, it is quarter-to-4.     I don't think we will start
with anything further tonight as far as you are concerned.
I also have s o m e more legal submissions to deal with we di<
not quite finish.      So I am going to rise.  You can leave.
Please be h e r e on time so we can get cracking at 10 tomorrc
morning.    W hat we will do tomorrow in the morning is we uiJ
look at the videos, this compilation tape, which is about t
hours.   So we will watch for an hour and then stop and have
coffee and w a t c h the other half.  Then we have two short
videos.   O n e has two screens.   It compares 1988 with 1989 £
best one can, and then I have had another short compilatior
made of 1981 and 1988, I think, which shows the events.       Me
thought if we d i d the words today you would follow the vide
that much better tomorrow.      Is that satisfactory to you? I
the a fternoon w e are starting with some real live witnesses

     C a n we r i s e for five minutes or so.

                       (Short Adjournment)
                                                         83




                (In the absence of the jury)
     THE CORONER:   Yes, Mr. Isaacs?
     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, before my learned friend Mr. King
makes such submissions he wishes to make in relation to the
submission that I made this morning, may I just take this
opportunity to draw to your attention the city late edition
of The Star.   If I hand my copy in - you, sir, have not had
the benefit of going out to the local news vendors.   If I
could be handed another copy.
     First of all I would ask you to read it. First of all
against the background of the submission that I made this
morning my argument is this that nothing could be more
designed to add fuel to the submission I made than what,
sir, you will now read.
     THE CORONER: Well, Mr. Isaacs, I have to agree with
you that it was an unwise - if the quotation is correct and,
of course, I can't say whether it is or whether it isn't, I
think it was an unwise comment, bearing in mind that we are
sub iudice here and it is a matter for this court, or my
jury, if you like, to take decisions on what will happen.
     MR. ISAACS: Sir, that is another aspect of the matter
which perhaps I can refer to in .a moment and which I know
others will refer to and that is-the question a3 to whether
The Star, rightly or wrongly, have been party to an attempt
to influence the jury to bring in a certain verdict.    That
is certainly one aspect of the natter*
     The aspect I would seek to address you upon in relation
to the contents of this article is this, that clearly,
however you see these inquests, and, of course, you are in
control, those who represent.••   X put it another way* The
families quite clearly see these Inquests as an evidence
gathering exercise In order to produce fresh evidence which
will, they hope, enable them to persuade or enable the
Director to take the view that criminal charges should be
preferred.
     In my submission, so far as Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield is concerned he should not be put in a position
- should not even be put Into the witness box where he could
be put in a position where, by asking him questions which
would then be disallowed, then be disallowed, then be
disallowed in the manner that I referred "to this morning, so
as to increase the possibility, probability, what you will,
of the jury returning a verdict of unlawful killing.
     In my submission, sir, this article and the contents of
it do add a great deal of fuel to the submission I made and
                                                              84




 the dangers inherent in calling Mr. Duckenfield to give
 evidence.
      THE CORONER:     Thank you.   Mr. King, I will listen t«
 you now.
      MR. KING:   I understood, sir, that those acting on
 behalf of Officer Greenwood still had submissions to make t
 you, sir.
 I      THE CORONER:   You are quite right.   Thank you for
j. reminding me.

      MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, happily in supporting my learned
 friend Mr. Isaacs I need not rehearse his very articulate
 submission and exposition of the rule.   I adopt his
 exposition of the rule without gloss.
      As far as Superintendent Greenwood is concerned, there
 are four areas from which further action might come, from
 which he requires protection against any conceivable self­
 incrimination which might flow from his giving evidence.
      If I can list them briefly, it is further action by the
 Director.   Second, a judicial review of the Director's
 decision.   Third, a private prosecution.   Fourth,
 disciplinary proceedings.
      Sir, the depth and the strength of the feelings of the
 families of the bereaved was perhaps spoken in words louder
 and better than I can select when ay learned friend Mr.
 Isaacs outlined what was the nub of his.submission, and you
 will remember the reaction that that took*   We now have on
 the front page of the newspaper what is a transparent use,
 or intended use, of these inquests before you*
      As far as disciplinary proceedings are concerned, I
 prefer to dwell on that to tne exclusion of the others
 because my learned friend Mr* Isaacs has Mentioned the
 position of the Director*   It Is, of course, sanction which
 could lead to the dismissal of long-standing officers,
 including Superintendent Greenwood, whoa I represent*    Sir,
 you may well be familiar with some of the publicity that
 surrounded the application to the Police Authority for funds
 for not only Superintendent Greenwood but the other senior
 officers concerned and that has been prompted by the fear of
 there being no funds for such proceedings as the
 disciplinary proceedings*   It is not merely an empty
 threat* These proceedings are on foot and what happens to
 them will, to an extent, be coloured by what happens within
 these four walls over the coming weeks.
      Sir, it is important perhaps also to envisage the wide
 scope of the offences and they are offences under the Police
                                                               85




     Discipline Regulations 1985, that constitute those
     disciplinary proceedings.   Perhaps I could invite you
     briefly to consider the nature of the complaints that have
     been made against Superintendent Greenwood because in my
     submission they show that the wider the scope of the offence
     the more difficult it is to conceive questions the answers
     to which will not tend to incriminate Superintendent
     Greenwood or anyone else in a similar position*
          The allegations of complaint come from two
     complainants, both of whom I note from the contents of
     letters and other documents put before you this morning, are
     represented by my learned friend Nr. King.   Mr. Jones >
     Leslie Jones - the father of Richard Jones, makes four
     allegations which constitute his complaint against
     Superintendent Greenwood and I say at the outset these are
     allegations which are, and will be, refuted by
     Superintendent Greenwood:
i;       "A. You failed to carry out your assigned duty by '
(        placing yourself in a position by the players tunnel.
          Using your radio and your eyes you should have been
          aware of the dangerous situation and controlled your
          officers accordingly.
 1       B. You failed to give instructions to your officers to -
i        monitor the pens for over-crowding in relation to the
■ i      crowd safety at your briefings.
1        C. You were totally ineffective in mounting a rescue.
<,       That is, you made no attempt to organise the police
ta       officers in a way which would have helped to bring
|        about a successful rescue operation.
 i       D. You failed to send officers to the rear of pens 3
I        and 4 to relieve pressure when you were in control of
          the area.   This was when you knew that gate C was
          being opened to allow supporters in."
          Sir, Mr. Trevor Hicks, who also instructs my learned
     friend Mr. King, is the other complainant.   He makes three,
     perhaps broader, allegations in his complaint:
          "1. You failed to prevent a dangerous build-up of
     (   supporters outside the gates.
     I   2. You failed to control the movement of supporters
          subsequent to the opening of gate C«.
          3. You failed to respond to the developing tragedy and *
 ”,      were slow to effect a rescue operation."
          I say again the totality of each of those allegations
     is refuted, but they do serve to show the wide nature of the
position of Superintendent Greenwood and the way in which
his position will have to be protected should he give
evidence.   1 just invite you to consider the prejudicial
effect that the constant challenging of questions asked and
the jury being told that the officer need not answer them,
if matters are dealt with on a question at a time basis.
     Alternatively, if there is dispute about whether the
answer to a particular question might tend to incriminate
Superintendent Greenwood when such argument, if there is to
be such argument, takes place in the absence of the jury,
the effect and the impression that that will have upon the
members of the jury.
     In those circumstances I invite you to adopt the course
that has been suggested by Mr. Isaacs, that these officers,
certainly Superintendent Greenwood, should not be asked to
give evidence at all because of the prejudicial effect of
having to deal with each question on its merits and in
circumstances where it is difficult to conceive any question
which will not produce that response.




                   MR. KING:   Sir. the families...
                                                        87




  *THE CORONER:   Yes, Mr. King.

   MR. KING:   The families would have liked each of the
senior Officers to have come to give evidence here
voluntarily. That is what they would have liked. They would
have wished that the truth of the events which led to these
deaths could have come from their lips voluntarily so that
the Jury could hear it. The families are mindful of the law
as much as anybody else and I have advised them what thelaw
is. They know and appreciate that it is within the right of
any of those senior Officers that if any question is asked
tending to incriminate that he can refuse to give it. To
this extent they are in a dilemma because what they want, and •
have always wanted, is for this Jury to hear the whole of the
facts. It would be a very unreal world which this Jury would
be living in if they did not hear in some way from the
principal players in these events, by which I mean the senior
Officers.
    One could make trite examples. The one going through my
mind was hearing Julius Caesar but we did not hear from
Brutus and the whole of the Senate. That is not meant to be
trivial because these are vital witnesses.
    A few weeks ago, sir, X submitted to you matters relating
to the Taylor Inquiry Report and the transcripts. You know
if agreement were possible the families would wish that the
whole of the Taylor Reportimd the„whole of the transcripts
should be before* the Jury. Indeed, they would wish they
would go there without agreement but again they accept
advice, as they must, that that is not possible without
agreement. Zf my learned friend on behalf of Mr. Duckenfield
is saying to this Inquiry he will agree and consent to the *
whole of the transcript of Kr. Duckenfield*s evidence being *'
read out aloud to the Jury so that they can hear it and
assess it then that in fact from the families* point of view,
much as they would like Mr. Duckenfield in the witness box to
be cross-examined, will be far better in the effort they
generally have, not in making noises to the outside world, in
bringing the facts to the attention of this Jury.
    Sir, if that is the position, then much as they would
like Mr. Duckenfield here, and much as Z would say to you
that he ought to come into the witness box and be heard to
say, MI will not answer", if there is that alternative
genuinely being put forward, then Z would say on behalf of
the families Z represent that that is a course which is, in
fact, preferable as the lesser of two evils from their point
of view. Z say that not in any way reflecting on the right
of Mr. Duckenfield to take the stance he has but from the
point of view to prejudice of all the matters being before
the Jury.
                                                       88




   ' I do not know, sir, what the position is with regard to
the other Officers, that is to say Mr. Murray, Mr. Greenwood
and Mr. Marshall. I do not know whether I have the agreement
of those who represent those Officers to the transcripts o£
their evidence being read aloud to the Jury. If I do have
that, sir, thenmy position will be different than if I do
not and it might be helpful from my point of view if an
indication could be given in that respect.
   THE CORONER:  Mr. Hale is not here and so he cannot
respond. Do you wish to respond or take instructions on
that?
     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, for my part I would like to take
instructions and perhaps I could do so overnight.
   MR. KING:   In those circumstances, sir, perhaps it might
be better if I postpone my final words until I hear what
those instructions are.
   THE CORONER:     Iwould prefer to conclude this now. You
have heard what   Mr. Isaacs says.If he says no and Mr.
Isaacs says yes, perhaps I may think again but assume for the
moment that everyone will fall in line behind Mr. Isaacs.
   MR. KING:   If everybody falls in line behind Mr. Isaacs,
as I say, sir, much as I would prefer a different course - it
almost sounds like a bargain but it is not meant to be - if
that is the means by which the families can get facts before
the Jury it is the means they would adopt.
   MR. ISAACS:   X wish to make one thing very clear, sir, so
that there is no misunderstanding. The offer that I make is
this; that the transcript of Mr. Duckenfielu'o evidence both
in chief as it were and in cross-examination before Lord
Justice Taylor can' be read to this Jury as being a report of
that evidence he gave on that occasion. So far as my learned
friend is concerned he understood me correctly and X just
want to ensure, sir, that you understood me correctly as
well.
   THE CORONER:   What you are trying to say is that you are
not putting it forward as evidence of the truth of it but
purely of what was said?
   MR. ISAACS:    That is what was said because that is
exactly the point you were making this morning, as it were,
with a Criminal Justice Act statement when, of course, the
Witness would be asked, "Is that the statement you have
made?" On this occasion he would not be asked this but it
would be said on his behalf or by you, sir, by agreement,
"TETfe was the evidence that he gave before Lord Justice
Taylor".
                                                      89




   MR. KING:   I understand the point my learned friend is
saying on behalf of Mr. Duckenfield as to the quality of that
evidence but it is certainly evidence which can go before a
Jury otherwise we would have no function, sir. I an not sure
now if I understand the distinction being made.
   THE CORONER:   This is the problen.   Mr. Payne.
   MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I was rising to make the point which was
nentioned by Mr. Isaacs simply as a natter of clarification.
If this Inquest is to proceed, as has been suggested, then it
should be on the basis that the evidence, and we are only
speaking for the moment about Mr. Duckenfield, that he should
not in fact give evidence but there should be read out at the
Inquest what he said at the Taylor Inquiry, not as his
evidence before you but as a report of what in fact he said
on that previous occasion. That is what Mr. Isaacs said to
you just now and I was rising to ensure that that was what
was being agreed.
   THE CORONER:   I have not agreed to anything yet, Mr.
Payne.
   MR. KING:    So far so good. The next question was the   ’
purpose for which the Jury could use that evidence and
certainly, sir, as Z understand it, it should be capable of
being used as evidence of that which is stated in it, ,in
other words not as evidence toyou, sir, but as evidence of
what was said on previous occasions. Otherwise it would have
no value. Z an not sure if my learned friend is trying to
say,. "It can go before the Jury but the Jury nust be told
that they cannot put any truth on that which is being
asserted".
   MR. PAYNE:   I think Mr. King can be helped by the fact
that the ordinary rules of evidence as we tend to know them
do not apply in these proceedings and certainly for our part
we can see no objection to the Jury being informed that what
was read out was a true report of what was said before the
Taylor Inquiry and the Jury could take it into account In
that context.
    THE CORONER:  Can Z just put this to you because Z think
Z can understand the problem but you will appreciate that if
you say to the Jury, "here is a statement which has now been
read. It nay or nay not be true because we have not asked
Mr. Duckenfield but it is true that he said that because it
is a report of what he said. You, ladies and gentlemen, must
decide whether you believe it or whether you do not". Are
you in effect inviting me to view that statement in that
foTfo? Have I understood you correctly?
                                                       90




   Mr . PAYNE:  Yes, Z think that is right. What is being
said is that the statement can be read out as a true account
of what was said at the Taylor Inquiry and the Jury cam take
it into account and make what use of it they wish.
   MR. KING:   On that basis I am content as long as ay
learned friend realises the iaport of what is being said, it
is not simply a record. It is being put to the Jury as
material which they can assess and use and, if necessary and
they think fit, accept as truth.
   THE CORONER:   I take it what you are saying is that
because this statement is in the public domain, so to speak,
because it has already been given - whether it has been given
on Oath or not is neither here nor there - it is there for
anybody who wishes to get the transcripts out. That is
really what you are saying, is it not?
   MR. ISAACS:    That is certainly right and in making that
concession I did it so not because I felt there was any
weakness in the submission Z originally made to you but in an
attempt to be helpful to meet the demands of you* sir, and
the Jury and perhaps the legitimate demands of my learned
friend's clients. Zf Z could put it this way, if the offer
which is made is unacceptable then it can be withdrawn and Z
rest on the submission that Z have made which is still a
strong one, in my submission, but I hope to try and assist
the Court by saying that..here. at .least is an account which
has been given by Mr. Duckenfield, in the circumstances it
was given, first of all, in chief and then under cross-
examination for a number of days. That to some degree will
assist the Jury in determining in this particular-instance in
this Znquest where the truth lies, that is, how the deceased
met th«ir deaths.
   MR. KZNG:   On that basis I am content and would be
content in respect of any other senior Officer who allows his
transcript to go forward in that way.
                                 :\
   MR. MANNING: Z have been able to use the intervening
period to talk to Superintendent Murray who instructs me on
the same basis as that put forward by my learned friend, Mr.
Isaacs, on the part of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, that
so far as his evidence to the Taylor inquiry is concerned it
may be used in exactly the same way. Zt was evidence that
was received. He answered questions in chief and in cross-
examination in detail. There it is. Zt will be received and
read in that way and on the same basis under the same caveat.
   THE CORONER:   May Z put in my view for what it is worth?
I had listened with considerable interest to your submission
and I have to agree with you because this is a regular
occurrence in Inquests that whenever you get the situation
                                                       91




where a person is potentially liable to be charged with some
criminal offence, be it careless driving or even speeding, it
does not matter what, it is next to impossible to construct a
question which is not incriminatory. That has been my
experience and in a sense I am encouraged that that seems to
be your experience as well. I thought it was just my failure
in constructing questions. So far as that goes, I agree it
is exceedingly difficult to formulate questions which
actually advance the matter if a person is in a situation
where an answer may incriminate him.
     Secondly, because I realise that that is so, my practice
has always been to call the driver, or the person whose
conduct is being' called in question, to ask him things like,
"What is your name?" (which is not I think incriminatory) and
then to pause. If questions are asked and if they are
incriminatory that is pointed out straight away and my
experience generally speaking is that the matter draws to a
close very quickly because people realise there is no point
in proceeding. It does have the advantage that the witness
who is a player in whatever it is one is enquiring into is
there, is seen to be there and is also given the opportunity
of saying something if he wishes to say something whereas if
you do not call him you do not give the witness that
opportunity.
     Now, of course, you might say to me, "I am telling you
that we do not want that opportunity, thank you very much".
   MR. ISAACS:   That is exactly what I am telling you for
the purposes of this submission.
   TBS CORONER:   The fact that somebody does not give
evidence is also prejudicial. In a sense the problem has
been made more difficult from the decision point of view
because of the exchange that has just taken place as to what
is to happen with regard to the transcripts of Lord Justice
Taylor*s Report and Nr. Xing, who has the primary interest of
a good number of the bereaved; feels that this might be a
better bet than having somebody say, "I am not answering
questions" and you obviously feel that as well.
      I am a little bit concerned about it, in fact, because
quite a bit of the evidence of Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield, and we think about him simply because you took
the lead in this matter but it applies to others as well I am
sure, there is quite a lot of his evidence which is not
germane to an Inquest. Zt will be ever so interesting but it
is not germane to an Inquest. Z could allow it if you, as
his representative, say, "Z do not mind, let us read it all
and have done with it". I am a little bit concerned about
that" aspect of the matter.
   HR. ISAACS:   There are two ways of looking at it, with
respect. First of all, it can be edited by agreement and
indeed on your direction because you will have read his
evidence that he gave some time ago now to Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry. Alternatively it can go before the Jury
and you can give directions as to those parts which are
germane to the Jury's task in this particular Inquiry. I
should point out, sir, that the offer I made was made on the
basis that he was not called. I think my learned friend
understood that and it was not in the way of holding a gun to
your head at all. it was a view to being helpful.
   THE CORONER:   Mr. Isaacs, may I ask you this because it
seems to me that it might be possible to achieve the best of
all worlds in this situation bearing in mind the point which
you have made and the acceptance of the issue? It is my
reluctance in a sense to make a ruling that we were not
calling him because I am a little bit reluctant, despite the
very persuasiveness of a lot of what, you said to me, but it
seems to me that your client would not be in any particular
danger of prejudice if the solicitors, Mr. King in
particular, were to agree that if we were to put Mr.
Duckenfield in the witness box having either read his
transcript either in toto or edited by agreement, that he
would agree not to pursue questions which clearly were
incriminatory because that would then give the advantage of
having Mr. Duckenfield here and yet without having the thing
which I perceive to be your main fear is that he will have to
answer hundreds of questions all of which he will answer by
saying, "I am not answering that question because it is
prejudicial". What do you feel about that?
   MR. ISAACS:   What will happen is this, let us .say it is
ay learned friend and he will ask a question which he
believes does not have the tendency to incriminate. Either
yourself or Mr. Duckenfield or myself will say, "We take the
view that it is". The Jury will go out. There will be some
legal argument. There will be some reference perhaps to some
parts of the evidence he. has given. That matter having been
resolved the Jury will come back in. The next question will
be asked and exactly the same thing will happen. I can
foresee unfortunately that one will have a morning, a day,
two days or three days and after every question that is asked
the Jury will go out, there will be legal argument and so it
will go on.




                      /With respect, sir
Witn respect, sir, that cannot be right, and however much
you, sir, would like to see him here, unfortunately the
very nature of the difficulty that he is in, and 1 stress
against the i>;ckr,rojnd that he does not accept that he has
committed any wrong-doing, but that others may take a
different view, that in those circumstances, and I say
this advisedly, the compromise that seems to have been
accepted is one which should commend itself to you, and
overcome what I appreciate to be your natural reluctance
not to call, even to say, "What is your name?", a chief
player. Sir, that is th-; only way that I can put it, but
I do hope tnat perhaps soth myself and Mr. King can manage
in the event to persuade you to take the course which is
now being put forward, ^>oth of us no doubt for different
reasons but, having said tnat, reasons that are to each
o*„her reasonably cogent.
        TH.. CO j’UNER s         Did you want, to say anything more, Mr.
King?
        MR. KING:          No.
     THH COiKWJEK:               Did you want to say anything, Nrs.
McBrien?
     MRS* tlcBRIEN:  I thin!; it would be useful to use the
transcripts from the Taylor Inquiry but we all know that
the Taylor Inquiry was never to blame anybody, it was a
different sort of inquiry to this one, but it would be
better than nothing, I think. Rather than have nothing at
all I would be happy with that.
     THE COKONER:   You are going along with what is being
proposed as the best?
     MRS. HcBRIEU:    Yes, but I really would prefer tlr.
Duckenfield to appear    in person so that Icould put
questions to him, not    in an incriminatory way, just to
speak to him.
     TH£ COilONER:     I think I ought to say that I know
Lord Justice Taylor said that he was not going to blame
anybody. In fact, it           is only fair to say that an inquest
is in exactly .tne same situation. We are not here to
blame people we are hire to enquire into how a decease;:
person died and, in fact, the rules I have already
referred to expressly say that you must «ot give a verdict
which in any way blames somebody, and I would follow that
ruling exceedingly strictly,, I can assure you of that. I
appreciate that you may want to ask the questions as
gently as possible but that is not, in fact, the issue.
The issue is not W i t e t n e r you are asking a question nicely
or nastily, but wnat is the content of the question, and
does it tend to increase the risk even by a little bit
tnat a person might be prosecuted. That is the point. It
is •   now you ask t \e question, wnich I an sure you will
do in a ladylike manner, but that is not really the issue.
      MRS. McBi’IEN:   I think that he would be able to give
u> far more information about that day than an/body else
as '.e was *.ie prime actor.
      Tll£ COilOrJEK: Yes, but Mrs. HcBrien, I thin’< it is
only fair to sav, as I have already indicated, it is, in
fact, practic lly impossible to frame a question, to put
  'e question wiece a person is in tne position of Chief
Superintendent Duckenf ielr*, which is not incriminating.
It may «ot be incriminating but it is almost impossible to
frame it and tne point is that he does not have to answer
that question. Wnetner it is incriminatory or not, you
c*nnot dry- a conclusion from it. If I ask a driver,
"Were you doing 40 miles an nour in a 30 miles an hour
area?", h: can say, "This is an incriminatory question, I
an .ot -.nswering it". You cannot tiraw the conclusion that
h w:<s doing 40 railed an hour from that. He might have
been but ne might not. He might just not want to answer
tna question and t tere is no way of finding out, not in
this Court, and that is tie difficulty in this situation.
It is a difficulty* wnich is almost insoluble I think.
      riftS. Mc&KlEN:  If I formed some questions and handed
t rim t'> you for you to look at •••?
     V.'lE CO.UmER: You could do it but it won’t make any
differenc . Vou would be a ver%* clever lady if you could
think of a question wnich actually gave you an answer.
     MRS. McSRiEi*:    I. would not be recriminatory.
      .HE C0.10NER*   Thank you, Mrs. McBrien.
       You will have guessed that ay inclination had been to
turn your request down from what I nave said, but on tne
05. o r hand I have to take into account what Mr* King has
said, and I have heard, of course, what Mrs. McBrien has
said and I have to take that into account as well, though
it is clear, I am sure, to you that ay experience is
similar to yours, tnat it is exceedingly difficult to
•sctu-jlly forrau^te tne questions in a meaningful sort of
w y.
        I know you won't be here tomorrow .but I am still
 :-.ovng to efer a "ecision for a day or two. We are not in
 a hjrr in 1 12 sen.?e that he is coming tomorrow. It will
  be, I an afraid, several weeks before we actually *»et to
-fcite crucia1 situ tion but I will think about it quite hard
   o~ause obviously if it is acceptable to everybody t.nen
  tnat may wc-ll be the most convenient way irrespective of
 my :’orm-.l • *c’-:ce. I appreciate it is a little, bit
  i-X'snve-ie.-t for you but I don’t think I can do anything
                                                                   95




     '•>out it.     I do think it is something that I need to
    c.s sidor.
          tlil. MAi'NIivG: Per :a >s just to follow front that, you
B    n :*ite that you will :;ive the decision w len you feel
    a'le t. do so. Can I ask a backwards way round assurance,
    it as .v't my intention to come tomorrow norning i'ecause
    t>vt v'dios ai*e sonethi g with which I am familiar. Could
    I :>e assured by you that you would not ~ive that
    adju ;*r?tio : at I*1 o'clock tomorrow raorn*ng, it would be 4
    o ’cl ck?
             T i.. CG.JO-tfSil: You can be assured of that and, in
        t ct, if it .*111 .telp you I will say that I won't =>ive a
        d cision at all a.id that I will let your instructing
        sol   nors of t'e Of: cers involved *:now wien I am raady
        t make a» a in.>u~ement, so that your instructing
        sol    iurs and ot.ters can be ^iere.
              MR. ISAACS:    I am ver grateful, sir, because I was
        jii~t oing ;o ask if you could give us •otice then
        c rtai ly some arrangement would be made to ensure tnat
D       your '.cision on this matter will be heard by somebody
        representing Nr. Duc'<enfielc. I also ask tais, that I
        ass.ime :.ierefore that you *ill near no furtner submissions
        0 . t iis pnrticul r matter without somebody being in
        attendance. I assume tiere will be no more in any event
        ni..?
              TUij CtUONER:    Th- only submission, if you like, that
        1 would tike to.aear, and I don't think this will
        prejudice your client, will be from tha representatives of
          .e o .'er people w.io are in tsie, same boat t shall we s a y :
        as t wnethcr or not thay would go alo g with the
        proposals which have been made.
              HR. ISAA S:    Clearly that cannot affect Mr*
        Duckenfield. I was only concerned that you aay .near - and
        I t iou ht you woul~ no*., but aay hear submissions about my
         Pi>l-c*»tion in my absence or in tie absence of any other
        representative of Mr. Duckenfiel-*.
               rE CO.iv.\;£R: No , that would not be my intention
        bcc ;u e I quite u d rstand this is aa exceedingly
        im jrtant matter for you and for tae other Officers.
             Mt'.. ISAACS: Effectively submissions on this point
         an ow :>e r .ir-ad as clossd until ydu make your
        d cision?
    —         TH:. C*>ROi*£R:   Yes, that is ri.;ht.
              MR. ^AiWE:    I won *er if I might just mention that
        t :are is anotner potential passenger in th* boat who has
           t been mentioned so far and that is Assistant Chief
        Constable Ja~'.;son. I just mention this so that you know

H
                                                        96




'that *e may be ad ad to lie group whose submissions you
 v 11 be c nsid r ng i-; flue course, whan tne decision is
 m-v'e "thout t.-se position of Mr. Duckenfield.
      THE COilONER:   Can we ju t make sure that we know who
 .e ire • Iking about.    I *:now Mr. H-?le isn't «ere but tie
 pte-.tia peo ,le w.. are talking about is Mr. Marshall, is
 th^t ri%at?
       M.!. PAY Ej  Yes, ths lis‘. is Assistant Chief
 C s able J cks.’.n, Superintendent Creenwood,
 Su •.r nt nd nt Murr y, Superintendent, I believe, Marshall
 an-i, of course, Mr. Duckenfield.
      T!!- COi'.OisTRj And you would want to add -Jr.
 homings.crth and Mr. Smith, I take it?
      MISS ADDLEMAH:    Tnat is ri^ht.                              4

      *.nE COKOr%£R:   What about you?
      M*. CATCHPuLE:    Si?, as I said before, at the moment |
  11 I tan say, sir, is that we would like to reserve our      |
 posi ion. It may wall be that for the purposes of. Mr..
 King and i*ie families it would be better all rojnd .if all i
 t»e statements went in from the principal players but we
 nesd to :-:lk to our clients direct and also to hayeV;
 discussion between ourselves.                      V*.!
       T**..:. C0HQ1JEK: You will appreciate that in respect of




                                                                 V>>iW
 quite a Tew of tne names that have been mentioned t.-iere




                                                                 i
                                                                 l
                                                                 i
 a.*e ver.* comprehensive PACE statements, which, of course, ;■
 -*11 be read anyway,'whatever we do about it. 'ilha'ti~do'you
 say. t tnat, V .r. King? Suppose for a minute that all
 tivese zolleaj>ues of yours said, yes, they think it is a
 splendid id'a of your.: and Mr. Isaacs, we will apply it to,
   11 of • 'em. Would you accept it?
       Hit. KI.-Gs Si*, my position is I would have liked to;
 h rve read out the whole of the Taylor Report and the whole ]
 of tie tr nscrtpt and just submitted to law on you,^so to i
 that extent, sir, I would not object to that course.
     .Til.! CORONER:   Than*< you.
        HR. CATCH POLE:   There was one point you mentioned
 t iat t iere wouL* be some live evideace tomorrow. Tnat
 certainly took me sonewhat by surprise and I tnink those
 a.rou *d me as w.-ll. I wonder if you .....
       iHE ;:OKOWER: Sorry about that. W len I *>eci ied to
 scr .p, if tnat is the ri^ht word, th.* summaries, or the
 speocnes or whatever you like to call’'the?., I thought we
 woul ha.e a bit of time, so we are going to take the
 fi*st four people on the list for Wednesday morning and
 t at will give u- a slightly' easier day on Wednesday, and


                        <S3>
                                                        97




-we have ,»ut it up at the :>ack actually. It is there.
That is where we are going to put the list. We intend to
put tie list up at the back so that it is visible. }
     So tne plan tomorrow is morning, videos, afternoon,
four ..it.iesses whose names I can't quite remember at the
moment.

     MR. KING:   The four witnesses at the top of the list
for Wednesday, sir?
      Tl! ! COROiJEHs Yes, I think so. Certainly three of
*. em but we may have had to shift the fifth and the fourth
arou d. It is the top end of the.Wednesday list.
      I just vant to check one other thing. You remember I
mentions-! the transcript* to you at the business meeting?
We have henrd from three firms. One said they did not
w n t one, two said thsy did. Is that correct? It is no
use turning up tomorrow morning and saying, "Yes, I did
w.nt a transcript". As I explained to you, it is entirely
up to you. It does not make ;<ny difference to me whether
you have tha:n or no:.

     HISS HAMPT/K:   I thin: we would be a third firm that
would require a transcript.
     THC COrfONEft: Thank you. Ladies and g e n t l e m e n / ^ :
thank you very much indeed. It has been quite a longday,
as Mr. Isaacs said - interesting, in many r e s p e c t s -
call adjourn then. •
(Tie Inquests were adjourned until tne following morning)
                                EDUCATION & DEBATE
                                                                                    *      ■




                                                                                               1
                                ^Ke HiUsboraugh^txagedy>Sr                                     •

                                James Wardrope, Frank Ryan, George Clark, Graham Venables, A Courtney Crosby, Paul Redgrave.


                                        On IS April 1989 Liverpool and Nottingham Forest because of hooliganism. At about 1520 Radio Sheffield
                                     . met at Hillsborough football stadium for an FA Cup made an urgent appeal for local doctors to go to the
                                   \ "semifinal mateh. The ensumg crushjdisaster^in which " ‘ ground. Between 1530 and 1545,20 doctors arrived in
                                    ,;r 95spectators were killed,hasb«nstu<Uedinanofficial the sports hall. Nearly all were general practitioners.
                                     iSreponi                                       ~"            ■ carrying equipment that they would normally take on a
                                                                                                  1homevisit;These supplies w^<jm cldye^usted;By^
                                  ^^£ofS e^oim d(fig 1) the area?was~3ivided by five‘radial?'-1615 most of the injured had been removed to hospital. _
                                    ^rm eS^M mOT,'^th f u ^ ttln e S                                   Theg^tesfdifficulty for doctors at the stadium was '
                                      Vbacktfards turned bars *to* prevent invasion "ofthc^Jthe, overwhelming 'number of rcasualties ^requiring ■
                                     >v'P<tch^^^. pens also had longitudinal barriers u^im m ediate attention. Unusually for a major incident,
        (#                              controicrowdsurges.Theeffectofthisdesignwasthat:-;: the dead and seriously injured had no wounds or
                                        the central pens, 3 and 4, lying immediately behind the obvious  -----sign of injury.
                                                                                                             -•—   r -  ' — Most
                                                                                                                              w---------------------- *r^ ' led
                                                                                                                                   were very young. This    ' ’
                                        Liverpool goal, became confined spaces, leaving as the to a dilemma in differentiating those who should
                                        only frej outlets the tunnel along which the spectators benefit from resuscitation from those who could be
                                        had entered and one small gate for each pen in the pronounced dead; The paucity of equipment for
                                        perime%*r and side fences (1-12; fig 1).                    resuscitation resulted in frustration and feelings of
                                           A sudden late influx of an additional 2000 spectators inadequacy.
                                        into the central pens led to a severe crush, which was
                                        exacerbated by surges in the crowd when the match
                                        started. One of the horizontal crushbarriers (124a; fig Hospital accident and emergency departments
                                        1) in pen 3 collapsed and large numbers of spectators'         The-accident and emergency departments of the
                                        were thrown forwards under a weight of falling bodies Northern General and Royal Hallamshire Hospitals
 Northern Geoers!                       (fig 2). At 1506 a police officer ran on to the pitch and received a message from the police at 1520 to say they
hospital, Sheffield S3 7AU              the match was stopped.                                      were “on casualty standby.” The agreed and correct
lames W ardrope, ntcs,
 onsuliant in accident and
                                                                                                    procedure, however, was to telephone the hospital
■m ergetuy mediciTU                                                                                 switchboard    with die message, “Implement the major
'ran k Ryan, FRCP, ctmsuiun; Actions at scene                                                      disaster plan.” No such message was received.
ihyiidcn                                   Gates 3 and 4 were opened and the police and NORTHERN GENERAL HOSPITAL
 Jeorgc Clark, ffa k c s,               spectators   worked quickly-to move the critically
  o m tu ta m a n a esth etist
                                        injured and dead on to the pitch. Others were evacu­           After the police message at 1520 key staff at the
 *oyal H allam shirt                    ated through the tunnel. First aid was administered by- in accidentGeneral
                                                                                                    Northern              Hospital, including the consultant
                                                                                                                  and emergency medicine and two assistant
H o s b ^ S h e ffie ld S10 2JF         police  and St John Ambulance    personnel  together with
 jnn^^eoables,M*a>,                     seven or eight doctors and a few nurses who had been matrons,            were informed that the hospital should
                                                                                                    expect casualties. At 1525 a message was received from
 o n su lta n t n eu ro lo g ist        spectators. The resuscitation equipment available was
\ Courtney Crosby, rues,                very limited and included only a single oxygen the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service .control to
 o n su lu m in a ccid en t a n d       cylinder. The nine available stretchers were quickly "expea           a child with a cardiac arrest.” There was no
 •m erfen cy m ed icin e
                                        used up, and spectators resorted to using advertising reference         to Hillsborough or indication that a major
                                                                                                    incident was taking place.
^aul Redgrave, m xcgf
                                        hoardings to cany bodies to the gymnasium, which               Shortly afterwards three patients receiving cardio­
Correspondence to:                      served as a makeshift mortuary.                             pulmonary resuscitation arrived, and only then,
\lr Wardrope.                              Help was not summoned over the public address
                                        system until 1530. By then some doctors had left the after        conversation with the ambulance crew, did the
                                                                                                    charge nurse in the accident and emergency depart­
iMJ                                     ground thinking that the match had been abandoned ment implement die proper major disaster procedure.
                                                                                                       Failure to implement the major incident alert earlier
                                                                                                    meant that only a few staff had to cope with a large
                                                                                                    clinical workload in addition to implementing the
                                                                                                    major incident plan. The consultant physician on call
                                                                                                    was not included in the first line a ll of the major
                                                                                                    disaster plan but had been alerted by seeing the BBC
                                                                                                    television broadcast at 1525. He arrived at 1555,
                                                                                                    when his presence was important in coordinating the
                                                                                                    efforts of medical and nursing staff dealing with the
                                                                                                    immediate resuscitation and treatment of the patients
                                                                                                    with crush asphyxia. Within five minutes many more
                                                                                                    staff had arrived, and two doctors w e re dispatched to
                                                                                                    the stadium with the major accident equipment.
                                                                                                   Presentation and disposal o f patients
                                                                                                     Most o f the seriously in ju red arrived at the hospital
                                                                                                                               • su m m arises th e status o f p atien ts on arrival an d t h e i r
                                                                                                                                 s u b se q u e n t niimaycmcni and disposal.
                                                                                                                                      T h e a c c i d e n t aod e m e r g e n c y d e p a r t m e n t o f the
                                                                                                                                 N o rth e rn G enerat H ospital is d e s i g n e d to _ c o p c w ith
                                                                                                                                 la rg e n u m b e rs _ o f.p a tie n tS r e q u i r i n g re s u s c ita tio n .
                                                                                                                                 T h e re a r e f o u r p e rm a n e n t a n d e ig h t p r e p a c k e d
                                                                                                                                 r e s u s c i ta t io n p o in ts . But e v e n th e s e fa cilities w e r e not
                                                                                                                                 su f f ic ie n t, a n d e a c h p o in t w a s u s e d m o r e - t h a n o n c e as
                                                                                                                                 p a t i e n t s w e r e m o v ed o n e i t h e r a s a re s u lt o f b e in g
                                                                                                                                 d e c la r e d d e a d o r being re m o v e d to a s u p p o r t w a r d .

                                                                                                                                 ROYAL HALLAAISH1R£ HOSPITAL
                                                                                                                                     A t th e R oyal H allam shire H o sp ita l th e a c c id e n t and
                                                                                                                                 em erg en cy consultant a n d senio r reg istrar arrived
                                                                                                                                 to g eth er a t 1537. T he n u rsin g s ta ff h a d alread y beg un
                                                                                                                                 to p re p a re th e departm ent to receive large n u m b e rs o f
                                                                                                                                casualties. W h e n two police officers a rriv e d a n d c o n ­
                                                                                                                                firm ed th a t a m ajcr disaster was ta k in g place the
                                                                                                                                ho spital im p lem en te d the m a jo r d isaste r p la n .
                                                                                                                                    T h e first tw o patients arrived a t 1540. O n e w as dead
                                                                                                                                a n d th e o th e r required in tu b atio n an d was tra n sfe rre d
                                                                                                                                to the.ini[ensive_ca.*e u n it.. B eing T u n h e r^ fr o m the
                                                                                                                                sta d iu m ,_ th e h o s p is l then h ad a q u ie t p e rio d , w hen
                                                                                                                                th e ^departm ental plans"could b e o rg an ised . B etw een
                                                                                                                                1600 and_1700 the d ep artm en t received a f u r th e r 69
                                                                                                                               'p a tie n ts , 2 4 o f whcsn req u ired ad m issio n . F ig u r e 3
                                                                                                                                show s th e disposal o f patients. F o rty five w ere d is­
                                                                                                                                ch arged a fte r treatm ent.

1   2 —Photograph o f oest urracts at 1459 shooing ozercroii'ding in pens 3 <imi 4. Police observation post
-awed                                                                                                                           In te n siv e c a r e u n its
                                     receiving     basic       c ard io p u lm o n ary resu scitation .                             Seven teen pa ueats were ad m i tted to in tensi ve care a t
                                     Initially these patients w ere treated in th e resuscitation                               th e N o rth e r n G en en I H ospital an d o ne at th e Roys]
                                     areas, an d cardiac o u tp u t was resto red in three o f th em .                          H allam sh ire H ospital. Six o f those initially a d m itte d to
                                     As m ore patients req u irin g resuscitation arrived those                                 the N o rth e r n Genera! were su b se q u en tly tra n sfe rre d to
                                     patients arriving in cardiac a rrest w ere triaged to the                                  the R oyal H aUaroshire for c o m p u te d to m o g ra p h y and
                                    m o rtu ary . T w o o f the p atients resuscitated from                                     to relieve p re s su re o n staff at th e N o rth e r n G en eral.
                                    cardiac arrest reached intensive care but subsequ en tly                                       O n a d m issio n to intensive care all p a tie n ts had
                                    died.                                                                                      arterial lin es, central; venous p ressu re lines, u rin a ry
                                        Fifteen o th e r p atients had severe neurological p ro b ­                            c a th e te rs, a n d nasogastric tubes in se rte d . C are was
                                    lems. N ine w ere a d m itted unconscious o r convulsing.                                  aim ed at go od oxygenation, p re v e n tin g fu rth s r
                                    A fu rth er six w ere confused on arrival and su b se­                                     scizures, an d treating presum ed cereb ral o ed em a. All
                                    qu ently d eterio rated , an d all six began having severe                                 patients w ere hy p erren u lated to achieve an arterial
                                    convulsions req u irin g resu scitation , in tu b a tio n , and                            carb on diox ide pressure o f 3 '5 -4 0 k P a an d an arterial
                                    ventilation in the accident and em ergen cy d e p a rtm e n t                              oxygen p re ssu re o f 15-20 k P a , aim ed a t red u cin g
                                    o r on th e receiving w ard. An additional 15 patients lost                                in tracran ial p ressure while m a in ta in in g good cerebral
                                    consciousness in th e c ru sh . T w o o f these were co n ­                                perfu sio n a n d oxygeration.-’ V entilation was c o n tin u ed


        •                           fused on adm ission b u t rap id ly im p ro v ed . O n e s u b ­
                                    sequently developed cortical blindness. F ig u re 3
                                                                                                                               for one to 15 days. One p atien t a d m itte d to intensive
                                                                                                                               care at th e N o n h e m G eneral H o sp ital die d soon



                                                                                                     . A mortuary. dead on arrival
                                                          13 Cardiac anes;                             7 mortuary after attempted resuscitation
                                                                                                       2 Intensive care unit a-^.er resuscitation

                                                                                                                                                                     "1 I n Northern General Kcipiiai
                                                         10 Unconscious / convulsing ■                • 10 * f esusciation / ventilation                               - '“ l intensive care unit
                                                           5 Contused • deteriorated “                • 5 receiving ward / ventilation ‘                                     6 Royal Hallamshire Hcspsa'
                                       Northern                                                                                                                                intensive care unii
                                       Generat
                                       Hospital                                                                                      k | i1   Iransier
                                                                                                                                              Irar     !o Roya
                                                    ■"•J 15 Histcry ol toss o t .
                                                            consciousness                                                         Q HaHamshire
                                                                                                                                      H*<
                                                                                                                                 — —1 (blii
                                                                                                                                                  Hcscnaf
                                                                                                                                      (blindness)
                                                                                                       1intensive care untj
                                                                                                             tpneumoiftorax)
                                                         45 OtMer injury                              26 ward
                                                                                                      18home
                                                         . I Cardiac 3 fres i — — mc'tuory. dead on arrival
                                         71
                                       floyal
                                     HaHamsfiiref         1 Unconscious        •*   rcsusc4J?<on / venidaied— inienjA'e cste                        7 veniJtosc pai*ents
                                      Hospfui
                                                  K      69 Omer injury-            24 adm*ttcd’                                 * 25 on ward *

                                                                                    J5 home                                                                         . One pJneni dcie'crated at -3
                                   HC 3 —Fhrj.' o f p jn V n fj through    ac;ui%nt ju .!   .'w rr y t i "               o / . W f r . T T t Genera! and F.r.al l i j l l j n n h i r c H o i f u d t . T h re t o:r*T
                                            jilicrw urds. J l i c 10 p a tie n ts w ho rem ain ed :.i that
                                            hospital were also treated w ith n u n n ito l, fluid rcsinc*                                                 UAconscoui        Hiisbo'ougn
                                            turn, and frusem ide to en su re 3 slightly negative fluid
                                            balance while en su rin g an a d eq u ate card iac o u tp u t. All
                                                                                                                          W.irwi iviq hours
                                            10 patien ts also rcccived high dosage d cx am cthasone (1                    01Admission
                                            m g/kg). F o u r p atien ts w ho rem ain ed at th e N o rth e rn
                                           G eneral H ospital an d fo u r a d m itte d to th e Roval
                                           H allam shire H ospital h ad refracto ry seizures w hich
                                           w ere controlled w ith in tra v e n o u s an tico n v u lsan ts, tw o         By Oay 2
                                                                                                                                           O ead
                                           p atien ts requiring th io p e n to n e .
                                               In five patients th e re was evid en ce o f in halation o f
                                           gastric contents (observed a t in tu b a tio n , in aspirate
                                                                                                                                                                                             Conical
                                           from endotracheal tu b e s, o r in ch est radiog raphs). All                                                                                     blindness
                                          these patients received p ro p h y la c tic m etro nidazole and
                                          cefuroxim e a n d n o n e d ev elo p ed ch est in fectio n . F iv e
                                          p atien ts not given p ro p h y lactic an tib io tics developed
                                          chest infections. I n these p a tie n ts a p o te n tia l cause
                                                                                                                        A lone
                                          additional to inhalation m a y h ave been prolon ged                          month
                                          ventilation fro m fo u r to 11 days . O n e p a tie n t w ho d ie d
                                          was confirm ed to have inh alatio n al p n eu m o n ia at
                                                                                                                                                                         ’ Glasgow coma scare gZ-i-2
                                          necropsy . -                                                                                                                  ♦Glasgow coma score >2-4-2
                                                                                                                        FIG 4 -N eurological injuries onJ outcome at 48 hours and one month

                                          C ru s h asphyxia
                                              T h e disaster a t H illsb o ro u g h resu lted in a grad ual ". for up to7 2 hours; and six'for up to ‘14 days." Each of
                                                                                                                  these six patients had a severe neurological deficit at
                                          a n d prolonged c ru s h affecting large n u m b e rs o f p re ­
                                                                                                                  one m onth.
                                         viously fit young peop le. T h e p a tie n ts p re s e n te d w ith
                                         little evidence o f the classic signs o f trau m atic asphyxia              F ive p a tie n ts deterio rated w ithin tw o hours
                                         —facial oedem a; cyanosis o f face, n e c k , shoulders,"and            o f   th e ir in itial recovery. W ith o u t w arning, each
                                                                                                                 started to sc re a m , developed m yoclonus an d a
                                         u p p e r chest; subcon junctival haem o rrh ag es; scattered
                                         petechiae over th e u p p e r p a rt o f th e bod yM—y et m an y        d eterio ratin g level o f consciousness, and w ent into
                                                                                                                 status epilepu'cus. T hese p atien ts, tw o o f w h o m had
                                         developed serious neurolo gical co m p licatio n s, usually
                                         said to be rare.’ 5'                       ;                            already been m o v e d to m edical w ards, req u ired urgent
                                                                                                                 resu scitatio n , including ventilation and tre a tm e n t of
                                             All the asphyxiated p atien ts h ad craniocervL-al
                                                                                                                 seizures. A six th patient, w ho seem ed to be recovering,
                                        cyanosis, w hich cleared com p letely w ithin tw o h o u rs o f
                                                                                                                deterio rated a fte r 48 hou rs. F iv e o f th e six m ade a good
                                        th e trau m a. O nly tw o p atien ts had petechial h a e m o r­
                                                                                                                physical recovery. A seventh p atien t developed cortical
                                        rhages (chest an d face) an d o ne oedem a o f the retinas
                                                                                                                blindness a fte r six hours b u t su b seq u en tly m ade a good
                                        an d o p tic discs. F ig u re 4 su m m arises th e neurological
                                                                                                                neurological recovery.
                                        com plications a n d s u b se q u e n t o u tcom e. A lto g e th er 22
                                        p atien ts suffered neurological in ju ry d u e to asphyxia.            O UTCOM E A fT E R N’EL’R O L O G lC A i IN JU R Y
                                        T h e ir ages ranged fro m 14 to 41 years (m ed ian 19), and
                                                                                                                    F ig u re 4 sh o w s the outcom e a t one m o n th in patients
                                        all h a d been unconscious at th e g ro u n d . T w o died two
                                                                                                                w ith neurological injury. T w o patients die d in
                                       and 48 hours after ad m ission w ith o u t regaining co n ­
                                       sciousness.                                                              hospital. T h e tw o patients in a vegetative state
                                                                                                               rem ained so o ne year after in ju ry . F o u r p atien ts had
                                       EARLY RECOVERY                                                          m ajor neurological and cognitive h an d icap s, including
                                                                                                               one p atien t w h o was cortically blin d . T h e table gives
                                           Six ventilated p a tie n ts (in clu d in g fo u r w ho had
                                                                                                               the details o f seven representative cases, to g e th er w ith
                                       secondary d eterio ratio n ) recov ered w ithin 24 h o u rs
                                                                                                               the o utcom es a t six m onths.
                                       and w ere exrubated. F o u r p atien ts req u ired ventilation
                                                                                                                     Seizures
presentative cast histories o f patients with neurological injury                                                       S e c u re s o c c u rre d in 16 p atien ts, m ostly as m ultiple
    Sex and
                                                                                                                     tonic-clonic ev en ts associated w ith m yoclonus. F our
      age         Time a o J s u m s                                                                                p atients w ere know n to have had seizures before
    (y o n )       on sdtsission                        Progress                     Outcome a* s « months          reaching h o sp ita l, 12 h ad seizures in the accider.:
   M 41         1700. A p u ic d ,                                                                                  room , and five continued to have seizures desp ite large
                                       1745 Developed status epilepticus. Sedated    No neuroiopca! defier,
                  responsive 10          and ventilated for 24 hours                                                doses o f conventional antiepileptic d ru g s. N o p3tieni
                  pain
                                                                                                                    w ho m ade a com plete physical recovery had had any
   F 26         (600. Ctwonsctous     1730 Developed seizures acd myoclonus.        No formal follow wp.
                                         Sedated and reatibted for 24 hours.          Reportedly in good            fu rth e r seizures by one year o f follow up.
                                        Several episodes o f upward deviation of      health
                                        eyes                                                                        Ocher neurological injuries
   M 21          16IQ. L’ncwtscious  IS00 Improved 2nd aJen, then suddenly          Minor behavioural
                                        resdessaod irritable with deterioration in    problems                          Six p a ti e n ts h a d n e u r o p r a x ja , o f w h o m t h r e e h a c
                                        conscious level. Spasms* Treated with                                      b ra ch ial p le x u s in ju rie s, a n d o n e e ac h h a d sciatic
                                        chJonmethiazole and sodium valproate.
                                        Ventilated oversight                                                       n e rv e , late ral c u ta n e o u s n e rv e o f th ig h , a n d p o s te r io r
  .M 17         16 1S. Unconscious  Improved but at 1700 became agitated and       Difficulty in concentruunc.     i n te ro s s e o u s n e r v e injuries.
                                       had seuure. Treated with benzodiazepines      Men:al impairment on
                                       and ventilated overnight                      psychological testing
  M 20          1S-J7. Already      I62S Recovered consciousness and extubated. No neurological or
                  tntubaied.            1730 Became obtunded and had seizures.       psychologic j !               O th e r in ju ries
                  unconjcitMji         Gi ven benzodiazepines and ventilated         impairment
                                       overnight                                                                        F iv e p a ti e n ts su ffered a p n e u m o t h o r a x , b ila te r a l ir.
  .Nt 16       1630. Urwonst'ious   1*00 Hod first seizure. Given thiopentone,     Spastic wcik/tcis, cognitive    o n e . w h ic h in fo u r cases r e q u ir e d d ra in a g e . O ne
                                      sodium valproate, and phenytotn and            handicap
                                       vcntibted for 48 hours. Became able to                                     .p a t i e n t w a s n o t e d at initial in iu b a t io n 10 h a v e severe
                                      obey commands. Relapsed with further                                         lary n g e al o e d e m a , w h ic h p e rs is te d a n d r e q u ir e d j
                                      seizures. Ventilated for seven more days
 M 23          1640. Responded to 2230 Complained of poor vision., confused,       Needed m pjoent                 t ra c h e o s to m y .
                 Mucstum^             confabulating. Tests showed perception of     psychiatric Care. Severe           N in e p a t i e n t s h a d e v id e n c e o f rig h i h e a rt s t r a in ir.
                                      light only. Gradual improvement o*er 10       memory lo*s and djm.ii;c       th e initial e le c tro c a r d io g r a m ( fo u r o f these e ases have
                                     jjv%                                           i«*nrln tentfNH)! I*»lv
                                                                                                                   b e en re p o rte d * /. T h r e e p m ie n is l u d p c r i o r d i j l
    ciVum'i'iin. ( « ilia c iil;r.iN,uiu” i ;i|>liv n1ki«.cJ ir.niMoni                   lulrm ne iIeveIo|«nJ m uch earlier un»l ilieie « v r ; |)4)
    im p a irm e n t ol rig h t ventricular lim c iio n in seven                     C M rapyram iJal features. In reiro sp eei, com puted
    patients. H y p o te n s io n was timed in two patients. O n e                   to m o g ra p h y an d d cctroen cephalo tjrapliy, undertaken
    patient lia 'd la p a ro to m y lo r a rig id abdom en and was                   bccause o f uncertainly ab o u t the n atu re o f the acute
    found 10 have gastric dilatation.                                                b ra in in ju ry , added nothin g to patient m anagem ent or
      T h e re w ere large n u m b e rs o f soft tissue injuries to                  to u n d e rsta n d in g dsc m echanism o f the deterioration,
    the c h e st, b a c k , a n d pelvic a re a —especially in p atien ts           p e x a m c th a s o n c reduces oedem a aro u n d tum ours but
   w ho h ad b een c ru s h c d against the m etal b a rrie rs— but                  its place in the m a n a g e m e n ro f hypoxic oedema is less
   surp risin g ly few fractu res. O ne p atien t h ad a fractu red                  c e rta in . It was u sc d in tfic se patie'nts on the basis that it
   skull b u t no se rio u s neurological dam age, fo ur p atien ts                  m ig h t be beneficial an d was unlikely to do harm .
   h ad rib fra c tu re s, a n d one p atient each h ad fractures o f                    In h alatio n o f gastric con tents was a problem in six
   rad ius and u ln a , styloid process, an d ankle. O n e                          p a tie n ts; severe external pressure on th e abdom en, a
   p atien t h ad arc h ao rtograp hy because o f a w id en ed                      full sto m a c h , and unconsciousness are potent c o n ­
   m e d ia stin u m su sp e c te d on chest rad io g rap h y , b u t th e          d itio n s fo r inhaladonal p n eu m o n ia. O u r experience
   resu lt w as n o rm a l. In seven p atien ts changes co m p a t­                 sug gests th a t prophylactic antibiotics helped reduce
   ible w ith a sp ira tio n w ere seen in chest x ray films.                       th e risk o f chest infection in these p a tien ts.

                                                                                   IMPLICATIONS FOR DISASTER PLANNING
   Discussion                                                                            C o m m u n icatio n difficulties are a n im p o rta n t feature
         W e h ave used.the te rm “ cru sh asphyxia” to d escrib e                   in m o s t m a jo r disasters re p o rte d .“ u I n o u r series
     th e m a in - n eu ro lo g ical inju ry in these p atien ts.                    n e ith e r o f th e two m a in hospitals received proper
     A lth o u g h th e re w ere sim ilarities to trau m atic asph yxia,             w a rn in g th a t a m ajor disaster w as ta k in g place, w hich
     th e c o n d itio n s d iffe r in m echanism o f in ju ry , clinical            delay ed im p lem entin g th e m ajor d isaste r plans. F o rtu ­
     findin gs, rnain co m p licatio n s, a n d outcom e.                            n a te ly , m a n y sta ff arrived because o f th e m edia cover­
        T ra u m a tic asp h y x ia is usually caused by a heavy                    age, b u t in o th e r circum stan ces—p articularly at night
     w eigh t falling o n th e chest o r a violent crush b etw een                   — th is m ig h t have resulted in im p o rta n t delays. W e
     heavy o b je cts, su c h as m o to r vehicles. O ften th e victim              stro n g ly advise that th e stan d ard m essage recom ­
     has w arn in g th a t h e o r she is a b o u t to be c ru s h e d , a n d      m e n d e d in th e recent g overnm ent guidelines, “ M ajor
     th e n a tu ra l reflex is to su d d en ly inh ale an d th e n close           in c id e n t d eclared —activate p la n ,” sh o u ld be used
     the g lo ttis.’ 1 I t h a s been suggested th a t this resu lts in             to alert hospitals o fa m ajor in c id en t.14T h is task should
    m assive increase in p ressu re in th e su p erio r vena cava,                  b e u n d e rta k e n b y th e am bulan ce service, a n c other
    explaining th e classic p resentatio n o f trau m atic                          em erg en cy service com m unications to hospitals should
    asp hyxia, w h e n p etech ial haem orrhages in the su p e rio r                be relayed via the am bulance service.
    vena cavai d is trib u tio n and su bconjunctival h a e m o r­                      O u r previous major d isaster plan expected the junior
    rhages are alm o st always fo u n d .’ ” A ny neurological                      staff, on receiving th e disaster call, to contac: their
    co m plications d o n o t usually lead to p erm an en t d is ­                  seniors in the cascade system . T h is p ro ved im practic­
    ability. I f th e p a tie n t survives ihe initial cru sh, th e n a             able because o f the large n u m b ers o f p a tie n ts requiring
    full recov ery usu ally ensues.                                                 th e ir im m ediate services for resuscitatio n. VFe have
        By c o n tra s t, c ru s h asphyxia is caused b y a g rad u ally            a ltered o u r plan to delegate this responsibiii:y to
    increasin g a n d su stain e d p ressu re on the c h e st, so                  a d m in istra tiv e personnel, a nd we suggest that ether
    p re v e n tin g in sp ira tio n and m a k in g it m ore likely th a t          h o spitals should m odify th e ir p la n s also. T h e initial
    the glo ttis w ill rem ain open. T h is m ay lessen the                        im p ressio n was that a large n u m b e r o f patients with
   increase in p re s su re in th e su p erio r vena cava, w hile th e           . head injuries were to be expected, an d a surgically
   sustain ed n a tu re o f th e crush m ay be im p o rtan t in the                d ire c te d m ajor disaster plan w as im pleizir.red.
   d e v elo p m en t o f serio us neurological com plications.                    M edical skill proved to be im p o rta n t in the early
       In this series a m a jo r co n trib u tio n to the eventual                 m a n ag em en t o f the neurological cases, and we recom ­
   success o f resu scitatio n was th a t 24 an aesthetists                        m e n d th a t a consultant physician sho u ld be included
   arriv ed at th e a c c id e n t and em ergency d e p a rtm e n t o f            w ith the anaesthetic a n d surgical team s in the £rs: line
   th e N o rth e r n G en eral H o sp ital, m a k in g it possible to             call for all m a jo r ( f e s t e r plans. T h o u g h n e u rd c g ists
  allocate an in d iv id u a l an aesth etist to every u nconscious                a re n o t usually in d o d e d in m ajor d isaste r p la rs . ± e v
  p atien t.                                                                       m ay have useful advice to give ab o u t th e m a n a g ;~ in t
       S y n d ro m e s cau sed b y acute cerebral anoxia w ere                    o f cerebral anoxia and seizures.
  review ed b y P lu m and P o sn er an d include early                                T h e victim s a t H illsborough w ere sim ilar ir. cge,
  delayed p o st-an o x ic en cep halopathy and post-anoxic                        m ain ly w ore T skirts and jeans, an d czrr.ti no
 m y o c lo n u s." In o u r series 30% o f patients (6/20)                       id en tificatio n. Id eati/y in g unconscious a n c cesd
  rem ain ed serio u sly disabled a t six m o nths. T w o                         people was therefore a m ajor p ro b le m a z i the
 d eaths w hich o c c u rre d early in hospital are in c lu d ed                  u n certain ties and process o f identification very dis­
 because th e y a d d e d substantially to th e m anagem ent                      tressing to relatives. T h e dead a t th e stad iu m were
 b u rd e n . T h e delayed neurological d eterioration was                       p h o to g ra p h e d , which helped identification, ^"e
 unexpected in p a tie n ts w ho had seem ed to be reco ver­                      reco m m en d using s P olaroid cam era fo r this a ~ i r.cw
 in g an d w ere alread y being m oved to m edical w ards                         in clude a m edical p h oto grap her in o u r m ajor ir.c iitn t
 away from in ten siv e m o n ito rin g and resuscitation                        pla n .
 facilities. T h e d eterio ratio n occu rred betw een tw o and                       D o cto rs at the scene had little e q u ip m e n t : : help
 48 h o u rs after th e anoxia had passed, and all b u t one                      w ith th e resuscitation o f large n u m b e rs o f C2s u :l-s s .
 p atien t seem ed to m ake an uneventful recovery.                               b u t, given the little likelihood o f a recu rren ce o f -: -«'h a
 D etailed neu rop sycholog ical assessm ents, ho w ever,                        d isaster, it seem s im probable that an y sp o rtir.r ir.ue
su b se q u e n tly sh o w ed tw o patients to have cognitive                    w ould be equipped w ith such facilities. N everthiless,
dcfccts.                                                                          large stad iu m s and sim ilar venues sh o u ld e n su r; that
      T h e re was no ex trinsic reason for th e neurological                    the personnel and equ ipm ent necessary for a -'-.r.re d
d eterio ratio n an d we can offer no explanation o r m e c h a ­                life su p p o rt arc available to deal w ith sm aller i-r^le
nism . W e p re s u m e th at it was an o th er response o f the                 em ergen cies, such as a cardiac arrest. It h :s r-.’i-r.
young b rain to pro lo n g ed hypoxia. N o pathological                          reco m m ended that there should be increased p : : • :;:on
m aterial was available for exam ination. T h e d e te rio ra ­                  o f resuscitation equip m ent at large events, ir.i in
tion d id not re se m b le delayed post-anoxic en cep h alo ­                    fu tu re am bulance services will dep lo y their rr.sror
pathy'-' or delayed post-anoxic m y o clo nus"; the                              in c id en t vehicles near stadium s w here cro-.vds ir. ; \ ; r s s



                                                                                             U.VlJ     vom mi: 50?           50 NuVl .Ml'!
                                                                                          ,*r
                                  o f 2 5 0 0 0 a rc ^ c x p e c ic d .1 N e w legislation may -be                   » I ' k J 111.. C h a n J I c r I S ' . T n u m i m a>r h < i u A —J M . J 1‘W I . J * >UX I.’
                                                                                                                     7 R o x n u c u i I . , n u i f ( I K . S lu t v l l i n i; II. T h e pciicniKiv t%( i n u m j i K   m
                                  needed.
                                                                                                                           d u U h x ^ .J /VJwir.Vwnr 19S#*;.!1:73J-A.
                                                                                                                     I O uniw r K $,          O f., M ^irc t M , M cllu^h I1.                            i Avuir nctu
                                    This report u-as compiled on behalf o f (|lc 5tafjf ai (he                           heart u m n »hcr crushing initin- ji                                            waJiuiii Jt.lt}
                                  Northern General llospiial, Sliclrield, the ita ff a< the Royal                          IWV£99:IJ79-S0.
                                                                                                                     V V jllu m i JS» aMinfce* 'SC, Adam* JT . T nu m aiic tip lir iii reap p o n cj,
                                  Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield, and the many people who                                                          -    _          '..............
                                 helped at the scene. T he efforts of hundreds of professionals                     10 Thomfnon A, lUewas F F , Chiu R C -j. Why ts the l<>we( torvJ p ro iK id in
                                 and volunteers were vital and greatly appreciated. We thank                              traumatic asphyxia? A new hypothesis./(ft* ThontSwt I9S9;47J47.9.
                                                                                                                    11 rium F , Power JB. TV Jiagnans      n upor «W o m a. irU d . rbilJJciphu;
                                 Neil Applevard. David Edbrooke, David Dawson, Stuart                                     FA Davis, 1911.
                                 Yates, Ian Winston, John Duncan, G A Baker, Charlie                                12 flum F , Potner jB, Kiin RF. Delayed neurological deterioration after jnm u
                                 Cooper, Kath Sherry, Tim Shaw, and A Moss for access to                                 Ank fmumMtJ 1962;! 10:11-2$.
                                 the neuropsychological reports on some o f the survivors.                         IJ Lance J, Adam* RD. The syndrome of intention or action mvoctonus a* a
                                                                                                                        lequd to hypoxic csKephaJofnthy. Brat* 196344:11105.
                                                                                                                   14 Staff of the Accident and Emergency Departments of Derbyshire RoyaJ
                                  1 Taylor P. Tkt HdlOtnnik iuJium Jm iut . tmurim rtpon. London: HMSO.                 Infirmary, Ldceucr Royal Infirmary, Quern's Medical Centre.
                                       I«39.                                                                            Nottingham. Coping with the early t u |c t of the All disaster at ihe sceiw
                                  2 Shapiro KM. Ncumurcical aiucuhcsia and intracranial faypcncwion,                    tad oo arrival at hospiol. BMJ 19S9;298:6$M.
                                      I#I Milla RD. cd-                2mi cd. Voi 2. EdJabufsh; QHKbiS            15 Sharpe DT, Roberts AHN, BvcUy TL, Dickson T A , SettJc JAD. Crockett
                                      livintiiooc. 1434:157}.                                                           D)tetcl. Treatment of burn casualties after the fin at Bradford Gfy football
                                  3 Landcfcupcr J. Co$bilI T. Ljjof-ttfrm follow up after traumatic asphytia.           ground. BMJ l935^9l.-945-«.
                                                                                                                   16 NHS Management Eaecuiire. Emerjenty pianwg t» Uu SH S: KeaUJt ttrvisa
                                  4 Olfiner d*A. Jtdauon meJiole tin cvcacmcm furvcnut *u Qump*.dc>Man                   •m*ft*unu for dtati^ wuh n ajor vtcidtna. London: NHS Management
                                      le 14 fuji,                      1137,18:416-9.                                    Executive, 1990.                 .....
                                  5 Sudifocd JA. SicfcJcr D. Traumatic asphyxia with invert ocwotopcal
                                      M qixlx.7 Tnamj 1974;14:J05-9.                                               (AccepuJ 2$ .August J991)




                                Doctor-patient communication: the Toronto consensus
                                statement
ria, S outh Africa
 el Simpson,                    M ichael S im p son , R ob ert B u c k m a n , Moira Stew art, Peter M agu ire, M a ck L ip k in , D ennis N o v a ck .
 YCH, consultant                Jam es T ill                                                                                           >
itrisi

 to-Bayview Regional           Effective com m u n icatio n berw een d o c to r and patient                       sub stantial deficiencies w hen studied. O nly a Io"
 r C en tre, University        is a central clinical fu n ctio n th a t c a n n o t be delegated.                 proportion o f visits w ith d o cto rs include any patient
 onto , T o ro nto ,           M ost o f th e essential diagn ostic in fo rm atio n arises
 o , Canada
                                                                                                                  e d u catio n ,'5 a n d a su rp risin g ly high p ro p o rtio n of
                               from th e interview , a n d th e p h y sic ia n ’s interpersonal                   patients d o n o t u n d e rs ta n d o r rem em ber w hat thcir
: B uckman, frc p ,
 I oncologist
                               skills also largely d e te rm in e th e p a tie n t’s satisfaction                 phvsicians tell th e m a b o u t diagnosis and tre a tm e n t.'-
                              and com pliance a n d positively influence health                                   C ultural differences also im p ed e the w ork with
e for Studies in              o u tc o m es.'-' Such sk ills, in c lu d in g active listening to                  p atie n ts.'1’*
  M edicine,                  p atien ts’ concerns, are am o n g th e qualities o f a                                P atien t anx iety a n d dissatisfaction is related to
 -sity o f W estern           physician m ost desired b y p a tie n ts .' In creasing public                     u n certain ty and lack o f in form ation, explanation,
 o, L o n do n, Ontario,      dissatisfaction w ith ih e m edical pro fessio n is, in good                       and feedback from th e d o c to r. Yet docto rs ofter.
 1N 6A 5C 1                   p a rt, related to deficiencies in clinical com m unication.                       m isperceive th e a m o u n t a n d type o f inform ation
 jtewan,PHD,                  Studies in m any c o u n tries have c o n firm e d that serious                    patients w a n t. T h e lang uage doctors use is often
 •   o f fam ily medicine
                              com m un icatio n p ro b le m s are c o m m o n in clinical                        unclear, b o th as re g a rd s th e use o f jargon a n d in
 ResuKh                       practice.                                                                          relation to a lack o f th e expected shared m eanings of
  gn I ^ P ologicai              T h is consensus sta te m e n t ad d resses three issues:                       relatively co m m o n te rm s.
     G & .-P, Christie        W h at are th e m o st im p o rta n t facts w e already know
 ;l, M anchester M29         ab o u t d o cto r-p atien t c o m m u n ic a tio n ? W h at are the                COMMUNICATION PRACTICES IN RELATION TO OUTCOME'
                             m ost im p o rta n t th ings th a t could b e d one now to                               T h e q u a lity o f clinical com m unication is related tc
 ag u ire, FRCPSYCH,         im pro ve the situ atio n ? a n d , W h a t are the m ost                            positive health o u tc o m e s .'1“ R eduction ir. bjooc
                             im p o rta n t unansw ered q u estio n s?                                            pressure w as significantly g reater in patients w ho,
 aen t o f M edicine,                                                                                             d u rin g visits to th e d o c to r, had been allowed to express
 rk U niversity                                                                                                   their h ealth c o n c e rn s          w ith o u t interrup tions.
                             W h a t a re th e m o s t im p o r ta n t fa c ts w e alread y know
 if M edicine, New                                                                                                C on cordance b etw een p h y sician an d patient ir. id e n ti­
                             a b o u t d o c to r-p a tie n t c o m m u n ic a tio n ?
 SA                                                                                                               fying the n a tu re a n d seriou sness o f th e clinical problem
 p k in , MD, director,      PROBLEMS IN PRACTICE                                                                is related to im p ro v in g o r resolving the p ro b lem .” -’-'
 f primary care                 C om m u nication p ro b lem s in m ed ical practicc arc                            E xplaining and u n d e rs ta n d in g patient concerns,
                             both im p o rtan t and c o m m o n . F o r ex am p le, 54% of                       ever, w hen th e y ca n n o t b e resolved, re s u lt' in :
 university School of        patient com plaints and 45% o f p a u e n t concerns arc not                        significant fall in a n x ie ty ." G reater participation by the
 e. Providence,
                             elicited by p h y sician s.’ Psychosocial an d psychiatric                          patient in th e e n c o u n te r im proves satisfaction anc
  land, USA
 .'ovack, m d ,              problem s are com m o n in general m ed ical prsctice, b ut                         com pliance1 an d o u tc o m e o f treatm ent (for exam ple,
 orofessor o f               these diagnoses arc m issed in up to 50% o f eases.*r In                           control o f d iab etes a n d h y p e r t e n s i o n ) . T h e !;vel o:’
 y health                    50% o f visits the p atien t an d th e d o c to r d o not agree on                 psychological distress in p atien ts w ith serious ilir.ess is
                            the n atu re o f the m ain p re s e n tin g p r o b l e m ." In one                 less w hen they perceive them selves to have received
 la n c e r Institute,      study p atien ts w ere in te rr u p te d b y physicians so soon                     adequate inform ation.--’ *
 M argaret Hospital         after they began d escrib in g th e ir p re s e n tin g problem s                       Beneficial clinical com m unication is feasible
   O ntario, Canada         (on average w ithin 18 seconds) th a t th e y failed to                             routinely in clinical p ractice and C3n be achieved
  1, rifD, senior
                            disclose orher signi/icanr c o n c e rn s .10 M o st com plaints                    d u rin g n o rm al clinical e n c o u n te rs, w ithout unduly
                            by the p u b lic ab out physicians deal n o t w ith clinical                        prolonging th e m , p ro v id e d that the clinician has
     dcncc to: Dr           com p ctencv p ro b le m s, b u t w ith com m unication                             learned the relevant te c h n iq u e s .11u
                            p ro b lem s," and the m a jo rity o f m a lp ractice allegations
                            arise from co m m u n ic a tio n errors.'-' R esidents or                       EDUCATIONAL ISSUES
                            tra in e e s "   and   p ra c iiM H i;   p liv-.iC ians'                              Tt' become effective co m m unic ato rs , phys:cians
When Ian was lifted onto the pitch he was placed in a position
close to the goal mouth.  His brother 3oe was with him when a
police officer pronounced him dead and covered his face with a
pullover.  Joe and a group of fans carried Ian on a makeshift
stretcher to the gymnasium where he was examined by a doctor who
found a pulse on him and attempted resuscitation (NB this was
approximately twenty minutes after the police officer had
pronounced him dead).  I believe that this issue was inadequately
dealt with at the inquest and request that a detailed explanation
is sought at the soon to be resumed inquests by falling the
relevant witnesses.

There are three issues relating to the notification of Ian's deatn
and his identification which I feel need addressing: v

<.a)   On the evening of the disaster I travelled to Earnsley
       hospital to see my injured son, Joe (having been informed c l '
       his whereabouts by my other son John).  The police at this
       stage knew that Ian was dead (Joe had identified him i m t h e
       gymnasium in the afternoon).  However, an official* at tiW
       hospital checked a computer print-out and informed me that;
       Ian was alive because he was not on the list.                \

'(b)   When I was at the gymnasium and before I had looked at the
       photographs of the deceased I was told by a policeman in *•
       reception area that both Ian and. Joe were dead.

<c V   Whilst I was being given the above information in Yorkshire i
       police officer visited my home in Liverpool and informed my
       wife that Joe was injured yet made no mention or Ian
       though It was acme three and a half hours since      had
       unofficially identified him in the gymnasium giving his name
       and address to a police officer.

I request that witnesses be called to explain how this inacc;:ru!-«
information was d i~seminar.ed . Moreover . an official cvaip i-a h i ■'
made by myself regarding the actions of .South Yorkshire poLioe
                U   U U   i . 5 1 1 W i. u u   »
