                                                                                                M I R . 15




    OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and tim e raised     *   |     ^   D -_____        Number


                                                                                                                      CS«+',=N o
    T itle




'
    (Include source and any document number i f relevant)


         feiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                  c    "I o'

                                                                                                                          Receiver




                                                                                                                           Indexer
    D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

    No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                      Statem ent Reader
    Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                           Indexer
    Indexed as indicated                                        'Stt     ~Tm P         Q*S> .
    No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                                   S IO
    Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




                                                                                                                           Indexer
    Further action No(s)


    When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master N um ber Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER
          OH THE 15th OF APRIL 1989


           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

               CHRISTOPHER EDWARDS




                      Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, B S , MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                        At

              The Memorial Hall,
                  City Hall,
                  Sheffield.

                        On

          Thursday,   19th April,     1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                        APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN            Trent Regional Health Authority and
                            South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                            Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY              Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE              Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN            Police Federation of England and
                            Wales

MR. P. ISAACS               Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and        Chief Constable,   South Yorkshire
MR. P., METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S., CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.    JACKSON
                    A


                                                        INDEX


                    B   PROF. JAMES CRESSEY ELPHINSTONE UNDERWOOD - Called

                         By THE CORONER    .....................................


                        POLICE CONSTABLE GILLIAN PARKES - Called

                          By THE CORONER   .....................................


                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                          By THE CORONER   .....................................



                    D
                                                     — oo— oo—




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        19th April    1990

                                (INQUEST     INTO THE DEATH OF CHRI STOPHER E D W A R D S )

                               THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser,         are you representing the
                          family in this case?

                               MR. FRASER:   Yes, sir.  Mr. and Mrs. Edwards are
                          present in Court and they are with their Social Worker.

                    B           THE CORONER:   Mr. and Mrs.         Edwards,   where are you,
                           just so that I can see you?

                                MR.    FRASER:    They are over here,      sir.

                               THE CORONER:   Were you here yesterday?   You weren't.
                          The reason why I ask is that if you weren't here I just want
                          to very briefly describe and tell you what we are going to
                    C     do so that you aren't surprised.   What we are going to do is
                          that I am going to read the original evidence as given right
                          at the beginning last April.  Then one or two people are
                          going to come and give evidence.   Nearly all of those have
                          already taken the oath because we did that earlier on in
                          respect of everybody but if you partic ularly want to hear
                          them resworn then if you will tell Mr. Fraser he will ask me
                    D     and that can be done.  We don't think it is necessary but
                          whatever you wish.  Then they will take us through the
                          evidence in so far as we are able to deal with it today.
                          Mr. Fraser will then ask any questions which he thinks are
                          relevant and which I can allow.   Is that clear?  ( ind icat in.g
                          agreement)   Good.

                                Now this is a resumed Inquest which was opened on the
                    E      18th April 1989 and on that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin,
                           Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

                                "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                                identified to PC 1958 Hill of the South Yprkshire
                                Police as that of Christopher Edwards by Malcolm
                                Ramsey, his friend.  He was 29 years of age having been
                                born on 11th May 1959 at Sutton."
                    F
                           I will come to that      in a minute.

                                "He was a single man and he lived at _______________
                                                 South Wirral.   He was a steelworker by
                                occupat io n . He died at Hillsb orough Football Ground
                                following an incident there on Saturday, 15th April
                                1989.   PC Hill caused the body to be removed to the
                    G           Medico-Legal Centre and there he identified it to
                                Detective Cons table Simon Wei gold who subsequently
                                identified the same body to Prof. Underwood.     It is the
                                family wish that the body should be buried."



                                                              1
                    H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                      PROF.   J. C. E. UNDERWOOD

                             I then adjourned the Inquest.    We sent the form to the
                             family fairly soon after the event and Mr. Sidney Arthur
                             Edwards signed it to verify the facts.      I think the only
                             error you noted was that he was actually born at Bebbington.
                             That is right, i s n ’t it? (indicating a g r e e m e n t )

                                  Mr. Fraser, we have descr ibed him as steelworker in one
                             place and steelmaker in another.   Which is the term that the
                    B        family would prefer to use?

                                  MR.   FRASER:   Steelworker,     sir.

                                  THE CORONER:   We took evidence yesterday of all the
                             alcohol levels and I can tell you that Dr. Forrest told us
                             that the level of alcohol in the case of Christopher was
                             negative.  We will now take the evidence of the pathologist.
                             I think it is Prof. Underwood, i s n ’t it?

                               PROF. JAMES CRESSEY ELPHINSTONE UNDER WOOD was         called
                               and took the following o a t h ;

                                  THE CORONER:    Prof. Underwood, I think you were in
                             Court and so you will know there is a slightly modified
                    D        version of the oath.   If you would take it please.

                                  "I swear by Almighty God that the evidence I shall give
                                  shall be the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the
                                  truth in respect of each of the bodies on which I
                                  perfo rmed a post mortem examination as a result of an
                                  incident which occurred at the Hillsborough Football
                                  Stadium on 15th April 1989."
                    E
                                                    Bv THE C O R O N E R ;

                        Q. Good morning? - A. Good morning,          sir.

                        Q. Prof. Underwood, would you please give me your full names,
                           your job description and your qualifications please? -
                        A. Prof. James Cressey Elphinstone Underwood.    I am Professor
                           of Pathology at the Un iversity of Sheff ield and Consultant
                           Histopathologist to the Sheffield Health Authority.     I am a
                           Doctor of Medicine and a Fellow of the Royal College of
                           Pathologists.

                        Q.   I think I am right in sayi ng that you were at the
                             Medico-Legal Centre at about 9.30 on the Sunday when there
                             was a general identification carried out? - A. That is
                             correct, s i r .

                        Q. By Simon Weigold.  You rnay not have known him by name but
                           there was an Officer there, that is right, isn't it? -
                        A. That is correct, sir.


                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                     PROF.   J. C. E- UNDERMOOD

                        Q.   I take it that you also looked at any docu ments and the tags
                             on the people on whom you carried out post mortems? - A-
                             Yes, sir.

                        Q. You are quite sati sfied that we are in this case talking
                           about fatality No. 38 who was identified and who you now
                           know to be Christopher- Edwards'? — A. I am satisfied with the
                    B      identification, sir.

                        Q. Prof. Underwood, would you be kind enough to tell us the
                           cause of death and outline fox' me the basis on which you
                           make that finding? - A. Yes, sir.   The cause of death is
                           traumatic asphyxia.  I found no evidence of any naturally
                           occurring disease which would have contributed to death or
                           would have accelerated death in any way.   Evidence for my
                    C      cause of death of traumatic asphyxia is provided by the
                           external appearance of the body which showed an extreme
                           degree of congestion of the skin in the upper part of the
                           body, small haemorrhages of the membranes around the eyes
                           and the respiratory passages and mouth.

                                  Internally, there were similar small haemorrhages on
                             the coverings of internal organs and there was also one rib
                    D        fracture on the left side consistent with comp ression of the
                             chest.

                        Q.   I accept that-  Just to clarify it, it is possible to break
                             ribs when one attempts cardiac, artificial respiration.   Are
                             there any views on that being the cause for it? - A. I have
                             no knowledge that cardiac res uscitation was attempted in
                             this case.  I would say though, sir, in such a young
                    E        individual with pliable ribs and a rib cage it is unusual to
                             find rib fractures as a result of external cardiac massage.

                        Q. Even if it had happened, it wouldn't be a crit icism of
                           anybody who did it because it happens in hospitals quite
                           often in cases, doesn't it? - A. Indeed so, sir*, that is
                           correct.
                    F
                        Q.   I really wanted to exclude that point? - A. Yes.

                                    THE CORONER:     Mr.   Fraser.

                                    MR.   FRASER:   The family have no questions,     sir,   thank
                             you.

                    G                 THE CORONER:      Any questions from anybody?  (no
                             r e s p o n s e ). Have you followed that, ladies and gentlemen?
                             Prof. Underwood, I am most grateful to you.         I cannot
                             recollect.         Are you in any other cases today? - A. Not
                             today.



                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                            P.C.   G. PARKES

                        Q. You are very welcome to stay, of course, but if you wish to
                           be excused it will be perfectly all right? - A- I will stay
                           until the end of this case, sir, thank you.

                                   THE CORONER:   Can we have the pr esenting Officer
                             pi ease?

                    B                POLICE CONSTABLE GILLIAN PARKES - C a l l e d :

                                                   Bv THE C O R O N E R ;

                        Q.   You have already taken the oath? - A.          I have,   sir-

                        Q.   Co uld you tell us your name so that we have it for the
                             record and so that the Edwardes know as well? - A. I am
                             Gillian Parkes, Police Cons table of the West Midlands Police
                             Force.

                        Q. You have in front of you a copy of the summary,               haven't you?
                        A. I have, sir, yes.

                        Q. Can you in your own time just state it to me please? - A. At
                           about 1200 hours on Saturday, 15th April 1989, Mr. Malcolm
                    D      Ramsey travelled with his son and Chri stopher Edwards by
                           private car to Sheffield.  They intended watching the Semi
                           Final football match at the Hillsborough Stadium.   They
                           arrived at the stadium and entered the Leppings Lane
                           turnstiles at about 1440 hours that day.   Mr. Ramsey and his
                           son left Christopher inside the stadium as they had seat
                           tickets and Christopher was in possession of a standing
                    E      terrace ticket.

                                  Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
                             terracing, Police Sergeant Hemmingway entered Enclosure 3
                             and attempted to resuscitate a man now known to be
                             Christopher Edwards whom he found lying on the terrace.   The
                             Officer was unable to revive him and left him to assist
                             others.

                                  Police Constables Baldwin, Coney and Smith, together
                             with Police Inspector Woodward, lifted a man, now known to
                             be Christopher Edwards, from Enclosure 3 and passed him out
                             through a gate to other Officers.

                                     Chief Superintendent Nesbitt and Police Constable
                             Buxton recall assisting to pass Christopher Edwards along a
                    ^        line of Officers at the gate from Enclosure 3 and on to the
                             pi t c h .

                                  Police Constable Whiteley saw Chri stopher Edwards lying
                             on the pitch being treated by unidentified persons.   The
                             Officer was assisted by Police Constables Ibbotson and


                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                               P.C.   G- PARKES

                             Hudson, Police Sergeant Turner and Sean David Parkin, a
                             steward at the football ground that day, to carry
                             Mr. Edwards, Christopher, to the gymnasium where a temporary
                             mortuary had been set up.

                                  Police Sergeant Turner recalls that res uscitation was
                             attempted on the pitch by persons, including a doctor, who
                    B        have not been identified.

                                  At about 1548 hours, Police Constable Hill assumed
                             responsibility for Chri stopher at the gymnasium. At 1550
                             hours, Dr. Allan Paul Redgrave examined Christopher at the
                             temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

                                  At about 0025 hours on Sunday, 16th April 1989,
                             Mr. Malcolm Ramsey identified the body of Christopher to
                             Police Constable Hill at the temporary mortuary.   PC Hill
                             later escorted the body of Chr istopher to the Medico-Legal
                             Centre where he confirmed the identification to Detective
                             Constable Weigold.

                                  At 0325 hours on Sunday, 16th April 1989, Mrs. Sheila
                    D        Mavis Edwards confirmed the identification of her son to
                             Detective Constable Ellis at the Medico-Legal Centre.

                                  On Sunday, 16th April 1989, following identification by
                             Detective Constable Weigold, Prof. James Underwood carried
                             out an autopsy and submitted a report giving his cause of
                             death.

                    E             Found in the personal effects of Christopher was a full
                             ticket for the match but Mr. Ramsey states that they had
                             entered via a turnstile.   It has been established, however,
                             that there was considerable chaos at the turnst iles at
                             Leppings Lane and spectators were admitted without
                             surrendering their tickets.

                                    THE CORONER:     Any quest ions of this Officer?

                                    MR. FRASER:     The family have no questions,            sir,   thank
                             you.

                                     THE CORONER:    Is that clear?        Thank you very much
                             in d e e d .

                                     DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - C a l l e d ;
                    G
                                                      Bv THE C O R O N E R ;

                        Q.   Inspector? - A. Yes, sir, Michael Layton, Detective
                             Inspector, West Midlands Police.  Sir, in respect of
                             Christopher I have made examination of visual evidence

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                    D .I . M . LAYTON

                             available and Mr. Edwards has been identified on visual
                             evidence being carried across the pitch.   Police Sergeant
                             H emmingway of the South Yorkshire Police has signed a plan
                             of the terraces indicating at which point he found
                             Christopher.

                    g             Police Constable Whiteley, again of the South Yorkshire
                             Police, has also signed a plan of the pitch indicating where
                             he found Christopher.

                                   A number of photographs showing Christopher being
                             carried across the pitch have been found including a
                             photograph which bears a reference number NGN1/29.   The
                             persons who are shown on that photograph carrying
                             C hristopher have, in fact, confirmed that identification.

                        Q.   Your plans I think are MWJL62,   is that right'? - A. That   is
                             correct, sir, yes.

                        Q. What number is that?     C10.

                                  THE CORONER:      Mr. and Mrs. Edwards, don't worry about
                    D        all these numbers and so on.     We have to deal with them so
                             that we can understand it later if we ever need to read the
                             papers again.  D o n ’t worry about it, all right?

                        Q    Is there another one as well of yours? - A. No, there is
                             another plan refere nced MJH/1.

                        Q. We will give that No. C 1 1. I think that should really be
                    E      sufficient probably,  Can you come and show us on the big
                           pi an?

                                   THE CORONER:     Mr. and Mrs. Edwards, what we are doing,
                             we d o n ’t want to use the photographs if we can-avoid it for
                             all kinds of reasons which solicitors will be able to
                             explain to you if you need.     We are trying to use plans    It
                             is easy to understand and it is also I think less hurtful.

                        Q.   Yes? - A. Can we refer, first of all, to the plan MJH1 of
                             the te rracing? This was prepared by Sergeant Hemmingway-
                             The point at which he believes he found Chri stopher at this
                             stage apparently dead was in this location here (indicat i n g )
                             which is Enclosure No. 3.

                    G   Q-   Just so that we have it, you are pointing just above a
                             barrier which is, in fact, very close to the barrier which
                             broke? - A. Yes, that is right, sir.  That is the section
                             that remained.

                        Q. The other plan is actually visual evidence of Christopher
                           when he is dead but when he is being carried across the

                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                         D. I. M. LAYTON

                           pitch at various locations? - A. Yes,          perhaps I can go to
                           the bottom plan?'

                        Q. Please? - A . As you can see the photographs show movement of
                           Christopher across the pitch the first location being around
                           here ( indicat in.g) just- outside the Leppings Lane end penalty
                    B      area.   Me have another photograph just slightly further on
                           here and then another one further down towards the Spion Kop
                           area of the pitch.

                        Q. Thank you very much    indeed.   - A. Yes,     sir.

                                THE CORONER:   Is that all clear?           Are there any
                           questions you want to ask?

                                MR. FRASER:      No questions,    sir.

                                THE CORONER:      Anything you want to ask Inspector
                           Layton?

                                 MR. FRASER:     No   sir, thank you.

                    D            THE CORONER:          Anybody else want to ask any questions?
                           (no r e s p o n s e )   Ladies and gentlemen, is that all reasonably
                           clear.      Is it clear to you?       Mere you able to see, Mr. and
                           Mrs. Edwards?         (indicating  agreement-)   In most- cases there
                           are 1oads and         loads of other  plans  and  I haven't necessarily
                           seen them all         but I select  the ones  which  I think give a
                           suff icient overview, if you like, of movement and what
                           happened.
                    E
                                M R . FRASER: Sir, I think for the record the blood
                           alcohol level has not been mentioned.

                                 THE CORONER:    Hasn't it? Oh, I thought I had
                           mentioned it but I am pleased to do it again because in this
                           pa rticular case it is negative.    I thought I had mentioned
                           it but I    may have forgotten. Dr. Forrest has given us the
                           evidence    on the alcohol and, as I said, in the case of
                           C hristopher it was negative.

                                Now that is all the evidence we are going to take with
                           regard to Christopher today.  Mr. and Mrs. Edwards, I am
                           grateful to you for coming.  Thank you very much indeed.  I
                           am very, very sorry that this tragedy has struck your
                           family.  It is difficult to find suitable words but just
                           accept my sympathy.  Thank you very much indeed.  Me will
                           rise for a moment or two while we get ready for the next
                           Inquest.

                              (The Inquest- into the death of CHRISTOPHER EDWARDS
                                       was adjo urned to a date to be f i x e d )

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
