OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                 Date and tim e raised   T* \ r[qo              Num ber



Title

(Include source and any document number i f relevant)
mj
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es/N o       ____
                                                                                                                 Receiver




                                                                                                                 Indexer
Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                             Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                 Indexer
Indexed as indicated                        ~ T ^ -v P

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                             Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
      HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SO UTH YO R K S H I R E
                          (WEST D I S T R I C T )



              I N Q U E S T S INTO THE DEATHS O F THE

        V I C T I M S O F THE H I L L SBO ROU GH F O O T B A L L

                        S T A D IUM DISASTER

                   O N THE 15TH APRIL,              1989



                 INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


                 CHRISTOPHER BARRY DEVONSIDE




                                 Before

DR.    S.L.    POPPER,      LL.B,     B.MED.Sci,          B M , B S , MR C G P

                   (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                                     At

                  The Medico-Legal Centre,
                       Watery Street,
                         Sheffield.

                                     On

                        26th April,          1990




                  T R A N S C R I P T OF P R O C E E D I N G S




         From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
              O f f i c i a l Shorthand Writers,
          55, Q u e e n Street, S h eff iel d SI 2DX
                    A




                                                    INDEX
                    B                                       Page


                        OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER       1


                        PROF. J. S. P. JONES Called

                           By The    Coroner                   3


                        POL.   INSP. H. R. SAWERS Called

                           By The    Coroner                   4

                    D
                        PET.   INSP. M. LAYTON Called

                           By The    Coroner                   7




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        26th April,   1990


                        INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF CHRISTOPHER BARRY DEVONSIDE


                             MR FRASER:   Sir, you are n o w going to hear
                        evidence about Christopher Devonside.     Christopher's
                        mum and dad are in Court with several members of his
                        family and a social worker.  Christopher's cnura and dad
                    B   are represented by a practice wh i c h is a member of ray
                        group and I therefore appear on the usual basis, as
                        their agents.

                             THE CORONER:   Yes.  Mr. Devonside, I know that
                        you, were here on the first day so you have an idea
                        about the procedure, the general format.  Do you want
                        me to recount it again for other members of the family
                    C   so that they can follow?  I will do, just very briefly.

                             MR. B. W. DEVOWSIDE:     Yes,   please.

                             THE COROWER:   Basically what will happen is that
                        I am going to read to you in a moment the evidence
                        which was taken on 18th April, 1989, and the way I do
                        it, I read it as it is written down, mistakes and all,
                    D   because that is the evidence which was given.     Then I
                        correct any mistakes wh i c h there are.  Having done that
                        I will tell you, what the alcohol levels are, w h i ch I
                        know you know already of course, because you were here
                        the first day, but I still tell you.     Then we are going
                        to call Prof. Stephen Jones who is going to deal w ith
                        the post mortem evidence.
                    E        When that has been completed, the West Midlands
                        Police Officer who is presenting the summary will come
                        and do that and when he has completed his evidence
                        Inspector Layton will deal with the visual evidence,
                        and then when that has finished we will conclude the
                        hearing.

                    F        Two other points that need to be made, and I say
                        this to everybody, particularly when Inspector Layton
                        speaks he has to refer to the various plans and maps
                        and videos, and he gives all the references.   That
                        breaks the flow, if you like, of the text.   We need the
                        references so that we have got a proper record of them,
                        but when you are listening try and switch off while all
                        the numbers are being said, so that you can pick up the
                    G   sense of what is being said rather than the detailed
                        location, but it is up to you, of course.  When
                        Inspector Layton has finished he comes over here and
                        demonstrates on these big plans anything that he has
                        mentioned to me which is relevant.



                    H
                                              - 1 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             This then is the resumed Inquest which was opened
                        on 18th April, 1989.   On that occasion Neil Anthony
                        Parkin, Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

                             "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has
                             been identified to PS 1073 Bown of the South
                             Yorkshire Police as that of Christopher Barry
                             Devonside, by Barry William Devonside, his father,
                             lie was 18 years of age, having been born on 1st
                             April, 1971, at Bebington, W i r r a l . H e was a
                    B        single m an and he lived at
                                      Liverpool.  He was a college student by
                             occupation.

                            He died at Hillsborough Football Ground following
                            an incident there on Saturday 15th April, 1989.
                            PS Bown caused the body to be removed to the
                            Medico-Legal Centre and there he identified it to
                    C       Detective Constable Simon Weigold, who
                            subsequently identified the same body to Prof.
                            Jones.  It is the family wish that the body should
                            be cremated."

                        and then I adjourned the Inquest and, as I did in every
                        case, we wrote to check whether we had all the details
                        right and in fact you, Mr. Devonside, signed the form
                    D   on 25th - I think it is the 25th May actually, you
                        signed it - and you confirmed that by that time we had
                        got the spelling of the name right, and that it is
                        "Devon", with an "o", Devonside, and that the address
                        was right, and indeed everything was correct.  The only
                        thing that I want to check is the place of birth was
                        shown as Bebington, Wirral, and we have shown Bebington
                        with two "b',s, Hr. Fraser. Can you help on that?
                    E
                             HR FRASER:   If you have, sir, it is erroneous.
                        There are two "b"s in it but they are not together.

                             THE CORONER:     All right, with three " b " s , this is
                        what I mean.

                             HR FRASER:     No,   there should only be two - B-e-b-
                    F   i-n-g-t-o-n.

                             THE CORONER:   Thank you.   I knew that I had seen
                        it with a double "b".  The blood alcohol was estimated
                        by Dr. Forrest and he gave evidence on the first day,
                        and the level in the case of Christopher was measured
                        at 32 mg. per 100 ml., and there is just one minor
                    G   thing - I want to go back to the details - we have
                        described Christopher either as a student or in one
                        place as a college student.  Which description would
                        your client prefer on the whole?   It does not make any
                        difference to me.

                             HR. B. W. DEVONSIDE:         College student.

                H
                                                  - 2 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                       PROF. J. S. P. JONES


                             THE CORONER:       College student.

                              PROF. JOHH STEPHEN PHILLIPS JONES Called

                                              By THE C O R O N E R :

                        Perhaps you could just repeat your name for Hr.
                        Devonside? - A. Yes, John Stephen Phillips Jones, Home
                        Office Pathologist and Consultant Pathologist in
                        Nottingham, and Professor of Forensic Medicine in the
                    B   University of Nottingham.

                             The body of Christopher Barry Devonside, which was
                        designated number 17, was identified to me by Detective
                        Constable Weigold.  At that time the spelling was
                        "Devenside", and as you say, sir, it has n o w been
                        corrected to Devonside.  I found on examination that
                        this was a well built young man of average stature and
                        good general physique.  There was very severe cyanosis
                        of the head, neck, shoulders and fingertips.    By
                        cyanosis I mean a blue discoloration, and there were
                        also multiple little haemorrhages present on the
                        surface of the eyelids and the eyes.

                             Further examination showed that there were several
                        minor injuries on the face and on the front of the
                    D   chest and on the knees and arms.  These injuries were
                        mainly bruises and abrasions and some of them were
                        caused by the friction of clothing on the surface of
                        the skin.  These injuries on their own wer e very minor
                        in their severity and they in no way contributed or
                        caused death.

                             Further examination revealed these petechial
                    E   haemorrhages, wh i c h are multiple little pinpoint
                        haemorrhages, that these were present on some of the
                        organs of the body, particularly of the heart and the
                        lungs, and the presence of these and the cyanosis led
                        me to the conclusion that Mr. Devonside had died as a
                        result of traumatic asphyxia.     There was no evidence of
                        any natural disease and no evidence of any injury which
                        might have contributed to death.

                             THE CORONER:       Mr. Fraser?

                             MR FRASER:   Christopher's family have no
                        questions, sir, but I suspect that they might like to
                        spend a few minutes wit h Prof. Jones, if he would be
                        good enough to spare them sometime.

                             T H E WITNESS:     I would be very pleased to, yes.

                             THE CORONER:   Prof. Jones, you are going to leave
                        us in a moment to see the other family? - A. Yes.  I
                        will wait until the end of this Inquest.


                    H
                                                    3 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                          PROF. J. S. P. JONES
                                                                                  M. R. SAUERS


                                THE CORONER:   The parents are not wanting to see
                           Prof. Jones, is that right?

                                MR FRASER:   They originally expressed an
                           intention to do so, sir.

                                T H E CORONER:     I see,    I misunderstood.

                                MR FRASER:   No, it is in view of what was
                    B      actually said in your Court they may not need to, I
                           don't know.  Emotions run very high, and they change
                           obviously.

                                THE CORONER:      Yes,    indeed.

                        Q. Yes, if you would be so kind, Professor, but before you
                           leave, Prof. Jones, this, I think, is the last Inquest
                    C      that you are actually dealing with before me in
                           connection with the Hillsborough deceased, isn't it? -
                           A. Yes.

                        Q. And Prof. Jones, I would just like to take this
                           opportunity of thanking you for the way you have given
                           your evidence in every single one of these, and I
                           believe there were about 13 that you dealt with, and
                    D      the fact that you have been so willing, and indeed I
                           know that you have spent time with a lot of families,
                           which I am certain is a matter of great appreciation,
                           and I particularly want to thank you because on the day
                           in question, I don't know whether you still remember
                           the 15th, you were in fact the first person apart from
                           the Police Authority, who contacted me and you offered
                           to come w ith me and I found your presence and your
                    E      support invaluable, and I want to thank you personally
                           for your great kindness to me and your support.      Thank
                           you, and on behalf of the families for the way you have
                           dealt w i t h things. - A. Thank you very muc h for those
                           very kind remarks.

                                 POL.   INSP. MAT TH E W ROBERT SAUERS C a l l e d :
                    F                            By THE C O R O N E R :

                                THE WITNESS:   Matthew Robert Sawers,             sir,
                           Inspector, West Midlands Police.

                        Q. Would you, when you are ready, take me through the
                           summary, please? - A. Yes, sir.  At 1015 hours on
                    G      Saturday 15th April, 1989, Mr. Barry William Devonside
                           left home with his son Christopher Barry Devonside to
                           travel to Sheffield.  It was their intention to attend
                           the FA Cup Semi Final football match at Hillsborough
                           Stadium.  They travelled by car with Jason Kenworthy
                           and two other friends, arriving in Sheffield at about
                           1330 hours.

                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                       11. R. SAWERS


                                The group then made their way on foot towards the
                           stadium.  Hear to the ground Barry Devonside left the
                           others and made his way to the North Stand.  That is a
                           deliberate correction, sir, to the summary.

                        Q. Yes. - A. The other members of the group had tickets
                           for the West Stand and Christopher and Jason Kenworthy
                           had tickets for the West Stand terraces.

                               Jason Kenworthy and Christopher entered the
                    B     stadium via the Leppings Lane turnstiles and went down
                          the tunnel and into enclosure number 3, where they took
                          up a position about half way down behind the centre of
                          the right hand side of the goalmouth.     At this point
                          they were standing with James Thomas.     After the
                          referee and players came onto the pitch at 1457 hours
                          but before the match kicked off at 1459 hours, there
                          was a surge in the crowd wh i c h caused all three men to
                    C     be forced forward.  Christopher was pushed out of sight
                          of his two companions.

                               Jason Kenworthy was able to leave the enclosure
                          via Gate 3 and afterwards saw Christopher being laid
                          down on the pitch by stewards who have not been
                          identified.

                    D          At about 1515 hours, following the severe crushing
                          in the West Stand terracing Hr. Raymond John Lloyd, who
                          is employed as a steward by Liverpool Football Club,
                          was on the pitch assisting casualties when he came
                          across a man now known to be Christopher.  With
                          assistance from Jason Kenworthy and Police Sergeant
                          Bown, Mr. Lloyd carried Christopher into the gymnasium
                          on a temporary stretcher.  Police Sergeant Bown
                    E     remained with Christopher, who was initially identified
                          to him by Jason Kenworthy.

                                At 1540 hours Christopher was examined by a doctor
                           whose details were not obtained, who pronounced life
                           extinct.

                    F           At 1700 hours Dr. Edward Birkby examined
                           Christopher in the g ymnasium and certified life
                           extinct.

                                Later that evening Barry Devonside identified the
                           body of his son to Police Sergeant Bown who shortly
                           afterwards accompanied Christopher's body here, to the
                           Medico-Legal Centre, where identification was confirmed
                    G      to DC Weigold.

                                On Sunday 16th April, following identification by
                           DC Weigold, Prof. Stephen Jones carried out an autopsy
                           and submitted a report giving cause of death.



                H
                                                - 5 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                          M. R. SAWERS


                               Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
                          blood sample from Christopher, where the presence of
                          ethanol was detected.  The witnesses proving continuity
                          of the blood sample are Mr. Philip Rich, Detective
                          Sergeant Turner and Detective Sergeant Fletcher.   Dr.
                          Alexander Forrest carried out the analysis.

                               I would add, sir, that a part match ticket was
                          recovered from Christopher's personal effects and this
                          has been returned to his father.
                    B
                        Q. Jason Kenworthy, at page 12, talks about the time they
                           arrived at the Leppings Lane entrance.  I think he said
                           about 2.30, is that right? - A. That is correct, sir,
                           yes.

                        Q. And that is, in fact, the only time that he actually
                           mentions with regard to getting into the ground.  He
                    C      says on page 13 that they went to individual
                           turnstiles, but he doesn't say what time it is, is that
                           correct? - A. Could you just bear with me a moment,
                           sir?

                        Q. Yes, certainly.   - A. That is correct,   sir, yes.

                        Q. I can't remember, was James Thomas with Christopher or
                    D      not, or had he separated? - A. James Thomas was in the
                           enclosure, sir.

                        Q. But did they enter together or not, or did they meet
                           up? - A. It is true to say, sir, that once his father
                           had left him, Christopher and Jason Kenworthy joined up
                           w ith a group of some nine other people who were all
                           known to each other, and whilst not always together
                    E      side by side, they were certainly loosely connected as
                           a group in the same area of the enclosure, sir.

                        Q. Shall we then try James Thomas's statement? - A. Yes,
                           sir.

                        Q. I am just trying to pin, as far as one is able, the
                    F      times.  Page 24, at the top it says the time would have
                           been about 2.25 p.m. - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. And he talks about meeting somebody and that they had
                           met Christopher and, in fact, dad as well? - A. That is
                           correct, sir, yes.

                        Q. And they met them at 1.45, he says, earlier,     somewhere
                    G      near a gateway? - A. He does.

                        Q. And then about four or five lines further down they say
                           they walked down to the ground, "We arrived at about
                           2.30"? - A. He does say that, sir, yes.

                        Q. Which ties in with the earlier statement, and then if
                           you look at the next paragraph, he says it took about
                H
                                                  - 6 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                     M. R. SAWERS
                                                                                        M. LAYTON


                             ten minutes to get through the turnstiles,              is that
                             right? - A. He does, sir, yes.

                        Q.   And then they waited, I think, inside for everybody
                             else to join them? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

                        Q. And what time does he say they all met up? - A. He
                           says:

                    B             "By the time we had all met up it was about 2.45
                                  p.m . "

                             He goes on to name the group on the following page,
                             sir.

                        Q. Yes, that is right, and that includes Christopher,
                           doesn't it? - A. It does, sir, yes.

                        Q.    And then he says they went down the tunnel and he
                             thinks the time was between 2.50 and 2.55? - A. He
                             does, sir, yes.

                                  THE CORONER:         Mr. Fraser?

                                  HR FRASER:        Christopher's family have no
                    D        questions, sir,      thank you.

                                  THE CORONER:    Actually,          I think Mr.   Devonside
                             does have something.

                                  MR FRASER:   There just seems to be a slight
                             confusion about the time Christopher might have got
                             into Pen 3, sir.  His father recalls seeing him from
                    E        another part of the ground at about 20-to-3 in the pen,
                             and that would mean that the time he was going down the
                             tunnel might not be right.  I appreciate times are
                             difficult but is it possible for you to - perhaps the
                             visual evidence will help on that?

                                  DET.   INSP.    M. LAYTON:        I think I will be able to
                             assist.

                                      THE CORONER:      Let's wait and see what the visual
                             evidence is.         When people estimate times it is
                             exceedingly difficult, isn't it?          Any questions?  (No
                             r e s p o n s e ; Thank you very muc h indeed.  Shall we have
                             the visual evidence?

                                         DET.    INSP. MI C H A E L LAYTON Called:

                                                     By THE C O R O N E R :

                                  THE WITNESS:   Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
                             Inspector, West Midlands Police.  Sir, an examination
                             has been made of video film and photographic evidence
                             and Christopher has been identified alive in enclosure
                    H
                                                        - 7 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                   H. LAYTOIi


number 3, and that, sir, is on a BBC video tape which
has been given the reference nuraber MAP 1 and in fact
is timed at 1440:50:24, which I think, in fact, deals
with that particular question.   Sir, this
identification is confirmed by Jason Kenworthy.

     Sir, James Thomas has signed a plan of the
terraces indicating the position at wh i c h he stood with
Christopher before the pressure from the crowd
separated him for Christopher.  He has indicated this
position on a plan by the letter "C", and the reference
number, sir, for that plan, is JT2.

     Sir, on a photograph which has been given the
reference number RGP1/10, Christopher is shown being
carried across the pitch on a temporary stretcher by
supporters.  Mr. Raymond Lloyd has, in fact, confirmed
this identification, and the photographic reference for
that, sir is PR3/34A.  I beg your pardon, sir, if I can
just go back to that, photograph reference RGP1/10
shows Christopher being carried across the pitch and
Mr. Lloyd has confirmed that identification.

Yes. - A. A further photograph, sir, PR3/34A, also
shows Christopher, again being carried across the
pitch, and that, sir, is timed at 1531.

     Sir, Mrs. Devonside, Christopher's mum, has seen a
photograph of Christopher being carried across the
pitch and I believe that she does confirm that it is
Christopher.

     Sir, can I refer you to two plans, MWJL23, and
that, sir, is a plan of the terraces.

That will be C126. - A. And a further plan,      sir,
MWJL24, which is a plan of the pitch area.

C127.

   (The witness   referred to the large scale p l a n )

- A. Sir, if we can deal wit h first of all the plan
MWJL23, the point at which we believe Christopher is
shown alive on the BBC video MAP 1, is approximately in
this location h e r e . Sir, on that plan there is a
further indication made of a later identification on a
video MAP 7, which is further forward towards the front
of enclosure nuraber 3.

Yes, but that one you are less certain about? - A. It
is   a rear view, sir. In my own mind I am satisfied it
is   Christopher. It is a rear view but it is at a much
later stage when he may well have already died.

Yes.  Do we know the time of that one? - A. I can give
you it in a moment, sir.
                                                                                 H. LAYTON


                        Q. Yes, okay. - A. Sir, in respect of the plan M17JL24
                           there is an identification of Christopher on the pitch,
                           in this location here.  That is on a video tape MAP 7.
                           Sir, the photograph I have referred to, PR3/34A, is in
                           this location here, and there is a further photograph,
                           sir, which shows the position h e r e , at the Spion Kop
                           end of the pitch.

                        Q. Yes. - A. Sir,   if you will just bear w ith rae a moment.

                    B   Q. Yes, of course. - A. Sir, in respect of the
                           identification at the lower end of Pen 3, the time,
                           sir, for that is 1517:17:24, and it is in the position
                           that I have indicated.

                        0. Yes, that is quite a lot later,         isn't it? - A. It is,
                           sir, yes.

                    C           THE CORONER:     Mr. Fraser?

                                T H E CORONER:   Sir, no there are no questions for
                           this Officer but I rise at this point, as I have been
                           asked to do on previous occasions by families.     Mr. and
                           Mrs. Devonside want specifically to extend their
                           gratitude for all the help that was given to
                           Christopher on the day.    Tragically those efforts were
                    D      in vain.    Liverpool football supporters fought
                           obviously vainly, as did everybody else who attended
                           Christopher, and their efforts are greatly appreciated,
                           sir.

                                THE COROWER:   Thank you very much indeed, Mr.
                           Fraser, and thank you, Mr. and Mrs. Devonside, for
                           asking for it to be said publicly.
                    E
                                Any questions?    (No r e s p o n s e )

                                Mr. Devonside, I don't know whether you realise
                           it, but there are, in fact, very few of the families
                           whom I have had opportunity to speak to personally.   It
                           is just the way the system works - I never get to meet
                           anybody, so to speak - but I have as it happens, and as
                    F      you will, of course, know, spoken to you on more than
                           one occasion, and so I have had the opportunity of
                           saying to you that I am very sorry that you have lost
                           Christopher Barry, but I want to take this opportunity,
                           as I have done in every single case up to now, of
                           saying that I am exceedingly sorry that this tragedy
                           has struck your family, and to you particularly, Mrs.
                    G      Devonside, because I have not spoken to you, of course,
                           I say that particularly as his mum.

                                N ow ladies and gentlemen, we are going to rise and
                           we are not coming back this afternoon because we have
                           actually concluded the Inquest.   One of the cases which
                           we brought forward to this morning should have followed
                           now, but we decided to bring it forward.   It might
                H
                                                  - 9 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
  have been wiser to have left it but I had taken the
  decision.  Anyway, what we are going to do is we are
  going to rise and so you can have a cup of tea or
  coffee or go straight home or whatever is most
  convenient for you.    Remember, no discussion.   I don t
  say it every time but it applies throughout.     We want
  to see you tomorrow morning at the usual time - 9.30 we
  are starting.  Tomor r o w we will not be finishing early
  because we have got three Inquests scheduled for the
  afternoon, so although it is Friday tomorrow and you
  might like to finish early, don't plan on that.     It is
  just fortuitous that things have finished a little bit
  earlier than normal.

       MS. NORCLIFFE:   Sir, for the record I would ask
  you to note that as from tomorrow and for the remainder
  of these Inquests the Chief Constable of the South
  Yorkshire Police will be represented by Mr. Patrick
  Limb of Counsel, who has actually been in Court this
  afternoon as an observer.

       THE COROWER:   Thank you.  Well, we welcome you,
  and we will miss you but thank you for being here,
  thank you all.


(The Inquest into the death of CHRISTOPHER BARRY DEVOWSIDE
           was adjourned to a date to be fi x e d )
