                                                                                                 M I R . 15



     OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                  Date and tim e raised                               Number
                                                                                                                          74
    •) ~ £ - < £ S ~ ■
     *IT itle                                C X         ^
•     ■

     In c lu d e source and a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)


    JB^ceiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es/N o      ____
                                                                                                                             Receiver




                                                                                                                              Indexer
     D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

     No(s) o f actions raised                                                                                                       —
                                                                                                                       Statem ent Reader
     Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                              Indexer
     Indexed as indicated

     No(s) o f actions raised

     Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                          S IO
                                                                                                  a *

                                                                                                                       dJ
                                                                                           m m




                                                                                           F
                                                                                           1      I L
                                                                                                                       v s .3 i

     Further action No(s)                                                                                                     Indexer



     When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
   HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



            INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


              JAMES PHILIP DELANEY




                     Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , B S , MRCGP

             (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                        At

            The Medico-Legal Centre,
                 Watery Street,
                   Sheffield.

                        On

            Friday, 27th April, 1990.




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR.     ISAACS             Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT



OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER


     DR. J.R. SHORTLAND Called

       By The Coroner


     J. APPLETON Called

       By The Coroner


     M. LAYTON Called

       By The Coroner
       Cross-Examined by Mr. Limb


CLOSING REMARKS BY THE CORONER
                        27th April. 1990

                                 INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF JAMES PHILIP DELANEY


                             MR. FRASER:   The next evidence you will hear, sir, relates
                        to James Delaney.  James' mum and dad have seen the summary which
                        the officers have prepared.  They don't feel able to come to
                    B    ourt this morning, sir.  They are obviously very upset, but Mrs.
                        Davenport, who has looked after the family in the preceding year,
                        a social worker from Ellesmere Port, is present and will report
                        the proceedings directly to the family.  The solicitors who
                        represent the family are a member of my group, and I appear on
                        the usual basis through the Steering Committee, sir.

                             THE CORONER:   Thank you.  Before we start anything could
                        /ou please make it quite clear to the Delaneys that I respect
                        their wish, and it is perfectly all right for them not to be here
                        this morning, perfectly all right.  Have you been in Court
                        before?

                            M R S . DAVENPORT:   Yes.

                             THE CORONER:   In that case I won't explain the procedure
                D       ^hich you will recognise it.

                             This is a resumed Inquest which was opened on the
                        18th April, 1989.  On that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin,
                        Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

                                "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                                identified to PS 2396 Tucker of the South Yorkshire
                    E           Police as that of James Philip Delaney by James Philip
                                Delaney, his father.  He was 19 years of age, having been
                                born on 10th October, 1969, at Wirral.   He was a single
                                man and he lived at                        South Wirral.
                                He was a car assembly worker by occupation'.  He died at
                                Hillsborough football ground following an incident there
                                on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.  PC 2396 Tucker caused the
                                body to be removed to the Medico Legal Centre, and there
                                he identified it to Detective Constable Simon Weigold,
                                who subsequently identified the same body to Dr.
                                Shortland.  It is the family wish that the body should be
                                buried".

                             There is at least one error in this, and that is Simon
                        deigold did not identify the body to Dr. Shortland.  Dr.
                        Shortland will deal with that in the usual way in a
                        moment, and we also have a statement from Simon Weigold
                        correcting the information.  There is a typographic
                        error.  It should be "PS Tucker", but I don't think that
                        matters much.

                             There are one or two errors regarding details relating
                        to James Philip Delaney.  We sent the form to his dad which
                H       he signed on 26th April, 1989, and he confirmed the address
                        as                                    I South Wirral, and


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                       1
                                                                      THE CORONER


                                                                       DR. J.R. SHORTLAND
                         ;he name was James Philip Delaney, place of birth Wirral.  Is
                        itfirral an area or a place? I am sorry, I am very, very ignorant
                        about that.
                             MR. FRASER:   It is that bit of land between the Dee and the
                        Mersey, sir.  It is a geographical area.

                    B        THE CORONER:   It is a district, so "Wirral" would be
                        correct as a place of birth?

                             MR. FRASER:     Yes, sir

                             THE CORONER:   The only other thing I want to check on, and
                          don't know whether you will be able to help me on, Mr. Fraser,
                        we usually spell "Philip” with one "L". There is one statement
                        of his dad's actually, where in the typescript it is spelled
                        with in one place two "L"s and in another place with one ”L " ,
                        and we have opted for the one.

                             MR. FRASER:      It is one

                             THE CORONER:   Good.  That is the conventional spelling,   In
                         act, I have a copy of the birth certification.  I should not
                    D   lave had to ask.  It is one "L", quite right.

                             Dr. Forrest did the blood alcohols, and in the case of James
                        ;he amount he measured was 38mg/100 ml.  Dr. Shortland?

                                           DR. JOHN RICHARD SHORTLAND Called

                                                    Bv THE CORONER:
                    E
                        3. It is John Richard Shortland? - A. That is correct, sir.

                        3. Dr. Shortland, you carried out the post mortem on James Philip
                           Delaney? - A. I did, sir, yes.

                           Could you for the record state how you made identification,
                           how you were satisfied we are dealing with the right person? -
                           A. The body was identified to me by Police Officers who were
                           in the post mortem suite - I do not know their names - and
                           mortuary technicians.  In addition to that the patient’s name
                           was clearly marked on the body, and the relevant sequential
                           body number was also marked on that.  In this case it was body
                           33.

                         . Dr. Shortland, if you would be kind enough to take me through
                           the PM report? - A. Yes, sir.   There was evidence of external
                           congestion and cyanosis.   The small haemorrhages which you
                           have heard before were also present.   These were present also
                           internally.  There was evidence of swelling of the brain and
                           cerebral coning.  That is, the brain was squashed down on to
                           the base of the skull.   In addition to that there was
                           evidence of direct injury to the heart, little haemorrhages
                H          and congestion within the heart.   Otherwise the body was that
                           of a healthy young adult male.


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                         2
                                                                             J. APPLETON


                    ^Gj. And this coning that you mentioned is a very, very serious
                         matter, is not it? - A. And is a feature of traumatic
                         asphyxia, yes.
                                   THE CORONER:   Were you in Court when Dr. Shortland gave
                              evidence earlier regarding loss of consciousness?

                                     M R S . DAVENPORT:   Ye s .
                    B
                                     THE CORONER:     Do you want him to repeat it?

                                     M R S . DAVENPORT:   No.

                        G|.          THE CORONER:     That will apply? - A. Indeed.

                    _G|. A s with all the others that we have talked about? - A. Yes.

                              There would probably a rapid loss of consciousness? - A. I
                              think so.

                                     MR. FRASER:     James' family have no questions, thank you,
                              sir.

                        ,G         THE CORONER:   Dr. Shortland, thank you.  If you are
                    D         released you can talk to the other family. - A. Thank you,
                              yes.

                                             PET. SERGEANT JULIA APPLETON Called

                                                          Bv THE CORONER:

                                   THE WITNESS:       Sir, Julia Appleton of the West Midlands
                    E         Police.

                                   At about 0930 hours on Saturday, 15th April, 1989, Mr.
                              James Delaney saw his son, James Philip Delaney, leave the
                              family home with the intention of travelling to Sheffield.
                              James was known to have a ticket for the Cup Semi Final
                              football match at Hillsborough.

                                   Mr. Brian Peter Bickerstaff travelled on a coach with
                              James and also James Robert Hennessy, who also died in the
                              disaster.   They arrived at Leppings Lane, Sheffield, at about
                              1400 hours.   m r . Bickerstaff was with James and Mr. Hennessy
                              outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles at about 1440 hours when
                              he was separated from them due to the crowd.

                                   At about 1540 hours following the severe crushing in the
                              Leppings Lane terracing, Police Sergeant Stephen Tucker was
                              near to the entrance to the gymnasium when he saw a man he now
                              knows to be James Delaney lying unattended on a hoarding. The
                              officer could not find any sign of life in James.   He sawthat
                              an airway had been inserted James' mouth which suggests that
                              he had received treatment from a medical source.
                              Unfortunately, this source has not been identified.   The
                    H         officer, with the assistance of others, carried James into the
                              gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had been set up.

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                                  3
                                                                       J. APPLETON



                               Extensive enquiries have been made to establish who
                          removed James from the terracing and to carry him across the
                          pitch, but to date we have not been able to identify these
                          persons.

                               At 1602 hours Dr. Matthew James Bull examined James in
                          the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.
                    B
                               At 0355 hours on Sunday, 16th April, 1989, Mr. James
                          Delaney, senior, identified the body of his son to Police
                          Sergeant Tucker.  This occurred in the temporary mortuary at
                          the gymnasium.

                               Police Sergeant Tucker   later escorted the body of   James
                          to the Medico Legal Centre,   where he confirmed the
                          identification to Detective   Constable Simon Weigold.

                               On Sunday, 16th April, 1989, Dr. John Shortlandcarried
                          out an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of death.

                               Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the blood
                          sample where the presence of ethanol was detected.  The
                          witnesses proving continuity of the blood sample are Detective
                    D     Constable Alan Jones, Detective Sergeant John Turner and
                          Detective Sergeant James Fletcher.  Dr. Alexander Robert
                          Forrest carried out the analysis.

                               Found in the personal effects of James was a ticket
                          counterfoil for the match, but in the circumstances it cannot
                          be established exactly how or when James entered the stadium.
                    E          This concludes my evidence.

                               THE CORONER:   Just two things.   I missed a little tiny
                          bit.  I think you said extensive enquiries have been made to
                          try and find the people.... - A .......who removed James from
                          the terraces, sir, and also carried him across the pitch, but
                          unfortunately ....

                          You have not been able to find anybody.  Although you are
                          quite right to say we can't say exactly when he entered the
                          stadium, I think one can say it must have been some time after
                          1440, because he was seen outside? That is right, is not it?
                          - A. That is right, sir, yes.

                        3. We should say, at or about or thereafter? - A. That is right,
                           sir.

                        Q. We cannot be more precise than that.

                               MR. FRASER:    No questions, sir, thank you.



                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                       4
                                                                            M. LAYTON


                                        PET. INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                                                     Bv THE CORONER:

                                  THE WITNESS:   Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
                             Inspector, West Midlands Police.

                                  Sir, an examination has been made of video evidence and
                    B        photographic evidence, and James has been identified in
                             enclosure No. 3. Catherine Delaney, James' sister, has
                             identified him on a BBC video referenced MAP 1, and that is
                             timed at 1456:31:03, and perhaps if I just mention there, sir,
                             in fact both he and Mr. Hennessy we have already heard about,
                             are in fact standing side by side on that particular video.

                                  On a photograph which has been referenced PR1/8A which is
                             timed at 1503, he is shown in enclosure No. 3.

                                  As you have already heard, sir, it has not been possible
                             to identify the people that actually carried James across the
                             pitch.
                                  Sir, can I refer you to a plan which has been given the
                             reference number MWJL/123, which is a plan of the terraces.
                    D
                        3.        THE CORONER:   C.134. - A. Sir, in respect of that plan,
                             referring to the terrace plan, this is enclosure No. 3.  In
                             respect of the video identification at 1456, the approximate
                             location of James is here, very close to the dotted line one
                             has referred to as the barrier that broke.

                                  Sir, in respect of photograph identification, the one I
                    E        have referred to already, PR1/8A, the position shown is
                             somewhere in the region of that location there.

                                  There is reference on that plan to a further unconfirmed
                             photographic identification.  Again, it is one of those cases
                             where from the detail on the photograph we are just not able
                             to be absolute.  So that position is shown here. Certainly,
                             the first two I have mentioned we are satisfied they are
                             accurate.

                        Q. In fact, the video one is      a very clear   shot, I think, inthis
                           particular instance? - A.      It is, yes.

                                  MR. FRASER:     No thank you, sir.

                                                Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB:

                        Q. Inspector, may I trouble you about the timings of the photos.
                           Dealing firstly with the video timed for 1456:31:03, having
                           had the task of looking at that are you able to form an
                           impression as a matter of opinion only as to whether then Mr.
                           Delaney was still alive? - A. In this particular case I am
                           satisfied, and we are speaking about video here as opposed to
                H          still photographs, I am satisfied certainly that he is alive
                           at that time.

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                          5
   f\




                                                                             M . LAYTON



                        O. Can I ask the same question, please, regarding the photograph?
                           - A. Again, I think we are in the situation where I can give
                           an impression to you that I believe he is still alive at that
                           stage, but I obviously can't comment on the medical stage that
                           you have already heard of.

                        o .        THE CORONER:   The photograph is very much less clear, is
                    B         not it? - A. Very much so.

                                   MR. LIMB:      Thank you.

                                   THE CORONER:   You appreciate we want to be as careful as
                              we can, but I don't want the officer to go further or to
                              mislead you with his evidence, and I am sure you appreciate
                              that.

                                   MR. LIMB:      Sir, that was reflected in the form of the
                              question.

                                   THE CORONER:       Yes, indeed.   I know you did qualify it.

                                    That concludes the evidence which we will hear in this
                              case.   Please, would you be good enough when you go back to
                    D         Liverpool and recount what has happened to express to the
                              Delaney families the very sincere sorrow at their loss.   I
                              think it might be as well if you stressed to them, because in
                              this particular instance there is relatively little evidence
                              as to what happened, but there is one rather important point
                              which is in the summary which was read but which I want to
                              draw to your attention, and that is when Police Sergeant
                              Tucker found Philip - he first impression he was just lying
                    E         there and nobody was looking after him - he said specifically
                              that he had an airway.   That I think one could say must mean
                              somebody had looked after this lad and had tried, and also
                              somebody who almost certainly knew what he was doing and
                              presumably decided that nothing further could be done,
                              because otherwise he would still have been there.

                                 So it might help the Delaneys to realise that although the
                              evidence from the point of view of saying it was X, Y or Z, is
                              not there, there is in fact circumstantial evidence to show
                              that people had not just left their lad on the ground.  I am
                              sure you will make that clear to them.

                                    MRS. DAVENPORT:      Yes.

                                    THE CORONER:   We will rise and pause for a moment so you
                               can have a rest, and we will resume at 12.15, depending on the
                               availability of your clients for the next Inquest.   We seem to
                               be moving a little bit faster today.  It just happens that is
                               the   way it has worked out.  You will let my officer knowwhen
                               you are ready.

                                   (The Inquest into the death of JAMES      PHILIP DELANEY
                H                         was adjourned to a date to be      fixed)


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                               6
