  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)




       INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

           ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                      At

                The Town Hall,
                  Sheffield.

                      On

                8th March, 1991




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                        INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                              Page

    R.L. GREENWOOD Recalled

         Cross-Examined    by Mrs. McBrien      1
         Cross-Examined    by Mr. Hale         25
         Further by The    Coroner             29
         Cross-Examined    by Mr. Russell      32

    B.D. MURRAY Sworn

          By The Coroner                       56

PROCEDURAL MATTERS                             75
           SIXTY SIXTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

               FRIDAY, 8th MARCH 1991


          ROGER LIONEL GREENWOOD Recalled

            Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Superintendent Greenwood, at the 1988 semi-final people
were generally approaching the ground at the width of
the pavement only, weren't they? - A. No, I think that
is a little bit restrictive in its outlook. Clearly
when one brings the train loads down from Wadsley
Bridge they are fairly well confined to the pavement, but
I think generally you will always find that there will
be an overspill into the road at different times.

A little?- A. Yes it varies. You may get on occasions
you know more people spilling into the road.  It obviously
depends on the width of the pavements and where it actually
takes place. You don't find them streaming down the miffldle
of the road normally.
No, I quite understand that if people see traffic coming
along they will take care and in the same way the drivers
of the vehicles will probably be driving slowly as a
result of crowds being around.  Is that what you are
saying? — A. Well one would hope so. It is not always
the case.  I think it is fair comment to say on occasions
people will spill out into the road and will cross the
road and will force people to brake. That does happen.
I don't want to paint the scenario of everybody just
walking down the pavement because that is clearly not
the case.
I believe there would be Officers stationed at the end
of the side roads in 1988 wouldn't there? - A. Yes, that
is normal accepted practice and I mean the reason for
that is basically of course because of all the houses
that are there and the parking problems, that people
will come and park and then they come back to the house
they can't park the car, and of course I have to say
because of incidents that have taken place in there
as well, it is a protective measure really against the
residents that live near to the ground.

Yes, would you have other Officers in addition to those
along Leppings Lane making random checks for tickets?
- A. No, not as a formal thing. One is always conscious
that there will always be an element without tickets
but there is nothing that is, I think as I said yesterday,
that is formal within my view.
                                   R.L. GREENWOOD



      I think, clearly if there are people that Officers
think may not have tickets then they would approach them
and ask them but it is a very difficult problem because
of course as you have heard earlier, what is said:   "I
am waiting for somebody" and some people do wait for
tickets clearly and it is very difficult to distinguish.

      You have then got the problem of course with ticket
touts and obstruction and we are extremely limited in what
we can do even at this present day with ticket touts that
tend to cause an obstruction as well and whilst they are
there then you will always get people coming of course
to try and get tickets.

You made no request to the Control Box to close off
Leppings Lane to traffic before the 1988 semi-final though
did you? - A. No. From within my recollection before
the match in 1988 Leppings Lane was not closed.  It would
be a difficult problem I think. You would not do it as
a matter of practice, as a matter of norm because it is
a throughroad and it is fairly busy in that sense and
in a way of course it does confine people to the pavements
the traffic, or nearer to the pavements as such.

Can we just look at the photograph C260 please? - A. Yes,
I have that.

There are three pairs of gates leading to the A-G turnstiles,
aren't there? - A. Yes.

Now the larger centre gates, they are the ones giving
vehicular access, aren't they? - A. Yes they do, yes.

They are supposed to be closed at 2 p.m. on match days
according to the Operational Order aren't they
Superintendent? - A. Well I can't recall specifically
without having reference to the match day Order that you
are talking about.
I have read it in the Order.    That is the Order? - A. Yes.

      THE CORONER:    Which Order are you talking about,
Mrs. McBrien?

      MRS. McBRIEN:    About the vehicles sir.

      THE CORONER:    But which year?

      MRS. McBRIEN:    The Operational Order.

      THE CORONER:    But which year?

      MRS. Mc^RIEN:    1989 and I presume it would be the
same in 1988.
                                  R.L. GREENWOOD



      THE WITNESS: That was my point.   I would not be
familiar with it from 1989 because obviously that was
not a part of the Order that I was so concerned with.
In 1988 I honestly can't recollect that situation at
all from the Operational Order. You may be right.    I
don't know.

      MRS. MCBRIEN:  It is in the 1989 one. I thought
the 1989 Order had followed a very similar pattern to
the 1988one? - A. It may well be.   I am not going to
say you are right. I am not going to say you are wrong.
You may well be right.  I don't know without refreshing
my memory but I will accept if you wish that you are
right for the purposes of your question.

I thought if it would have been changed then something
would have been said that this was an additional thing
in the 1989 Order? - A. You may well be right. Can I
say this   if it will help you:  you are right when you
say that   it is for vehicular access and certainly within
my experience to prevent vehicular access and vehicles
getting into that entry, if the gate was open, then yes
I have known it be closed and it seems sensible for it
to be closed so that the vehicles don't actually try
and push through if you wish.   I think you have usually
seen a Steward and there are Police Officers around there
as well on that gate.
I believe we were shown in the video just one gate being
opened in 1988 or one set of gates? - A. I can't recall.
You may be right.

      THE CORONER: No, I will remind you.     What
Mrs. McBrien is reminding you of, we had a   look at   some
photographs yesterday of 1988 and you were   looking   at
those gates.  In 1988 only one appeared to   be open   as
far as one could see? - A. That is right.    Yes, it   was
difficult to see.
      MRS. McBRIEN: Did you ensure that the Officers
outside the turnstiles in 1988 maintained orderly
queues right up to the time of kick-off? - A. Well as
far as is possible.  It is not easy in that sense and
what you might class as an orderly queue and what other
people on an operation of this nature might class as
an orderly queue might be two different things.

      I don't recall any problems whatsoever in 1988
with the queueing as you put it, none whatsoever.

So would you say the turnstiles were operating very
effectively that year? - A. Yes, I have no reason to
say otherwise*
                                 R.L. GREENWOOD



That year did all the Liverpool supporters enter the
ground via the Leppings Lane turnstiles and in an
orderly manner? - A. Well save for the ones that went
to the Spion Kop clearly, but there were no problems
at the Leppings Lane turnstiles as I can recall, no.

No exit gate was opened to allow the entry of fans that
year, was there? - A. No.
      THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, we have established
that dozens of times. We don't need to establish every
single point with every single witness.

       MRS. McBRIEN: Finally dealing with the 1988 semi­
final.   It was considered a successful operation that
year, wasn't it? - A. Yes, entirely.

That is all on 1988. Now turning to 1989. I believe
arrangements had been made for Liverpool fans who had
managed to get tickets for the Spion Kop. What were
the arrangements please for them? - A. Yes, that was
looked at in some detail. The arrangements were that
they would be located in a specific area which is towards
the north end of the Spion Kop and it was a question of
how big would the area be and how would we actually keep
them separated if you like, how would we demark them
from the Notts. Forest fans.
       If you look at that area, that is at the top
left-hand side as you are facing the Spion Kop, at the
edge it is very steep, it is a very steep drop down
into the area where the ambulance came from on the video
and there is some metal fencing there which is quite
sharp.
      What I was concerned about in there is we would
not get pressure on that fencing because if you were to
get a public order situation or whatever or people being
pressed into that area, then they would be pressed against
that fencing and clearly although the fencing is high if
you put pressure on it it is a very very steep drop to
the other side, so what we had to look at is what was
the area? Where would the Police Officers go bearing in
mind what I have said to you that there were great
problems in 1988 and they had to have their staffs out.
It was a dangerous situation and it was a difficult one
as I recall it to resolve.
      What we decided was that the area would be extended
and I think eventually it was taped off. The Police
Officers that were actually to be on that operation,
the Serial in the Spion Kop, the idea was that they would
also demark that area so that if Liverpool supporters
appeared elsewhere in the Spion Kop and there was friction
and sometimes it can be noticed particularly if you have
                                                        5

                                   R.L. GREENWOOD



got a corner kick or a goal is scored, then clearly the
supporters of that team will react to it so you can
pick them out, and to try and encourage them to go into
that area.

      What I said to the Officers was this basically:
we were not interested in any arrests or any ejections
because that would weaken the Police line and I wanted
those Officers to remain there as well all the time.
It would only be as an absolute necessity that      wewould
actually take somebody out.    So that was the idea and
what I said was - because I think I expected them to come
in at least the same numbers   as 1988, I had no    reason
to believe otherwise ....




                        Q. How many came in
                                             R,   L.   GREENWOOD


How many came in?    I am sorry to interrupt you.   How
many were there in 1988 - A. Well, there were certainly a
few hundred.   I would find it difficult to estimate it.
There might have been 400, 500, 600, 700, maybe 800.     It
is very difficult to recollect it, but I certainly would
say that I would be expecting a few hundred to come.     If
that had not been the case - I mean, it is difficult
intelligencewise to actually be able to say...    It is
the same with all football matches.    You get a certain
amount of intelligence, or the same with all Police
operations, if I may say so.    You get the intelligence
or the experience that you have had before.    You put the
things together and then you design what is your Police
operation.   Now it is very easy and very costly, dare I
say, to go what you might say is over the top and provide
many Police Officers for an operation.    Whether you are
talking about local policing and the number of Officers
that are out on the ground.    The town that I police is
100,000 people, for example.    You will see possibly a
staff of ten policing 100,000 people.

You are always in a situation where you have got to plan
on that basis and that is exactly how it was done.

What you can't plan for in a way is what the reaction of
people is going to be to it.   We rely totally in all
these operations because, of course, we operate with a
minuscule ratio to totals.   You are always relying in
Police operations that the basic platform of policing is
policing by consent and sometimes it is not possible to
take reactive action by way of arrests.   Sometimes if
people are arrested, and they may justify being arrested
or ejected, that can escalate the situation.   It is a
delicate line that we draw.   It is a delicate line in
terms of the numbers of Officers and it is a delicate
line in terms of the intelligence.

If the intelligence had been more - and there was none of
it - then we might have reacted in that particular area
with more people.    You come to a stage when you have got
to say, "How far can we go?"     It did not justify putting
riot shields in there, for example, although I have had
riot shields on standby at a football match before.

You react to it in a sensible way having regard to the
experience and the intelligence.

It seems to me that these people    who buy tickets for that
end, they only want room in that    stadium.    I don't think
they want to make trouble there,     really.  I think they
just want to be able to watch the    match

     THE CORONER:   Is this a question, Mrs. McBrien?         I
think we got d very long and comprehensive answer.
                                             R. L .   GREENWOOD'


     THE WITNESS:    I can answer it shortly, I think.
Certainly within my experience...    You have got to
balance this and I don’ t want to create the effect that
inside a football ground you have people, that the vast
majority of people misbehave - they don't.    There is a
minority element that will misbehave.    It may vary
according to the years as to which club it is.    It
matters not whether it is a fourth division club or a
first division club.   Sometimes they can be more
troublesome, fourth division clubs, in lower crowds.

You have to contemplate the fact that people who do buy
tickets could, and have in my experience, whether by even
paying cash at turnstiles, to go into the opposing
supporters' end with the deliberate intention of causing
trouble.    Now I am not saying this was the case on this
occasion, but it would be foolish of me, having regard to
the experience I have had, if I didn't take account of
the fact that that might be the aim of some.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Well, it is clear there was a
problem there and especially as you say the numbers could
have been 400, 500, 600 people, so you did have a
segregation problem.   Would not it have been wise in
1989, do you think, for the segregation to be wholly so
that the Liverpool fans were put into the Kop area,
because they obviously wanted more room, or needed more
room...

     THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, what you are asking is
as to whether or not the ends should have been swopped
round.   That is what you are asking?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:    Yes, to alleviate...

     THE CORONER:   We are not going to investigate that.
The fact is they weren't and we have heard...

In two sentences, if you know the answer, say why the
ends were the way they were and that is all, but I don't
want more than two sentences. - A. The answer to that
quite simply is that I think it would have created
absolute chaos on the basis of the semi-final the year
before.   They naturally lent themselves to that.    That
means if you do that, if you keep the same plan, then you
will always have to take an element of risk in terms
of...   There are, and it has been known, a minority of
people who go to football matches to create trouble, and
nothing more than that.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:  I know that is what you think.         I do
think differently on that.

     THE CORONER:    Pardon?
                                           R,   L.   GREENWOOD


     MRS. MCBRIEN:   I do have my own ideas on that.

     THE CORONER:    I am sure you have.   Everybody has.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:    Were you aware that in 1989
Liverpool fans possessing Kop tickets were allowed
through the Leppings Lane turnstiles on Police
instructions? - A. No.

Do have any idea how many were in the Kop end in 1989? -
A. Quite a few hundred.    It is difficult to estimate.
I would have to...    You might have been talking about
600, 700, 800, I don't know.    Quite large numbers.




                     Q. It was very similar
                                             r   .   l   . CTBRKiwnnn



It was very similar to the 1988 figure? - A. Yes, I
would go as far as that. There may have been more.            It
is difficult to recollect.

What about problems in 1989? Were there any problems
about the segregation at that end? - A. The only
problem that I think I have recollected was a little
bit of disorder.  I think I referred to the one who was
ejected who somehow found his way back into the ground.

Did you instruct the following Officers to contact you
if they needed to do so. Chief Inspector Creaser,
Inspector Purdy and Inspector Sykes, as they were all
on the outside of the turnstiles that day? - A. No, Mr.
Creaser had a roving role as I think you are aware.   I
would not have to tell him if he needed to contact me
to do so. I might have said it in relation to the
specific problems that we discussed. Mr. Sykes and Mr.
Purdy, as I think I have already said, the accepted
practice was that outside the turnstiles they would
come, as they had in 1987 and 1988, under myself who
was outside the ground dealing with the away
supporters.

They were under your command but they were outside. So
who would they look to really? - A. They would have
been looking to Mr. Marshall.  If Mr. Creaser was there
they would look to him but I think as I have explained
it is fair to say the order is a little bit confusing
in that sense. When they came into the ground in Phase
2 then they were directly under my control. Whilst
they were outside the turnstiles then they would be
acting to Mr. Marshall.

Did they have the means to be able to contact you if
necessary? - A. By talk through on the radio.  That
would have been possible.

Did any of them contact you that day from twenty to
three? - A. No. No, I had no idea what was happening
there. Nobody contacted me from outside there, no.

Did you have a radio with you all the time? - A. Yes, I
did.

Was it turned on? - A. Of course, yes.

Would you have been able to hear any messages that were
being passed if someone was trying to contact you or to
the Control Room?

     THE COROltER: I think that is an impossible
question, is it not? You can ask him, did he hear any
                                                r   .   l   . ftR Frem w rnn



message but you cannot say, would he have been able to
hear?

     MRS. McBRIEN: With the noise level in the ground?
- A. It is extremely difficult. The radio was on. It
is possible for people to contact me.   It is a cauldron
of noise as I have said.   I think it is also very
difficult if you are actually standing there and you
are not engaged in any particular task then probably
you will be able to hear much more of what is going on
but if you are busy it is very difficult for the eye to
focus on what you are doing and for the ear also to be
conscious of what is actually coming over the radio.    I
can say no more than that.   It is extremely difficult.
I have explained there were problems with the radio.    I
remember that and the staccato effect at one stage.

Where do you keep    your radio? - A. The radio on that
occasion would be    on a strap and would be just here on
the chest.

I believe you said yesterday you did not hear
Superintendent Marshall's request for the opening of
the gates? - A. No, certainly not. No, I didn't.

Though he made four requests altogether? - A. I didn't
know that.

     THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, he has said no. He
said no to me, he  said no to Mr. King, and he does not
have to say no a dozen timesfor anybody to understand
it.

     MRS. McBRIEN: When you were making your way to
the pitch from the players' tunnel and you heard that
there had been an attempted forcing of a gate, do you
think then your main concern would be to prevent fans
from gaining access to the pitch? When you first set
off and you heard that? - A. No, when I first set off
what was in my mind was the fact that I saw people
coming over that fence.

     THE CORONER: Can I just stop you one minute? Let
us make sure that we know which perambulation. Are you
talking about the time when he set off at 2.35 or the
time just after kick-off?

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes.

     THE CORONER:    You were answering correctly.

    THE WITNESS: Just after kick-off, what was in my
mind at that particular time was that I saw supporters
                                              r   .   t ..   ftRFrem wnon



coming over that fence and I could see that there were
possibly two or three Police Officers, very limited
number.  I saw that there was a problem.  I didn't
think it was a pitch invasion per se as such. When I
say per    I mean people running on to stop the game or
on to the pitch because that would in my experience be
unusual.  It was a problem and whatever it was,
whatever went through my mind at that particular time,
we were only at the start of a game and that is where I
focussed and that is where I went. I didn't know what
I was going to be confronted with when I got there,
absolutely not.

You said you only saw a couple of Police Officers along
there.  Is that the whole of the Leppings Lane terrace
going from pen 1 right the way to pen 7, that area? -
A. No, my eyes focussed on that immediate scene and all
I focussed on, I can see it now, was a few supporters
coming over the fence and that there were a limited
number of Police Officers with them.  It was difficult
to tell because you were at distant but maybe two or
three.

Just in the centre? - A. In the centre area, yes.

Do you think other Police Officers that day thought it
may have been a pitch invasion?

     THE CORONER: No, it does not matter what he
thinks other Police Officers thought.

     MRS. McBRIEN: Was it emphasised in the
Operational Order that as a result of the minor pitch
invasion at the 1988 Semi Final that particular
attention should be given to that? - A. I didn't treat
it as a minor pitch invasion.  I think it was more than
that quite frankly and I hope I have illustrated that.

I am sorry. Superintendent Greenwood.  I was saying
because of the minor incidents that took place in 1988
was that incident drawn to the attention of Chief
Superintendent Mole and, therefore, this incident was
emphasised, or some attention was drawn to that fact,
in the Operational Order in 1989? - A. I think you will
find it is in the Operational Order and because of the
scale of it I think that is why it is reflected in the
Operational Order and I must emphasise I did not treat
it as being minor.

In 1988? - A. That is right.  I was not there, I must
stress that, but a minor pitch invasion to me means
possibly one 6r two coming over the fence but when you
                                              R . L . GREEKIWnnn



start talking about fencing being ripped out and gates
bursting open I do not treat that as minor.

I only use that word because this is how it has been
described in everything I have read. - A. I see.

That in fact I have read over and over again that the
operation in 1988 was regarded as a successful
operation? - A. I think it was and I think that was
defused but any pitch invasion is always bound to cause
concern because if they start going over from one end,
do they then start going over   from the other end? I am
talking about over the fence.Is it going to be a
battle? Is it going to be people coming out of the
stands and jumping over because of what might have
happened during the match or for whatever reason? All
that was drawn to my attention was this; that there
had been a pitch invasion, it had been necessary to
repair the fencing as a result of that pitch invasion
and that the gates had burst open. I think the
Operational Order, I think if   I am right, does onsome
serials deal with the question of going in, or just
before I think on Phase 3, to counter the effect of a
possible pitch invasion in 1989. As I have said I
think I spoke to Mr. Darling.  It was all arranged that
we would try and prevent that.

I have read it to be it was just exuberance and I have
read —

     THE CORONER: No, let us not worry about that.
Let us go on with the questioning.




                         /Q. MRS. MCBRIEN.
                                                              13

                                              R.   L.   GREENWOOD


Q.        MRS. McBRIENs   Would you say if crushing is
     apparent to Police Officers, that they should
     immediately react to it? It is something that you
     cannot leave until later, it has to be dealt with very,
     very quickly? - A. In fairness I have got to say that
     this is an extremely difficult question that you are
     asking.  We all know with hindsight what the problem
     was there.  When you are talking about crushing
     generally then I think I have already said that you do
     get localised densities.   My experience of pens behind
     goals is that people do like to be tight together.
     They treat it as where the atmosphere is. You do get
     swaying and surging, you get it more with some
     supporters than others.  If you have seen television
     recently you may have seen it on there.   What happens
     when people go forward is that you get a more localised
     density and you may get the appearance of what, to the
     inexperienced observer, is a crush, but then that moves
     away and it becomes freer.

     One of the dangers is this, that if you are a gate
     Officer, if I may say so within my experience, if you
     were to react to every movement which might look as if
     it was a crush at the front of the fence, and opened
     the gates, then that in itself could create a further
     crush.   I think, and I tried to emphasise, in 1981 how
     this chain reaction started from the back, and also
     further along the fencing, that people were trying to
     get out.   Some crowds will stay stationary, they don't
     move, they don't surge, they don't sway about and what
     have you, and will just remain there.   Others don't and
     it is trying to pick out that particular problem.   On
     most occasions when you do get that it then moves away
     or goes back, as you have heard, or what have you, and
     it is extremely difficult.

Q. A Police Officer who is standing on the perimeter
   track, he won't feel what it is like on the other side
   of the fence, he will only be able to make an
   observation as to what he thinks it might be like on
   the other side? - A. I can tell you how I felt
   basically, and that is, and I have tried to emphasise
   this - I think it is most important - that you can talk
   about whatever densities you wish in that sense.    You
   really would be talking having to put a fence round an
   individual person to say that that person has got space
   and nobody can interfere with that.   The densities do
   vary.  Some people like to be, I think, very tightly
   packed and they would seek to be into that particular
   situation.  When you actually look at it, I now would
   say I can't understand people who want to be in that
   situation, but a lot of people say that is where the
   atmosphere j.s, that is where they want to be, they
   don't want to sit down, they want to be there, and you
                                        R.   L . 'GREENWOOD


get Into that situation where you get localised
density.  I don't like the word crushing in that sense,
but you could look at it and you could say, if you were
an inexperienced observer, "There is a problem there",
but people don't move because that is how they feel it,
that is how they want it, and that is what they are
used to.

So to a Police Officer on the track, he may think this
is how they want it, they are used to it, you are
saying? They like to be in a tight situation? - A.
They like to be in a tight situation.  I am talking now
with hindsight but more often than not you get surging,
you get swaying, it is tight, it moves back and there
is no problem.  It is the difficulty of how many stages
away, as we are talking as a result of what happened,
how many stages away from that are you, the difficulty
in trying to piece it together and react to it.    Can I
just add one further comment, I am sorry, I am trying
to build a picture for you to help you on this.   If I,
on the track, recognised what I thought - and say I was
an inexperienced observer - of a density that looked
fairly tight to me, and I said right, I will send
Police Officers in there, I have seen that happen,
Police Officers going into a crowd like that, and I
have seen the reaction.  I have to say to you that it
is not the first time that I have seen Police Officers
carried out of there, so it isn't an area, and I make
no reference to this particular match in that sense, I
am talking about general experience, you have to be
very, very careful with the action that you take in
that particular area, extremely careful.

     THE CORONER:   I think we have exhausted this,
Mrs. McBrien.  If you want to come to a point, then
come to a point or move on.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   You do agree that it is very
difficult for, let's say an inexperienced Officer,
there may be very young Officers on that track there,
who have no idea of density rates, what the density
rates should be in that pen to start off with? - A.
There weren't. They were experienced Officers.s

But would they have any idea of what the density was
supposed to be in the centre? - A. I can't speak for
them, I can speak for myself and I would say this, from
what I have seen of the densities, I think it would be
fair if you went to any football ground, if you watched
them on television, if you watched the crowds, and try
and identify in what some people call the popular areas
a density of 5.4.  You may see it but there will be
many, many pccasions where you will not see it because
people do draw together and it becomes tighter.  These
                                         R.   L.   GREENWOOD


Officers that are on these gates have worked in these
areas for a long time, they are experienced.  It is
important that you have experienced Officers.  They
experience a lot of things.  They experience gates
being pushed open on other matches; they experience


     THE CORONER:   I am going to stop you because I
don't want you to go into what the Officers may or may
not -- I think you have given a sufficient answer.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    If I can just make one final point
on that before I ....

     THE CORONER:   What is the point?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Would you agree that the best way
to know what the density is, the comfortable density,
is to experience what it feels like on that terrace
yourself, or an Officer would have to be on that
terrace to know, is it comfortable or isn't it? - A. I
don't think it is the best way.   A lot of Police
Officers are football supporters.   I was at a rugby
match the other night and I was in a density crowd that
was not 5.4, it was more than that, and I was
comfortable in that crowd.

When you reached the pitch in front of the Leppings
Lane Terrace, and you did see the people who appeared
to be crushed against the fence, were they shouting out
or were they just quiet and pushed against the fence? -
A. No, it wasn't a quiet situation.  I would rather not
go into the detail of it if you don't mind.  There were
people pleading for help.  It was horrific, horrific.

Is that initially when you initially went there, they
were pleading for help? - A. There were some, yes.   It
got worse, there is no doubt about that, it got worse.
I have told you the rest of the crowd were watching the
match.  I sometimes wonder what the effect of me
stopping the match was, when people became aware.
There were more came over that fence as time went on
and I have my own views on it.  I don't think it is
relevant to this Inquest.

So was your initial reaction to get in touch with the
Control Box? - A. No, not immediately, as I have
explained, because I thought it was retrievable.   I
thought there was a chance and I took that chance.   You
see it was becoming more of a struggle.  I have seen it
on photographs.  People were led out of that gate and
then it got tighter, and then it became more of a
struggle, I,think more of a struggle when I was there,
and then as time went on it became more of a jam.
                                        R.   L.   GREENWOOD


I have to say this to you, I have not said it already,
and I can't be sure about this but I heard the evidence
of P.C. Packer about a man shouting out about a body at
his feet.  I didn't hear that and as far as I am
concerned I wasn't told about it.   I think it may be
the case, and it is only a thought if it will help, I
don't know, there may well have been bodies underneath
at the time when I got there, but certainly the gate
area became more jammed as time went on, there is no
doubt about that in my view.   You see, I said that it
was congested at the front - it was - congested is the
wrong word - it was tight.   Behind people were watching
the match.

Now, there was no wholesale panic at that stage because
you had got two separate compartments.  It is not for
me to judge what happened when the match got stopped
and what the reaction was to other people going over
the fence.  There were a lot of factors operating
there, and I don't want to try and give you my account
of what I think happened, but there were a lot of
factors operating.  It was not just one immediate
factor in my view.  A lot of things happened and I
looked at it and I said, even afterwards, "What caused
that?", because it was not clear cut in my view.   I
went back the following morning to have a look and I
have my own views on what played a very major role in
that disaster.

Before you left the players' tunnel had kick-off taken
place? - A. Yes, it had.

How long would it have taken you to get to the centre
pens? - A. Minute, minute and a half - a minute, I
think - not very long.

And at that stage there were two thirds of the fans
still watching the match in the centre? - A. That is
the general impression, yes.

But there was clear panic in the front, was there? - A.
There was a real problem at the front, a real problem,
yes.  I think experience, if you were to compare it on
a scale - I think I might have said this before - it
might have been six or seven, compare it with the 1981,
probably not too much different, I suppose.  It was
slightly worse, I think, than the 1981 because of the
gate area.  As I have said, we could get them out in
1981 in that south west terrace, but 1981 was a
pressure from the back, a definite pressure.  This
wasn't.  People were standing watching the match and it
was strange, to say the least.  I have said before it
wasn't a big seething, heaving mass of people in there.
                                        R.   L . ' GREENWOOD


It wasn't at all, it was different, it was two
sections.

But clearly the ones in the front needed attention,
even initially? - A. We needed to try and retrieve the
situation, yes, because it quickly went from that
original scale, it quickly went worse, there is no
doubt about that in my view, as time went on, and I
don't know, I can only, and I don't want to, but the
match was still going on and crowds react to football
matches, and I don't know what happened, whether there
were any reactions or what have you.




               /Q. Did you have any
                                                             18


                                      R.L. GREENWOOD



Q. Did you have any responsibility in connection with
   the radial gates on the terrace that year? - A. Well
   only in terms of I knew what the policy was.  I knew
   that the gates were open.  I knew that it was "find
   your own level".  I don't follow really what you are
   driving atf if you could be a bit more specific?

Q. You accepted Chief Superintendent Mole's system for
   the fans of "find your own level" with the radial gates
   being locked open didn't you? - A. With the radial
   gates being open, yes.

Q. You have raised no objections to that system at any
   time? - A. No grounds to raise any objection.

Q. And he felt that it was not necessary to put Police
   Officers at those access points on the terrace.  Is
   that right? - A. He felt it was not necessary?

Q. Yes? - A. Mr. Mole?

Q.   Yes? - A. Yes, I think that is right what   you said.
     There are good reasons for that as well.

Q.   Not one senior Officer objected as far as you know to
     that system? - A. No, I don't think so.  I can't recollect
     that no. In fact I am certain not, no.

Q. Would you agree that the   problem with that is that if
   there is an access point   in a certain area unless it
   is made obvious that the   access point is there it could
   become obscured with the   crowds, the blocked ....

           THE CORONER: You don't have to answer this
     question because it is potentially incriminating in
     the usual way.

           THE WITNESS:  I think itwould befair comment
     although I have never actually done it, to say that
     if you had not taken notice or what have you and you
     were in that pen and you were at the front, then it
     would be extremely difficult I suppose to see that
     radial access gate.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN: Oh yes, if it had got to the
     point it had it would be very difficult I know, but
     I think if Officers would have been there to start
     off with they would have thought:  "Oh there are too
     many coming in here today, we have got to do something
     about it" and use the gates that are on the terrace
     end of the tunnel.  I believe they could have closed
     that off?
                  r
           THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I know what you
     are driving at but that is your view and it may be
                                                                19

                                        R.L. GREENWOOD



     right and it may be wrong but it is not a question and
     the Officer has already dealt with what he thinks on
     that score and we have certainly had it dealt with
     by loads of other people.  Please move on, Mrs. McBrien.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN:   Just one little point about gangways
     please.

           According to the Green Guide, are you familiar
     with the Green Guide? - A. I have been familiar with
     various Green Guides over the years, yes.

           THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, before you get on to
     gangways let me remind you that we have got plenty of
     evidence that the one thing there wasn't on Leppings
     Lane terrace were gangways, so don't ask any questions
     about gangways.  It was a decision by the Officers'
     Working Party and the Fire Service in particular that
     in the circumstances that terrace did not need gangways
     and we had that dealt with at length by Dr. Eastwood
     and Mr. Seamen and various other people.

           MRS. McBRIEN: I was doing some reading sir last
     night and I don't know, I can't say where now, but it
     described those access to those points as a form of
     gangway.

           MR. KING: If I can help Mrs. McBrien.   I think
     there are passages in the transcript of another place
     where that word has been used very loosely and I think
     thatis probably where she saw it.

           THE CORONER:  Indeed and in fact somebody did
     use the word "gangway" here and I think I noticed it
     but did not pick it up on that occasion but the evidence
     is pretty clear on that there were no designated
     gangways.

           MR. KING:   I say that just to help Mrs.McBrien.
     I suspect that is where she has seen it.

           THE CORONER:    So can you try something else?

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN: You judged the situation when
     you arrived at the Leppings Lane terrace at the centre
     part and you decided to motion to the fans for them
     to move back? - A. Yes.

Q. Were you motioning to the people well back? - A. Oh yes,
   oh yes.  I was motioning generally but when you get up
   on the fence there it is not entirely a big area.  I
   was intending that my actions should be seen by everybody
   that was beydnd that congested point at the front.
                                                                           20
\

                                                   R.L. GREENWOOD



                      MRS. McBRIEN:   I am just trying to picture that
             scene.

                   THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I appreciate that but
             please ask the questions.  I do intend to make some
    B        progress today. We have spent an hour now and we have
             not made very much progress, not quite an hour, almost
             an hour.

                      MRS. McBRIEN:   I am very sorry sir.

                   THE CORONER:  It is all right,      I was just trying
             to correct myself not to cheat you.

                      MRS. McBRIEN:   I have not got a great deal left.

        Q. Do you think it is a possibility that the fans who were
           watching the match towards the rear of that terrace would
           have difficulty in understanding what you were trying
           to indicate to them. Would it be very clear to them?

                   THE CORONER:  It is a very difficult question.
             In some ways I would like him to answer it but he is
             really telling you what other people thought.

        Q. Can you describe whether you feel your actions would
           have been clear to somebody who would have seen them?
           - A. As far as I am concerned if anybody was in that
           pen and had seen me on the front doing that and also
           pointing down at the bottom, I would have thought that
           they would have realised that there was something. I
           was bellowing at them. I tell you at one stage I threw
           the hat off.  I took the hat off and I threw it to the
           ground because I don't know, that is my view, that is
           my view.

        Q.         MRS. McBRIEN: Were you wanting them to go back
             out of the tunnel? - A. I think I have answered this
             already. There was room in that pen. This is my
             perception, judgment, assessment, for them to move back.

        Q. There was room in that pen? - A. There was room for
           them to move back.  I am supported by the densities
           I have heard from the Health and Safety Executive
           in   this in my view.

        Q. This is why Ithought earlier how very very difficult
           it must be to judge densities from the pitch side.
           It must be extremely difficult because we know that even
           at the back the density was 7 point something? - A.
           Well when you are on the fence - all the photographs
           in the world - when you are on the fence you actually
           see it there and afterwards people can work out what
           they will.   I think it supports what I say, but what
           I am saying is that there was no doubt in my view that



    H
                                     R.L. GREENWOOD



there was room and the room got more as you got further
back, as the eyes went further back into the pen. That
was the judgment and the assessment and it will never
change that view.  It is imprinted on my mind.  It will
never change.

But it was clear that the people in the front did not
think they had room, they obviously didn't? - A. The
people at the front were in a totally different situation
and I can keep going on about it but it was different.
There were two compartments to that pen. As you moved
back then there became more room as the eyes moved back.
There was no room at the front but people were got out
of there at the front, right against the fence, people
that have been shown on photograph, that I could have
looked at and said ___   They are alive today.

So your motioning, the motioning that you were doing
with your hands it wasn't to get the people to move out
of there altogether, you just wanted them to move within
the pen? - A. I wanted them to move within the pen.
The central tunnel was clear as well.  If they had
gone back out of there what does it imply? What does
it imply when you are doing this and shouting to people?

But if they moved to another spot in the pen the
situation would still remain exactly the same in the
front, wouldn't it? - A. If they moved where, sorry?

If they just moved to another spot at the back? - A. No,
no.

It would not help the people in the front? - A. I say
it would do. I say it would have done.    I am not trying
to attribute any blame on this.   I don't want you to get
that impression that I am blaming people for not moving
back. That is not the purpose of what I am saying. I
am telling you what my assessment and judgment was.
I tried my best and I tried to make it perfectly clear
to them what was happening. I have my own views on that
that I am not prepared to go into, but I don't seek to
blame.

So you did not consider sending Officers to the rear
of the terrace at all?

      JTHE CORONER:    Mr. Greenwood has dealt with this
already.

      I think, Mrs. McBrien, we will stop for a few
minutes and have a cup of tea or coffee. Crystallise
your thoughts^ because I want you to come to an end.

                      (Short adjournment)
                                          R.   L.   GREENWOOD


     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Superintendent Greenwood, as there
were no Police Officers on the terrace itself, the fans
had to rely on the Officers on the perimeter track? - A.
At that stage yes.

It was only if the Police Officers there noticed any
danger or trouble... - A. I am sorry, the previous answer
I gave you I thought you were talking about the time when
we were at the incident.   You are meaning normally, are
you?

Normally, yes. - A. Relying in what way, please?

Well, to take some action if necessary.

      THE CORONER:   Mr. Greenwood has answered this
question several times to Mr. King and also to me as
to...    The words he used, the Control Room, Officers on
the track, various other people who were all involved.

     THE WITNESS:   Yes, it is a team operation.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Yes, but they are to respond if they
see danger or trouble in the pens, is that right? - A.
That is what they are there for, yes.

In normal circumstances, on an ordinary match day, for
instance, if someone on the terrace received an injury
such as a sprained ankle, if they had been up on a
barrier and they had fallen off it or something like
that, how would the Police on the perimeter track deal
with that sort of situation? - A. Well, I can only say
really...   Well, I suppose it follows that what would
happen there - I think normally what happens is that if
there is a problem in the crowd, whether it is in the
stand, on those terraces, or on the Spion Kop, then the
crowd normally draw attention to the fact there is a
problem.   It would obviously depend where it was.    If
it was something that could be accessed through those
gates then they would access, whether it be by way of a
Police Officer...   It is not unknown for somebody to
have a heart attack and a doctor going in.   There would
be a response to it, yes.   That is my experience, that
the crowd would normally draw attention to it.

Or if it was somebody who was able to walk, then they may
walk to the front or they may walk to the back and say,
"Look, I have sprained my ankle," or what have you.

Yes, but if they were not able to walk to the back who
would be responsible for those people in the pens? - A.
What do you mJan?   In terms of reacting to it?
                                                                   23

                                                  R. L. GREENWOOD


Q. Yes, so that they would receive medical attention. - A. I
   think normally there would   be an indication to the
   Officer on the track.   There are Officers up in theWest
   Stand at the front who may see something.    Somebody
   could turn round and shout   to them.

Q. They would have a long way   to shout to the           Officers in
   the West Stand, wouldn't they?

          THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I don't think we will
     go into this because the logical extension of this
     becomes so absurd that we can't pursue it, I'm afraid.

Q.         MRS. MCBRIEN:  We know the perimeter fence was torn
     down in pen 4 on the 15th April, 1989.   Now it was not
     torn down in pen 3.   Would you have stopped Officers
     tearing the fence down if you had seen anybody doing
     that?

          THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I have got a feeling
     you are wrong on that as well.   I think the fence was
     torn down in both pens actually.   I won't swear to that
     but I am almost certain.   There is visual evidence of
     it.

          MR. KING:      Sir, we have got photographs, I
     remember.

          THE CORONER:   Yes.   I recollect we were trying to
     establish where somebody was.   It was the chap who was
     with Mr. Trainer.  We were trying to do it by looking at
     the gaps in the fences, so both of them had holes in
     them

          MRS. MCBRIEN:     Yes.   Would I be able to see that
     evidence please?

          MR. CATCHPOLE:   Perhaps I can show Mrs. McBrien a
     photograph that hasn't been exhibited.

          THE CORONER:      There is no doubt about it.      There
     was a hole.

          MRS. MCBRIEN:   Thank you.   I was mistaken about
     that because when I first visited the ground...

          THE CORONER:   Never mind about that Mrs. McBrien.
     Just ask the question.

          MRS. MCBRIEN:      I just noticed the one tearing in
     pen 4:

Q. A photograph taken at 15.13 - I haven't got the number -
   but it did shdw that the tunnel was still congested at
                                            R.   L.   GREENWOOD


the terrace end at that time.   I presume it would make
rescue operations very difficult from that end? - A. That
the tunnel would make it difficult because it was
congested?

Yes. - A. I am speaking for other people now.   I know
there were difficulties in terms of Officers making their
way into the pen, even when one could say it was clear
what was going on.    Whether that was trauma or what have
you, I don't know.    There were difficulties.   I don't
recall any particular problems with the rescue operation
in terms of the tunnel being blocked.    My recollection
is that it worked well;   the two-way system worked very
well in my view.   Two-way by front and back, that is what
I mean.

When you ran on the pitch to get the game stopped, what
were other Police Officers doing at that time? - A. Well,
m y . ..

     THE CORONER:    No.   How can he possibly answer that
question?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:    No, when he left...

     THE CORONER:   There may have been fifty Officers
there.   No, Mrs. McBrien.   Besides, we have had plenty
of evidence.

      MRS. MCBRIEN:  Did you hear the coded message, the
emergency message that day, come over the PA system, "The
attendance of Mr. Meadows is urgently required."? - A.
No, I did not hear that, but I would not expect to hear
that.

There was an emergency though, wasn't there? - A. Yes.   I
don't think necessarily that that particular emergency
would necessarily have assisted - that particular system
or procedure - because that means that people go to
certain points and I think what was clear is that what
was needed as I saw it at that particular time is that
that was where the emergency was in that particular area
in terms of a rescue.   For example, under the
"Mr. Meadows" system, in terms of manning the exit gates,
Gate C etc., then I think I would rather have had those
Officers elsewhere.

You don't think a message giving instructions to the fans
to clear the pens by way of the tunnel so that Officers
could get to the front part to rescue people would have
helped at all?

     THE CORONER:   No, that is not what he said.        You
asked him whether he heard the emergency message.         He
                                           R.   L . ■GREENWOOD


said, no, and he actually said a bit more.    He said he
didn t think it would help, but the emergency message
does not tell the fans anything.  It is coded
specifically not to tell the fans anything:

That is correct, is it? - A. Yes.

The message is coded so that the fans would not know
what... - A. It is coded.   Unless you knew the code you
wouldn't know what it was.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   I am quite unfamiliar with all the
procedures that take place, but I understood this to be
that a message would be given if there was an
emergency...

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, it doesn't matter.
The message wasn't given so that is it.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   All right:

Do you know if any Police Officer is briefed specifically
about crushing?

     THE CORONER:   We have dealt with that as well,
Mrs. McBrien, so we don't need to deal with it again.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Just a last question.   Was cutting
equipment asked for that day? - A. Yes, it was.

What time was the request made? - A. I don't know because
there was more than one request, as I understand it.

Did it in fact arrive? - A. It may have done.   I can't
remember.   I say that because the Fire Service came,
there were quite a few people came.   I can't remember.

     THE CORONER:   One minute, Mr. Russell.      Mr. Hale
has one question, I think.   Yes, Mr. Hale?

     MR. HALE:   I hope I won't let you down now and make
it two or three!

             Cross-Examined by MR. HALE:

Mr. Greenwood, you observed the crowd on the day,
presumably?   You saw the whole of the crowd on the
terraces? - A. Yes.

What I want to ascertain is whether the section of the
crowd that was most unfortunately killed, and I
appreciate it is very distressing to talk about people
who have been killed as a statistic, but whether the
section of the? crowd that was killed was representative
                                             R.   L . -GREENWOOD


of the total crowd on the terraces, or whether there was
any particular reason why the sample, if you like, that
was killed would be any different from the general crowd?

     THE CORONER:   Just a minute.   That is a question
which by no stretch of the imagination could I allow this
Officer to answer.

     THE CORONER:   Well, I was hoping to jump right to
the conclusion to save time.   If that is not possible
may I ask this...

     THE CORONER:      Yes, I may not allow the answer but
ask the question.

     MR. HALE:      All right:

Would it be right that the crowd as a whole contained
more men than women? - A. Yes.

The women would   be a comparatively small proportion of
the total? - A.   From my view on the terraces, yes.

Would it also be right that the number of young people,
by which I mean 15 or 16 or less, would also be
comparatively small compared to the total? - A. Yes.

I intend to ask a statistician about this, but he may say
he would have liked the view of somebody who was actually
present because obviously he will not have been present.
Among the people who died there were a few young people,
one or two...

     THE CORONER:      No, Mr. Hale.   I am sorry.

     MR. HALE:    I am sorry, sir, but it is essential...

     THE CORONER:   I am not allowing it.         I consider it
to be in improper question.    I am sorry.

     MR. HALE:    I will have    to just ask one or two more
questions then.

     THE CORONER:      I will disallow them if they are in
the same vein.

     MR. HALE:    Yes, sir:

Would the preponderance of the crowd be males between the
age of about 18 and 40...

     THE CORONER:      No.
                                               R.   L.   GREENWOOD'


     MR. HALE:   This is a matter he could observe from
his own observation and it is a matter of some
importance.

       THE WITNESS:      Can you tell me which specific area?

       MR. HALE:      On the terraces.

     THE CORONER:   Let me put the question slightly
differently and see if you can answer this.   Were you at
the time in a position to make a judgment as to the age
distribution of the people on the terrace when you were
there? - A. I think I could relate to the specific area
which I have been dealing with this morning and say that
by and large that would be under 40.

In the... - A. In the area, in the pen I have been
talking about this morning, in pen 3, that by and large          I
would say under 40.

     MR. HALE:  If I could put it into one question then.
Do you know any reason why the people who were in the
positions where they were unfortunately killed, should
have been unrepresentative of the crowd as a whole? - A.
Could you repeat that question?

Was there any reason that you could see why the people
who were most unfortunately killed, and they were on the
terraces, not all in the same place, some where here and
there, was there any reason that you could see why they
should be unrepresentative in the spread of age, sex and
so on of the crowd as a whole?

     MR. KING:   Sir, it is highly unlikely that this
witness at the time would know who the unfortunate people
were who lost their lives.

     THE CORONER:   Indeed.   Mr. Hale, I can see what
you are getting at bit he is not the right person.

     MR. HALE:    Well, if he is not, sir, I am certain
the statistician is going to say he does not know because
he was not there.

       THE CORONER:   In that case there    will be nobody who
will   be able to answer your question.

     MR. HALE:   Well, I am sorry, but      this is an
important point.

       THE CORONER:     No, Mr. Hale.

     MR. HALE:   This is visual and personal experience
of this witness.
                                                R.   L.   GREENWOOD


     THE CORONER:   No.   You are asking him to express
an opinion as to the representation of character of
people who died, most of whom he probably did not see:

How many of the deceased did you actually see?   Not in
the mortuary, I am not talking about that, but in the
ground? - A. I was present when all the casualties were
taken out, either from the front or the back.   I cannot
with the exception of a few tell you in terms of age
group.   I can with one or two, but more than that I
would not be prepared to say.

     THE CORONER:       It is a hopeless endeavour, Mr. Hale.

     MR. HALE:   At least it establishes this, sir, that
he knows of no reason why they should not be
representative and that is all that I seek.   For
instance, if a car ran into a crowd...

     THE CORONER:       No, Mr. Hale.

     MR. KING:      I   get into trouble many times...

     THE CORONER:    No, Mr.     Hale, I am not allowing the
question, full stop.

     MR. HALE:      Very good, sir.     I accept that ruling,
of course.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Russell, one moment.  I have got
a number of questions from the jury, so as I have already
got them I will put some of these and then I will let you
start.




       Further by THE CORONER
                                               r   . l . aRBRMwnnn


                  Further bv THE CORONER

These are points from the Jury, one or two of these I
do not think are appropriate and so I will draw them to
your attention but I do not think it is proper to
answer and some you may not be able to answer anyway.
In 1981 the Spurs v. Wolves match can you remember
whether any of the fans who had climbed on to the
fences were pushed back into the terracing? - A. I
can't recall anybody. You mean in the area of the
crushing?

Let us deal with that first of all and then anywhere
else? - A. No, I cannot recollect that and I do not
think it was the case.

You and Superintendent Marshall swapped roles in the
years? - A. Yes.

Did you have an opportunity to meet directly with him
to exchange thoughts, tips, ideas, intelligence? - A. I
cannot remember it specifically. We were at planning
meetings together.  It wasn't something that I felt —
Roger Marshall had more recent experience anyway of
that particular area of the ground than I did.   It is
not something that sticks out in my mind at all.

Nothing specific? - A. Nothing specific, no. There
might have been generalisations, I can't recall.

If you know the answer to this one you can tell us but
if you do not say so. Do you by chance know what the
arrest figures were for 1987, 1988 and 1989 Semi
Finals, in particular drink related arrests? - A. I
don't know the overall figures but I think for 1988
there were one or two people who were arrested for
attempting to enter a sports ground whilst drunk
outside the turnstiles.    Icannot recall 1987 at all
but there was nothing that sticks out in the mind to
say that there were a tremendous number.

The 1989 ones you do not know? - A. No.

     THE CORONER: You have asked who draws up the
Operational Order and the selection of Officers but
Superintendent Marshall has already told us he was not
involved in the drawing   up of the order and so I do not
think it is appropriate  we should ask him that
question.

I think you do know there was some reduction in
manpower made between 1988 and 1989? - A. I cannot
                                              R. L. GRERMwnnn


remember whether I knew it at the time.   I know now,
yes.

You may have some views in retrospect on that but at
the time are you saying it was not something which was
immediately apparent to you and you did not form any
views on that? - A. As far as I was concerned at the
time the intelligence that we had on that particular
match, the resources that I saw in the Operational
Order, were quite adequate in my view to deal with it.
If the intelligence had been different then I might
have taken a different view but, no, it was quite
adequate in my view.

Of course, you were in 1989 the internal Ground
Commander? - A. Yes.

Your particular body of men had not in fact been
reduced, had it? - A. No. I did look at the
Operational Order in some detail in any event. One
takes note of the ground area probably more but as an
overall reaction there was sufficient men to meet that
occasion.

You mentioned that in 1988 the fencing at the Leppings
Lane end had been damaged? - A. Yes.

Could you give the Jury a little bit more detail as to
what actually happened as far as you can remember? - A.
At the end. Well, again I am only relying on what
people told me.  I think from what I recollect the gate
burst open. That is not unusual in itself at football
matches but it burst open and I was told that some of
the fencing, it had been necessary to repair it. I
cannot tell you the extent of it but it was because of
that that obviously we looked at the specifics of what
was likely to happen at the end of this match. I am
sorry I cannot help you any more.

You do not know any more detail? - A. No more detail,
no.

Do you know whether in 1989 any Merseyside Police
Officers were on duty within the ground? We know of
mounted Officers outside but the question is, were
there any Merseyside Officers allocated? - A. No.  I
can answer that question. There were Officers from
Notts who had come, who can be seen clearly on the
photograph and indeed I met them. There were no
Officers from Merseyside who came in that particular
role of coming with, if you like, the supporters.  The
only Officers from Merseyside who were there were the
mounted Officers that we had used because we had not
                                              r. r,- ORRRMwnnn


got sufficient mounted people ourselves but there were
no Police Officers.  I send Police Officers away from
Doncaster to other matches, not every match, but there
were none that came from Merseyside, no.

We have heard from Mr. Wells, who is a St. John's
Ambulanceman, and what he told us was that shortly
before kick-off somebody had told him, and I think he
said it was a Police Officer, that the match kick-off
was being postponed. He realised that was not correct
because the players then came on to the pitch? - A.
Yes.

First of all, did that message emanate from you? - A.
No.

Have you any knowledge as to where he could have got it
from? - A. No.

Had you heard it from anybody? - A. No, no.   As far as
I was concerned that match was going on.

You cannot help us on that score? - A. I can't, no.

While you were standing on the fence in front of pen 3,
did you notice any movement forward which could have
been associated with the crush barrier 1 to 4A
breaking? You know that a barrier broke, do you not? -
A. I do, indeed.

Did you notice any movement that you could have
associated with that happening? - A. No, and this is
hindsight, I think that barrier had already gone when I
got there, and it is a private view in a way but...

We have got evidence of various people. What I am
asking is - or at least what the Jury are asking
through me - whether you noticed any movement which
could have been associated with that barrier
breaking? - A. No. I didn't notice any.

The briefings which are given to Police Officers which
you have described, are they minuted as such? - A. No,
they are not minuted. Mine is not minuted.   I might
have some notes or I might do it from recollection.
When I have done briefings and when I do them now, I
might have a series of items that I have got down on
paper just to remind me.

Perhaps I will add a supplemental. What about the
debriefings? Are they minuted? - A. Yes, they normally
would be minutfed. We have heard the system of the
serial Sergeants putting their reports in and what have
                                                R. L. GREENWDOn


you and then there would be a debriefing meeting.  I do
not know whether the meeting would be minuted but
certainly there would be a report drawn up out of any
recommendations or anything of that nature.

On how many different occasions that you know of has
the radio gone down and what procedure is taken to
overcome this? - A. I don't know of — I think I know
of possibly one occasion when I think there might have
been problems with an interference with a local radio
station.  I think that might have only been temporary
and it is very difficult.  I mean if it went down I
suppose you would have to look at a system of runners
or what have you if it went down for a considerable
time but I have never known it go down;  just the one
occasion with interference that is all.

That you can recollect? - A. That I can recollect, yes.

     MR. ISAACS: Sir, arising out of the penultimate
question, with a view to assisting the Jury, that is in
relation to the briefing, the reason I was able - and I
think this is common ground - to read that long passage
out is because on this occasion Mr. Duckenfield had
actually had his briefing typed out so that he could
give it verbatim from the sheets and that is the
reason, so that the Jury will know, and that is the
evidence that will be given in due course I trust.

     THE CORONER:    It was not in fact a minute?

     MR. ISAACS:    It was not a minute.   It was a
prepared text.

             Cross-Examined bv MR. RUSSELL

Superintendent Greenwood, you have told us that you
have been a Police Officer for some 27 years but I do
not think you have been asked, or taken the opportunity
to tell us, what your present job is? - A. Yes,
presently since 1989 I am the overall Commander for
Doncaster Rovers Football Club.

That is your sphere of authority so far as football is
concerned but what is your job as a Superintendent? -
A. I am Subdivisional Superintendent for Doncaster town
centre.

You clearly have a continuing responsibility for
football and in particular the ground of Doncaster
Rovers, did you say? - A. Yes.
A
                                                                  . 3 3
                                                      r   . l . careRNwnnn


    Q. Do any other significant sporting events or arenas come
       within your present jurisdiction? - A. Yes, under my
       supervision is Doncaster race course which has, of
       course, some quite large events, the largest being the
       S t . Leger meeting.

    Q. I would like, if I may, to take you through
       chronologically the events that you have described to
       this Jury and begin with the events of 1981. At that
       stage you were an Inspector and I would like you to try
       and remember if you can your job that day as an
       Inspector? - A. Yes, I think from memory I was the
       perimeter track Inspector on that particular day.

    Q. That was a match between Tottenham Hotspur and
       Wolverhampton Wanderers was it not? - A. Correct.

    Q. Can you remember which end was reserved for
       Wolverhampton and which end was reserved for Tottenham
       fans? - A. Yes, the Spion Kop as it was then was
       reserved for Wolverhampton Wanderers supporters and the
       Leppings Lane end of the ground for the Tottenham
       Hotspur supporters.

    Q. Do you recall there being any difficulty or problem
       with Tottenham Hotspur supporters obtaining tickets for
       the Wolverhampton Wanderers end? - A. Yes, there were
       quite a few Tottenham supporters I think appeared on
       the Spion Kop.  I think those tickets had been
       purchased.  I think it was one of the things drawn to
       the attention of the authorities afterwards.   It was
       felt that those tickets had been purchased at a match
       quite near to Wolverhampton where Tottenham had been
       playing and taken the opportunity of going for those
       tickets, Tottenham supporters, a couple of weeks prior
       to that Semi Final.




                             / Q . That would have been...
                                        R.   L . 'GREENWOOD


That would have been a fixture against Coventry? - A.
That is correct, yes.

Do you remember what action was taken to accommodate
the Tottenham Hotspur fans who had got tickets for the
Spion Kop, which could in any way have contributed to
the problems that developed at the Leppings Lane end in
1981? - A. Yes, some spectators were transferred from
the Spion Kop end to the Leppings Lane end.

Do you know the route or point at which they were
introduced onto the Leppings Lane end? - A. No, I can't
recall.

One other matter, relating to 1981, at that time was
alcohol sold within the Stadium? - A. Yes, freely.
There was a large bar at the back of the terracing
area, in the concourse.

Can I move briefly to 1987, please? The Leeds United
semi-final, at that time you were, of course, the
Officer in command outside the Leppings Lane end? - A.
Yes.

In the course of your evidence you referred to problems
being anticipated? - A. Yes.

What were those problems? - A. The intelligence on
Leeds United supporters, the element, if you like, that
one comes to expect in football crowds, was quite
detailed.  Leeds United at that particular time had, if
you like, a terrible reputation.  I don't think we had
had Leeds United at that particular Ground for
sometime, it was a bit of an unknown quantity, so we
didn't have that much experience to go on, and we were
relying on the intelligence as to what we were likely
to get, the problems that we were likely to get at that
end of the Ground.

Did your intelligence lead you to take precautionary
measures? - A. Yes, it did and I recall that one of the
precautions on that particular day was to have riot
shields available near to the Ground, so that if we
needed them then we could use them.

I think you told us that the anticipated problems did
not transpire and so there was no need for those riot
shields to be used? - A. That is true.  Some very
important arrests were made on that day which I think
reduced the potential problem.

Can I move straight on to 1989, please, and deal with
the briefings before the fixture? You have clarified
                                        R.   L.   GREENWOOD


more than once that Mr. Duckenfield's briefing included
an emphasis upon safety? - A. Yes.

And that his briefing was in the nature of a general
briefing? - A. Yes.

As far as your briefings were concerned, how many
briefings did you give? - A. I gave a briefing to
Inspectors and I think there might have been a Chief
Inspector there on the Friday, and then on the Saturday
morning I briefed the serial specifically, as I have
said, on the Spion Kop and also caught up with any
Inspectors who weren't at the briefing on Friday.

Can I just deal first of all with the briefing that you
gave on the Friday? - A. Yes.

You have identified the main headings of your briefing
in the course of giving evidence to the Coroner.  It is
right, isn't it, that you did not seek at that briefing
to give a detailed lecture as to all aspects of
policing a football match? - A. Very true, yes.

Nor did you seek to outline or describe the parameters
and the role of each of the serials who came under your
command? - A. No.

The main headings - I listed, I think, eight as you
were giving your evidence - was to identify, it seems,
the salient points for this particular fixture, is that
right? - A. Yes.

Which of course was based on a carbon copy of the
fixture the previous year, and similar fixtures? - A.
Yes.

On the Friday your audience of Inspectors and above,
were they novices in policing football? - A. No, they
were experienced Officers.  In an operation like that
you have got to have experienced people. You can
obviously afford to introduce people into it, but the
practice at that particular Ground has been to use
experienced Officers who know what they are doing.

Those Inspectors were effectively representatives from
each of the spheres of activity which were to come
under your command throughout the Ground? - A. Yes.

They included the likes of Inspector Bullas, the
Inspector in charge of the West Stand? - A. Yes.

They included Inspector Darling, one of whose Officers,
P.C. Illingworth, I think was the only Officer who has
given evidence as one of the track serial? - A. Yes.
                                        R.   L.   GREENWOOD


We heard outlined the experience of Inspector Bullas
and P.C. Illingworth.  Is that the sort of experience
you were referring to when you said earlier this
morning that the job inside the Ground was largely done
by Officers of considerable experience? - A. Both
inside and outside, considerable experience.

When my learned friend Mr. King was asking you some
questions yesterday you described the job of monitoring
the crowd as being an essential one.  Would it be fair
to say it is one of the first principles of policing a
football match? - A. Yes, very much so.

You have referred to the emphasis on safety made by Mr.
Duckenfield at his briefing.  In your experience are
the two ideas of monitoring the crowd and the safety of
a crowd divorced and separate, or do they go hand in
hand? - A. No, they go hand in hand.

Can I proceed briefly to the briefing that you gave on
the Saturday to the serials, particularly to the
serials who were to have duties in the Spion Kop that
day.  As I understand your evidence you singled those
serials out for a particular briefing because of the
experience in 1988? - A. Yes.

Why did you feel that that experience warranted a
special word from their Superintendent? - A. I think
because of the problem in 1988 and the fact that they
had had to have their staffs out, they were in some
danger, it was an important part of the operation.   It
is a big area, that Spion Kop, and it was essential
that we maintained order as far as is possible on
there.  I think more than that, because the Officers
had been in difficulty that year, there was a threat to
their safety as well.   I think it is important on
something of that nature that the man who is in charge,
that they see him and they hear him speak, so that they
can have confidence in that and feel that they are not
left exposed to danger.   I think that is most
important.

That their Commander is aware of the difficulties which
they might face? - A. Exactly, yes.

Of the headings that you outlined yesterday, one was
the reputation of Liverpool fans in your experience? -
A. Yes.

What did you mean by that, or what did you say under
that heading, in outline? - A. What I said was this,
that within my experience and the intelligence that I
was aware of at that particular time, as far as the
Liverpool supporters were concerned then if things were
                                                          37

                                           R. L.'GREENWOOD


   going well for them - and again I am not talking about
   all the supporters, I am talking about the element we
   expect possibly to cause problems - if things were
   going well then there would be no problem.  However, if
   that was not the case then within my experience there
   would be problems, and I gave an example to them to
   illustrate the point.

Q. An example of the previous fixture? - A. An example of
   the previous fixture, yes.

Q. When you were being questions by my learned friend, Mr.
   King, you were asked what you thought would happen or
   what would or should be done, if the centre pens became
   full? - A. Yes.

Q. You will recall that you were shown a page from your
   transcript in another place, and the final remarks made
   in that piece of evidence which was read out before
   this Jury, indicated that in your view it was a
   flexible situation and one that had to be responded to,
   depending on the circumstances prevailing? - A. Yes,
   very much so.

Q. That there are a number of options to be considered? -
   A. Yes

Q. Is it your view that a rigid reflex, a rigid
   contingency, is not to be preferred to a flexible
   response? - A. Yes, because you can't cater for all
   eventualities and I think a flexible response, be it
   inside or outside the ground, is important.

Q. Is that flexible response founded on co-operation or
   co-ordination between on the one hand the Control Box,
   and on the other hand the supervisory Officers at that
   particular end of the Ground? - A. Yes, it is. You
   expect people to be able to deal with things and it
   becomes a team effort.  It interlinks, the whole thing
   interlinks.

Q. Such that in the course of that interlinking we heard
   from Chief Inspector Creaser of his visit to the
   Control Box to check on the appropriate method of
   filling the Leppings Lane Terrace on that day? - A.
   Yes.

Q. That is the sort of co-ordination that you are
   referring to? - A. Yes, entirely.

Q. At about 2 o'clock or at about the time the teams
   arrived, you told us that you went to the Club Control
   Room? - A. yes.
                                        R.   L.   GREENWOOD


On that visit you saw Mr. Lock? - A. Yes.

Was he someone that you knew? - A. Yes, very well.

What sort of working relationship did you have with
him? - A. Extensive.  I had worked with him during his
time at Hillsborough.  I am talking about the football,
I didn't actually work for him on the Sub-Division.   We
were together during the Miners' Strike at a colliery
for quite some time as well.

It was he who told you of the difficulties or the
matters to be expected in respect of Brian Clough? - A.
Yes, as I recall.

Communications, if I can pass to that subject briefly,
communication was principally, if you were out of sight
or earshot, by radio? - A. Yes.

You have already spoken of the noise and used the
phrase "a cauldron of noise", but can I just pick up
one thing you said yesterday? You said that you tend
to listen for your name and then to register? - A. Yes.

Was there a system of call signs in operation that day
whereby you could identify when someone was trying to
speak to you? - A. I would be addressed    by name.

That was unique, or it was a particular feature for the
senior Officers, was it not? - A. Yes, it was on that
day.

So the name that you were listening out for if anyone
wanted to contact you directly was Greenwood? - A.
Correct.

Can I proceed now to the tour that you made of the
Ground, beginning at about 2.35? Why did you make that
tour? - A. To ensure that things were on a stable
platform in the Stadium; to have a word with the
Officers that were on the perimeter track; make sure
that the operation was going smoothly.

At what rate did you make that tour? - A. It was a
measured space.  I stopped on probably, I suppose, a
couple of occasions.

You referred to P.C. Helliwell as being in particular
one of the Officers that you spoke to? - A. Yes.

Where was he situated? - A. He was behind the goal, in
that area, as I recall.
                                                                 39

                                                   R.   L.'GREENWOOD


    Q. Behind which goal? - A. Sorry, behind the goal at the
       Leppings Lane end.

    Q. Can I invite you to look at photograph C344? - A. Yes,
       I have that.
B
    Q. That I believe is P.C. Helliwell with his back to the
       camera? - A. Yes, it is.

    Q.    And he is standing in front of the perimeter fence, at
         the front of pen 4?- A. Yes, that is at the   Leppings
         Lane end, yes, the Leppings Lane terracing.

    Q.    That photograph we know was taken at exactly 14-
         minutes-to-3.  Was it at about that time, within say
         five minutes of that time, that you believe you spoke
         to or spent some time with P.C. Helliwell? - A. Yes, it
         would be about that time.




D




                      /Q. You described standing




H
                                                          40



                                    R.L.   GREENWOOD




Q. You described standing beside him looking into the
   crowd, in other words facing the direction which he
   is facing in that photograph? - A. Yes.

Q. And observing someone climbing up into the West Stand.
   Can I dwell for a moment on the state of the pen that
   was immediately before you. We can see a density of
   people in the front of the pen?- A. Yes.

Q. Is that the sort of pattern of density that you recall
   seeing at the time you were standing beside P.C. Helliwell?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Did you observe any difficulties or any signs of distress
   in that pen at that time? - A. Absolutely none, none at
   all.

Q. If you can now please look at two further photographs
   taken at exactly the same time, C477. That is taken
   a little further to the left and shows the bottom left-
   hand corner of Pen 4 and the majority of Pen 3? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Is that photograph equally in accord with your recollection
   of the state of the pens and particularly the front of
   the pens at the time you were making your tour of the
   perimeter track? - A. Yes.

Q. 478 please. The time is the same. The shot is between
   the two photographs I have already shown you and it shows
   Pen 4 and then Pen 3 in the background and my question
   is the same.  Is that in accordance with your recollection
   of the position at the time you made your tour of the
   ground? - A. Yes, it is.

Q. It was your intention to be at the tunnel in time for
   the emergence on to the pitch of the teams and perhaps
   equally importantly the manager of Nottingham Forest?
   - A. Yes, it was.

Q. From that point also is it a good or a bad position
   to keep an eye on the area of the Spion Kop that you have
   answered questions extensively about? - A. Yes, it is.

Q. Was that the best position in your view to deal with
   what I might call the "Clough factor" that day? - A. Yes
   it is, yes.

Q. In the absence of the specific factors of wanting to
   keep an eye on that particular area of the Spion Kop
   and the media interest in Mr. Clough, is that the
   position whicli you think you would have taken up in
   any event? - A. Yes I would, yes.
                                                                    41


                                          R.L.    GREENWOOD



Q. Have you seen yourself on any video film taken that day
   in that position at that time? - A. Yes, I believe I
   have, yes.
           MR. RUSSELL: Sir, I don't know if there is going
     to be any problem about this but I can give the Court
     the reference of the shot.  It is not on the compilation
     video, it is on the film Map 6 and the time that it
     appears at that is 1459:27 which is when Mr. Clough is
     seen to take his seat and at 1459:43-46 where
     Mr. Greenwood is facing a camera, in very close
     proximity to it.
Q. After Mr. Clough had taken his seat, we know from that
   time it was about the time that kick-off took place,
   did you have any other job to do or did you do any
   other job in relation to the cameras and mobile units
   that were in the vicinity of the tunnel? - A. Yes,
   they were moved away.
Q. And that was a job that you did? - A. Yes, I think it
   was somebody from the Nottingham Forest dugout as I
   moved out from the tunnel that complained about the
   presence of them being there so I told them to move.

Q.    Was it after that that you then took up a position
     in the mouth of the tunnel to survey the scene? - A.
     Yes.
Q. So it was at that stage that you first became aware
   of the problems at the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes, yes.

Q.   Having observed that there were problems at the
     Leppings Lane end or something not right, how long was
     it before you set off to investigate those problems?
     - A. Oh I went straightaway.
           THE CORONER:     I want to stop for a break.       Are
     you moving on to a     slightly different topic?

           MR. RUSSELL: Sir yes. We are going to the
     fence now, the perimeter fence.
             THE CORONER:    In that case would it be a convenient
     time?
             MR. RUSSELL:   Most convenient.

             THE CORONER:   Yes, we will have a little break.

                            (Short adjournment)

                   f
             MR. RUSSELL:    As I was saying before we adjourned
                                     R.L. GREENWOOD
                                      —— 1   ....................




for the short break I would like to take the opportunity
of seeking to illustrate by means of photographs what
was done and what time it was done by you when you got
to the fence at the Leppings Lane end^

        Can I please invite Sergeant Griffiths to put up
C360?
        Are you in that photograph? - A. Yes, I am.

You are the Officer in the cap in the middle of the
bottom of the photograph? - A. Correct.

That photograph was taken at 2—minutes—past-3? — A. Yes.

      THE CORONER:     You are giving me the corrected times,
aren't you?
        MR. RUSSELL:   That is the corrected time sir.

Can I ask you this: is it the first photograph chrono­
logically in which you have found yourself at that end
of the ground? - A. Yes.

We have had some evidence about the line of people that
appears to be between you and the perimeter fence. The
gate that is open to the left is that clearly to Gate 2?
- A. Correct.
Was that a line of people walking from right to left?
- A. Yes.
And were those people who had come out of Pen 3 and
were being relocated or being transferred to Pens 1 and 2
- A. Yes, correct.
Can I ask you now to turn to C440? It is the photograph
in which Nigel Abbott identified himself when he gave
evidence.  Sir, there are a series of photographs here,
perhaps we can skip this one.  I don't think there is
anything material or anything contentious about it.
I am seeking not to hold the Court up.

      THE CORONER: Why don't you move to the next
photograph and come back to this one.

      MR. RUSSELL:  I don't think we will have any need
to come back to it, we can proceed to the next one,
but I am happy to do that.

C354. That is a photograph, is it not, of Pen 3
with the perimeter gate entrance to Pen 3 just to the
right of thefcentre of the photograph, towards the
bottom of the photograph? - A. Yes.
                                                                  43



                                            R.L.   GREENWOOD



Q. You yourself are in that photograph and by this stage
   you have reached the gate? - A. Yes, correct.

Q.   What you appear to be doing at this stage is assessing
     the situation.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. The corrected time of this photograph is still 2-minutes
   past-3? - A. Yes.

Q.   C321 please. That is a close-up of the perimeter          gate
     entrance to Pen 3, is it not? - A. Yes, it is.

Q. Can you see yourself in that photograph? - A. Yes, in
   the gateway.

Q. You have moved into the gateway itself? - A. Yes.

Q. At that stage you still have your cap on? - A. Yes.

Q. That photograph has a corrected time still of 2-minutes-
   past-3? - A. Yes.

Q. Now can I move to a series of photographs which the
   jury will not have seen before. The first one being
   PR1/16/A.

           THE CORONER:  Do you want to do C440, we have
     got the acetate if you want to?

           MR. RUSSELL:  I don't think it is necessary.   It
     was a further photograph taken at 2-minutes-past-3 of
     Superintendent Greenwood assessing the scene between
     the gate and Pen 2.

           THE CORONER: Well you have established quite a
     bit of movement with the ones that you used.

           MRS. PERKINS:    This is C522.

           THE CORONER:    That is the new one.

Q.         MR. RUSSELL:  In that photograph can you see
     yourself? - A. Yes, in the gateway without a hat on.

Q. By this stage you had not got a hat but you were in the
   gateway with other Officers? - A. Yes.

Q. The time of this photograph, corrected time, is now
   3-minutes-past-3. 04 appears just below the 'A' of
   "PAN". - A. Yes, I can't see the time from here.

Q. I don't think there is going to be any dispute about
   it. Taking tihese I hope with some dispatch, PR1/17/A.
                                   R.L. GREENWOOD.



     MRS. PERKINS:    C523.

      MR. RUSSELL: Do you see yourself in that
photograph? - A. Yes.

You appear to be helping a lad in a blue shirt away from
the gate? - A. Yes, that is correct.

The time of that photograph corrected at 3-minutes-past-3.
18A?

      MRS. PERKINS:   C524.

      MR. RUSSELL: Do you see yourself in that
photograph? - A. Yes.

Again without a cap you were leading away a fan from
Gate 3? - A. Yes.
The timing of that photograph being still 3—minutes—past-3.
19A?

      MRS. PERKINS:   C525.
      MR. RUSSELL:    Do you see yourself in that photograph?
- A. Yes.
You are towards the bottom of the centre of the photograph
seemingly making your way back towards the gate just
behind the advertising hoardings? - A. Yes, that is right.

21 please?
      THE CORONER:    What time was that one?

      MR. RUSSELL: Oh I am sorry sir, the time is still
the same, still 3 minutes, all taking place in that long
minute.

      MRS. PERKINS:    C526.
      MR. RUSSELL:  In this photograph do you see yourself
just to the right of the entrance to Gate 3? - A. Yes I
do, yes.
Looking at the position that you are about to adopt, I
think, when you get on to the fence? - A. Yes.

This photograph is taken at 3-minutes-past-3? - A. Yes.

And it seems to show you just before you get on to the
fence.  Is tl\at right? - A. Yes, that is my recollection.
             !
                                  R.L. GREENWOOD



Because the next photograph I would like you to look
at is one we have seen before and confirm that in
C328, which is the photograph taken from the West
Stand at 3-minutes-past-3, the jury can see you on
the fence.

      Sir, I don't know whether a better copy need
be provided of that.  I am aware there are some
problems with the quality of that reproduction?




            f


                 THE CORONER:   I can't see it
                                             R.   L.   GREENWOOD


     THE CORONER:     I cannot see.    Can we see if we can
get a better copy?

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I have got a better copy.
Perhaps it would save time if this were passed round.

     THE CORONER:   If you could pass it round the jury
so that they can see it.   I am not doubting the
witness's word as to his identification.   It is just as
well if the jury actually look:

Can you point on that photograph to Sergeant Griffiths
where you are and then he can indicate it to the jury and
that saves them hunting around? - A. Yes.

You are satisfied that is you? - A. I am quite satisfied.

     MR. RUSSELL:   As the jury look at that can you
confirm or demonstrate the position you are in on the
fence, particularly in relation to the position your arms
are in? -A. Yes, the arms are up.     I think that is taken
in the course of the pushing motions.

So is this the position, that following the kick-off, and
you are dealing with the cameras by the players' tunnel,
you became aware of problems at the Leppings Lane end,
you made your way to the Leppings Lane end,   seen to be
there by two minutes past three.      In that minute of two
minutes past three you are seen to be assessing the
situation and during the third minute after three o'clock
you are assisting fans from the gate yourself and then
still in that third minute after three o'clock you are up
on the fence indicating to fans to move back in the way
you have described already? - A. Yes.

Can I please consider some of your actions while you were
on the fence by first of all inviting you to look at the
next photograph in the series PR1/30A.

     MRS. PERKINS:    That is C.527.

     MR. RUSSELL:     On the extreme left hand side of that
we can see a figure   on the fence.   It has been cut off   a
little, I'm afraid,   but is that you? - A. Yes.

In that photograph we can also see on the right hand side
at gate 4, Sergeant Swift working in gate 4? - A. Yes,
that is correct.

Now 31.A please.

     THE CORONER:     What time is that?
                                          R.   L . -GREENWOOD


     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I apologise.  We ara now in the
fourth minute past three, 3.04 corrected time.

     MRS. PERKINS:   That is C.528.

     MR. RUSSELL:   In that photograph do we see you to
the right of gate 3, at the same time, four minutes past
three? - A. Yes.

And Officers working below you to your left in the
gateway? - A. Yes.

Now 33.A please.

     MRS. PERKINS:   C.529.

     MR. RUSSELL:   The timing of this photograph is
still four minutes past three.   Do we see you beside the
gate on the fence making a gesture in the direction of
the Control Box? - A. Yes, that was the time when I was
trying to indicate that the match must stop.

We can see your arms frozen.   Can you help the jury with
the gesture that you were making at that time,
dynamically? - A. Yes, the gesture was this from the top
of the fence.

For the benefit of the shorthand note, the witness with
his outstretched arms was crossing his arms and then
moving them out several times.   What did you say the
purpose was of that gesture? - A. The purposa was to
indicate that the match should be brought to a halt.

From a different album, D.B17/22.

     MRS. PERKINS:   C.530.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Do you see yourself in the extreme
top left hand corner of that photograph? - A. Yes, I do.

Are you on the fence to the right of gate 3? - A. Yes.

What are you doing in that photograph? - A. I am using
the radio.

At that stage is that when you were, as you told us,
seeking to radio your perception of the position to the
Control Box? - A. Yes, I think so.

     MR. RUSSELL:   The timing of that photograph, as
appears in the bottom right hand corner, is three minutes
past three, but it is possible, and I hope the Court will
be assisted by this, it is possible to say that that
photograph wai taken later than the ones that have been
                                            R.   L.   GREENWOOD


shown so far because it is possible to plot progress of
the lad in the white sweat shirt with the hooped stripes,
with the hoops on, making his way towards the fence and
there he is actually getting over it.    The jury will be
able to look at the photographs in due course and watch
the progress of that person arriving at that point,
assuming that at any stage he did not go backwards.

     THE CORONER:   So you are saying the data based on
that photograph is not only out by a minute, but is out
by at least...

     MR. RUSSELL:   It is probably out by about five
minutes.   It is the last photograph seen of
Superintendent Greenwood before he stopped the match and
it is probably taken at five past.

     THE CORONER:   What is the time on the photograph
itself?

     MR. RUSSELL:   It says 03 on the photograph and from
that it appears that the timing on the DB series is
rather more than a minute slow.

     THE CORONER:   The problem is we have always taken
these times as being one minute different but, of course,
if there are no seconds it could be one second
difference, or it could be one minute and fifty-nine
seconds difference.

     MR. RUSSELL:    Sir, that is the difficulty we face,
but   we have made an assumption all along.   It can only
be an approximation and therefore we only know these
things happened at about the time shown.    Sir, if I can
just illustrate by inviting the Court to go back to the
previous photograph which was shown, which was PR.1/33A,
that is when Superintendent Greenwood is gesticulating to
the Control Box to stop the match, one can see the lad in
the white shirt with the hoops is still some way from the
fence.   He has not got to the fence by that stage.

     THE CORONER:    I see what you mean.

     MR. RUSSELL:    Sir, we know that thephotograph,
DB.17 is taken a little later:

Yesterday you told us you had a recollection of there
being a semblance of a chain being formed rather earlier
than was being suggested, and certainly earlier than the
arrival of Chief Superintendent Nesbit.   Is that right?
- A. Yes.

I wonder if Sergeant Griffiths could put up C.454?    One
can see in tha't photograph activity at gate 3 whereby a
                                                             49

                                             R.   L.   GREENWOOD


number of Police Officers appear to be handling a fan or
someone who is not a Police Officer, in the gateway? - A.
yes.

Is that the sort of activity you had in mind by that
reference to a semblance of a chain rather earlier? - A.
Yes.

We know the time at which you stopped the match.    I
wonder if you could confirm this:   you were asked
yesterday what you were wearing that day.   Can I invite
Sergeant Griffiths to put up C.355?

     MR. PAYNE:   Just before that photograph goes on, I
don't know if Mr. Russell wants to use this photograph to
illustrate the evidence which was given by Mr. Greenwood
about the discrepancy in crowding between the different
parts of the pen?

     THE CORONER:     That is up to Mr. Russell.

     MR. PAYNE:     Or at least the impression he had of
it, anyway.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I think the evidence given by
Superintendent Greenwood is that it looked different from
where he was on the fence than the position from which
this photograph was taken, namely, with a telephoto lens
on top of the South Stand.   I am content to leave
Superintendent Greenwood's evidence as it is.

     THE CORONER:   Indeed.  You are quite right, that is
what he said when this photograph was put up.

     MR. RUSSELL:   If that effect can be gained from
this photograph then the jury can appreciate from the
effects of taking a photograph a long way away with a
telephoto lens, that that would seem to foreshorten
things as opposed to what would have appeared to
Superintendent Greenwood.

     MR.   KING: Sir, there   may be a little confusion.
The photograph I put to the   witness was C.354, when the
answer were given about...     Just to clarify it I wonder
if Sergeant Griffiths could   find it?

     THE CORONER:   That's right.      Put the other one up,
the one that has just been up.

     MR. RUSSELL:    Sir, they are taken by the same
camera.     They are taken in the same position.

     MR.   KING:    Sir, I was not arguing anything.      I was
just...       ^
                                            R.   L.   GREENWOOD


     THE CORONER:   Yes, I must confess I had not
remembered the numbers.  Anyway, Mr. Russell, you are
asking the question so you just choose whatever you wish
to ask within the rules.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     That is 355, sir.

     MR. RUSSELL:     Thank you:

That is a photograph taken of you on the pitch, and is
that the uniform you were wearing that day? - A. Yes.

Did you wear any other clothes that day when you were on
duty? -A. No.

Can I turn to one aspect?   You were asked a question
raised by the jury about whether you were aware at any
stage of the barrier going from your position at the
gate? - A. Yes.

When you decided to stop the match you got down from the
fence? - A. Yes, I did.

Having got down from the fence you had to find your cap
because we can see you in your cap when you stopped the
match? - A. Yes.

Then make your way on to the pitch.  The time we have
from the video of your actually stopping the match is
that given in the chronology, twenty seconds after five
minutes past three? - A. Yes.

Some thirty-five/forty seconds earlier we know from the
chronology that Beads ley hit the crossbar. If, for the
sake of this argument, we assume the barrier went at that
point you would not have been on the fence when Beadsley
hit the crossbar? - A. No.

     THE   CORONER:   On that assumption.

     MR.  RUSSELL: Of course, on that assumption.    I
was only seeking to make the point he wasn't there all
the time.   He had to get down to stop the match:

Having stopped the match you told us you returned to the
perimeter fence and subsequently a very short while later
made your way towards the Control Box? - A. Yes.




             Q. What was the purpose
                                               R. L. GRRRNwrnn


What was the purpose of going to the Control Box? - A.
I think as I explained, one doesn’t stop a match.   It
was done unilaterally in that sense and I think had I
not met Mr. Jackson there then it was a question of
impressing people and what was actually happening and
the reasons for it.

When I put to Mr. Jackson, when he was giving evidence,
that you were keen to impress upon him the seriousness
of the situation is that what you were keen to do? - A.
Oh yes, very much so.

You were asked about your activity thereafter and you
told the Court that you sent Police up the side? - A.
Yes.

Would that have involved an entry by Police into pen 2?
- A. Yes.

Via gate 2? - A. Yes, it would.

I wonder if please you would look at photograph MWL/9A
of which there is a new acetate.

    MRS. PERKINS:   C.531.

    MR. RUSSELL:  In that photograph can we see the
gate to pen 2 open in the foreground? - A. Yes, we can.

Although the figures are still, it appears that a
number of Police Officers are in the course of entering
pen 2? - A. Yes.

Do we see yourself in that photograph? - A. Yes,
directly behind gate 3.

Looking towards the camera? - A. Yes.

Or towards the activity of Officers going into pen 2? -
A. Yes.

     MR. RUSSELL: That photograph was taken at about
08 and so it is not possible to say with any precision
because the photograph that precedes it is 07
corrected.  The photograph that follows it is 08
corrected and it is not possible to say in which minute
this one fell but at about 08.

     THE CORONER: So you are putting to the witness
that that would have been at about eight minutes past
three?
              f
    MR. RUSSELL:    Yes. - A. Yes, I accept that.
                                                                            •   52
                                                           r   .   l   . CTRRM wnnn




       IQ. At this time, following your return to the position in
       I which we see you there, after your brief conversation
    JDI    with Mr. Jackson, were there any difficulties being
       I experienced in removing people from gate 3 as far as
      .1 you can recall? - A. Yes, there were difficulties at
       I that stage.

     IQ. Did the configuration of the gate and the steps play
          any part in those difficulties? - A. Yes, it made it
          extremely difficult.

C     Q. Will you please tell us why it made it difficult? - A.
         Because it is like the sump of the terracing.  I think
         as I said yesterday even on me it comes up slightly
         above the waist and so you can imagine it would be on
         somebody smaller and, of course, the steps lead up from
         the bottom of the terracing as well and that had become
         very, very congested. You are not coming out on a
         plain, on a flat surface, and you are having to go up.
         So it is not the easiest way at all to get somebody out
D        of there.

      Q. At that stage do you recall what the configuration of
         bodies or persons was in front of that gate? - A. It
         was jammed and tangled.

      Q. We have heard a phrase used before in this Court of
         there being a tangle of bodies? - A. Yes.

      Q. Is that in accordance with your recollection? - A. I
         think that is a very accurate description.

      Q. Yesterday you were shown a photograph by my learned
         friend, Mr. King, on which he suggested the Police were
         apparently inactive and frozen to the spot? - A. Yes.

              You perhaps remember my intervention about Sergeant
      Q   *
              Morgan and his serial? - A. Yes.
F
      Q- Those Police who were not doing anything in terms of
         either being on the fence or in pen 2 at that stage did
         jobs become available for them as the rescue proceeded?
         - A. Very much so. It was a good job that they were
         there.

      Q. Was it from those sort of Officers that the activities
         such as the artificial respiration was carried out and
         as we see in the video assistance with stretchers? - A.
         Yes, it was.

      Q. And assistance'with stretchering? - A. Yes.
                                                P. T.. CTKKMWnon


You confirmed I think that jobs developed for those
Officers? - A. Yes.

Both in terms of seeking to carry out artificial
resuscitation? - A. Yes.

And subsequent stretchering duties? - A. Yes.

You were asked what Chief Superintendent Nesbit did
upon his arrival at twelve or thirteen minutes past
three? - A. Yes.

In particular whether he dispatched a serial around the
back of the West Stand? - A. Yes.

To come in at the back. Can I invite you to look at
one further photograph and test the patience of the
Jury once more, C.451? - A. Yes.

In that photograph one can see, can one not, that at
that stage, and that stage is twelve minutes past three
on a corrected time, Police Officers in considerable
number are already in the pens, are they not? - A. Yes.

One can see in the top left hand corner of that
photograph that there is a Police Officer by the
entrance between pen 2 and pen 3, the radial gate? - A.
Yes, I believe so.

That there are a considerable number of Officers
against the radial pen in pen 2? - A. Yes.

Finally, Superintendent Greenwood, can I deal with
this; yesterday you said the situation was chaotic? -
A. Yes.

I would like if I may to try and identify some of the
constituents of that chaos. Was there an atmosphere
there of distress? - A. Certainly.

Was there anger? - A. Yes.

Was there concern? - A. Yes.

Was there recrimination? - A. Yes.

Was there abuse? - A. Sadly, yes.

Was there fear? - A. Yes.

And trauma? - A. I think so.
                                                                       .   5 4

                                                           r   . l . GREENwnnn


            It was a situation, was it not, wholly without
            precedent in your experience or anyone else there that
            day? - A. Oh yes, very much so.
    B
            Did you perceive your role as being an attempt to bring
            order and preserve, in so far as you could, life out of
            that chaos? - A. Yes.

        |Q< In this task were you assisted by others? - A. Yes.

        Q. By fellow Officers? - A. Yes.

 C | q.     By Officers acting both on orders and on their own
            initiative? - A. Very much so.

            Were you also assisted by many of the supporters? - A.
            Yes.

                 THE CORONER: Mr. Russell, just help me on C.451.
            I am not very good at identifying Police Officers. Can
            you point out a few to me?

                 MR. RUSSELL:  They tend to be the ones with
            helmets on, sir.  In the left hand corner there is an
            Officer by the gate.

                 THE CORONER:  I think you mentioned that there
            were some by the radial fence.

                 MR. RUSSELL: Just inside pen 3 but near the
            radial gate that leads to pen 2.

                 THE CORONER: Mr. Russell, when you were talking
            about map 6 and you gave me the times, 14:59:43, when
            there is a good shot on the video of Superintendent
            Greenwood, I have seen the video and you are right, but
            would you just put it to the witness so that he can
            accept that that would be a correct timing?

                 MR. RUSSELL:   Yes, sir, I thought it was covered.

        Q. Superintendent, you have seen an image of yourself on
           the video at the time that you were at the central
           tunnel? - A. Yes.

        Q . It was on film video map 6, was it not, at 14:59:43? -
            A. That is as I recall it, yes.

G| Q.       You are shown there for several seconds? - A. Yes.

        Q        THE CORONER:   Mr. Greenwood, I would like to
            thank you for doming along and giving evidence. Some




H
                                             r   . l . GRRRNwnnn


of the questions which you were asked were distressing.
- A. Yes.

Indeed some of the questions in some respects perhaps
went a little bit further in that not only were they
distressing for you but also were distressing for
members of the families? - A. I understand that
entirely.

I am very, very sorry about that both for you and also
for them but I was conscious of it. I was tempted
perhaps to bring it to a halt but in the end I decided
that we would allow it on this occasion because you
were the senior Officer and you were on that fence. -
A. I am glad the opportunity of telling people.

That is why I let it go. We have got to bear this in
mind because quite apart from distressing the witness,
you might say, "So what?" — I do not say that but
somebody might say it — but even if you were to ignore
the witness you still have to take the sensitivities of
everybody else into account. So we have got to be very
careful about questioning.  It may not arise again and
probably will not. Thank you very much indeed, Mr.
Greenwood. - A. Thank you.




                         /THE CORONER.
                                              B./D,   MURRAY


     THE CORONER:   We are going to pause for a few
minutes, and I think I will start on Superintendent
Murray because I think we are going to have a good
hour, and I reckon I will have finished my examination
within that time.

     MR. MANNING:   I don't therefore have to push open
and open door, with respect, sir, because
Superintendent Murray has been sitting here now for the
best part of two days.  It is not easy, as you have
rightly remarked, for any witness.  It is not easy for
a Police Officer who perhaps one would easily assume is
not supposed to have emotions or feelings, but clearly
Superintendent Murray would have urged through me that
you at least try and start his evidence today.

     THE CORONER:   I am happy to hear you say that.       I
was concerned that you might say the opposite.

     MR. MANNING:      If we could get the 50 minutes or
an hour in ....

     THE CORONER:   I don't want to go beyond what we
would normally do on a Friday, but I am virtually
certain that I will have completed what I want to ask
him and then we can start on Monday with any cross-
examination there might be.

                    (Short Adjournment)

             BERNARD DEAN MURRAY Sworn

                      By THE CORONER

Good afternoon.  I know you were in Court so you will
have heard that what I intend to do, because of the
time, is to try and complete what I want to ask you
before we break for today and then we will carry on on
Monday. - A. Yes, sir.

You are Bernard Dean Murray, I believe, is that right?
- A. Yes, sir.

You are a Superintendent in the South Yorkshire Police?
- A. Yes, I am.

In fact, I think you were posted as a Superintendent,
was it in 1988? - A. In March 1988 to Hammerton Road,
yes.

It was as a result of that posting that you became
involved as Controller at Hillsborough, is that right?
- A. That is correct, yes.
                                            B.   D.   MURRAY


Of course, the semi-final in 1988 followed very soon
after your appointment? - A. It did indeed.  I think I
attended two football matches before the semi-final.

Were you then in fact the Controller in 1988? - A. Yes,
I was.

Not '89, we are talking about '88? - A. Yes, I was.

You had nothing to do with the '87 match, just so that
we can get that cleared up? - A. No, I did not.

In 1988 of course Chief Superintendent Mole was the
overall Commander, that is right, isn't it? - A. Yes,
he was.

But you were supported in 1988, as indeed I think in
1989, by the three regular Control Room staff, is that
right? - A. Yes, that is correct, the same staff,
Sergeant Goddard, P.C. Ryan, P.C. Bishop.

Is it right that Mr. Mole in 1988 followed his normal
practice which he described to us, namely that he
roamed and that he left you in the Control Room? - A.
He did.  I also had an Inspector with me who was
familiar with the proceedings, Inspector Calvert.

So you had additional back-up? - A. Yes, I did, sir.

In the shape of that gentleman? - A. Yes.

I am not criticising Mr. Mole in any way, or indeed
anybody else, I was just trying to establish the
situation.

As far as you were concerned with regard to 1988 have
you any recollection of any major problems pre kick-
off? - A. Before the kick-off - I think the problems
have been mentioned - there were one or two that I
noticed such as the problems that we had with the
Liverpool supporters in the Kop and keeping them
isolated from the Nottingham Forest Supporters. There
were also a few minor problems with the radio, that w$
had interference from outside, but I was not aware of
any major problems apart from those.

I think there was some sort of pitch invasion at the
end of 1988 but it was from the Police point of view
contained and did not present an insuperable problem to
you? - A. It was not a particular problem.  It was well
controlled. The problem with a pitch invasion is if
the two sets of supporters get together, and it was a
question of preventing the Liverpool supporters
reaching the Notts. Forest supporters, or in fact the
                                            B.D.   MURRAY


Notts. Forest supporters coining over their end, and
having a melee in the middle, that was the problem.

1988 is quite a few years ago now, but in the course of
your duties you would have been looking round the
Ground, I take it? - A. Yes.

Have you any recollection of anything unusual in any
way about the terracing at Leppings Lane,   in 1988? - A.
No. I didn't see anything peculiar about it at all.
There was some climbing from the terracing at half
time, into the West Stand, from both the terraces in
front of the stand and the terraces at the side of the
stand, but I noticed nothing unusual about it. It was
the first time I had seen a capacity match for some
years and it seemed to go very well indeed.

You were not either aware at the time or later that
there were some people who felt uncomfortable within
the centre pens at Leppings Lane - 1988 I am talking
about? - A. I received no information on that from
either people who had attended the matches or any of
the Officers who were there for that particular event.

We have heard evidence from quite a lot of people - it
differs in slight detail but the substance of it is -
that in 1988 the tunnel was for shorter or longer
periods closed off pre-match, with the presumed
intention of diverting the fans. First of all, did you
know anything at all about that? - A. No, sir.

The second question, of course, follows: you therefore
did not give the order for that to be done? - A. No,
sir.

Was it reported back to you by anybody? - A. No, I only
learnt about it after the 1989 semi-final.

So that is the first you knew about that? - A. That is
the first I knew that the tunnel had ever been closed.
I obviously made enquiries after that event.

That brings me to the second aspect of the matter.
Leaving aside the semi-final, thinking just of league
matches, were you aware or had you ever seen anybody
close the tunnel off? - A. I had no knowledge of the
tunnel ever being closed. No one had ever told me it
had been closed; no one had ever told me it had been
used as any sort of measure to prevent people going
down.

So what you are saying - I am not talking about semi­
finals, I am just talking about ordinary matches .... -
A. I am talking about every match I attended, sir, yes.
                                           B.    D.   MURRAY


May I ask you this, when you took the job on I assume
Mr. Mole or somebody must have had some conversation
with you as to what would be expected? - A. I took over
from Superintendent Freeman who had left the Police
Force sometime before I was appointed to Hammerton
Road.  I had no opportunity to speak to him.  I spoke
to Mr. Mole about football and he told me that the
matches would be commanded by the Divisional Commander,
which was himself, or in his absence his Deputy, and
that I would operate as the Superintendent from FI Sub-
Division, operating from the vicinity of the Control
Room, which was normal.  I accepted that.  I had a
Chief Inspector there who had been there for some
considerable time and obviously asked his advice on
different topics about football.

From what you have said I take it that the occasion
never arose where you were faced with the question, "We
have got too many fans in this area, we have got to
send them somewhere else", or did that happen? - A. I
never had that occasion personally and I did not know
whether anybody had ever taken any independent action.
If that was the case it had never come back to me and
the people I had spoken to had never told me, "We do
close the tunnel, we do deflect fans from the tunnel".

So what you are telling me then is that was news to you
after the 1989 event? - A. Absolutely.

It became news? - A. Absolutely, yes. It came     to my
attention that someone had said the tunnel was    closed
in 1988.  I disputed that but if people say it    was
closed then it was closed.  It was never drawn    to my
attention in any way.

I would be right in thinking then from what you say
that apart from the hiccups of pitch invasion and a few
other matters which may have arisen in 1988, you were
satisfied that everything had gone satisfactorily? - A.
Yes, I was. The Order was prepared by my Chief
Inspector and another Inspector.  It was based very
much on what had happened the year before, which I had
not had the privilege of attending, and it seemed to go
very well.

Then of course after that semi-final you continued to
do Control Room duties, I take it, for other matches? -
A. Yes, I did.

Throughout the season until some point when you were
told that the next semi-final was going to be played at
Hillsborough again? - A. At the beginning of January
Mr. Mole canje and discussed football with me again, and
said that he was satisfied now that certain matches he
                                           B.'D.   MURRAY


would take command of, and there were some that I would
take command of, and I actually took command of one or
two matches prior to the semi-final.

In other words, what you are saying is that initially
he was taking command of even relatively smaller
matches? - A. All category matches, yes.

It was only in January '89 when he felt, shall we say
confident enough to feel that he could leave you? - A.
Probably. He picked some matches out that he felt he
would like to be present at and some that he felt he
should leave in my hands.

I understand. When it became clear that the semi-final
would be occurring in Sheffield again in 1989, I think
you and your Chief Inspectors or Inspectors set about
revamping the Operational Order, is that right? - A.
Yes, sir. The first information I had was when Mr.
Mole told me we would be having the semi-final either
on the Saturday or the Sunday, he was not sure which,
because of the television. Later that day he came back
and said it would be on the Saturday, the traditional 3
o'clock kick-off, we would go ahead as before, and so
together with my Chief Inspector and the Ground Liaison
Inspector, we saw Mr. Mole, he presented us with the
senior Officers he had chosen to do the various tasks,
and I delegated by Chief Inspector and Inspector to set
about the task of preparing the Order, which I would
oversee.

Would I be right in thinking that it substantially
followed the 1987 Order? - A. Very much so.

But there were several amendments which you made to it
including, I think, the call sign which was changed for
senior Officers, and matters of that nature? - A. There
was no change to the general strategy of the Order.
Like I said, I had noticed personally a number of
problems which seemed minor compared to the main Order
itself, one of which was the call signs. The Chief
Inspectors used different call signs, and at the '88
match I had noticed that one or two of them had
reverted away from the one that they had been given in
the Order to the call sign that they used back at their
normal place of duty.  I felt this was confusing.
There were no Chief Inspectors and Superintendents with
similar names, so I arranged that they would use their
names and then the Officers under their command, who
were probably listening in, would know exactly who we
were talking to.

There were several other things that I wrote into the
Order as well. We did slightly increase the track
                                           B.   D.   MURRAY


serial.  I did arrange for additional serials to come
onto the track at the end of the match to prevent
problems with a pitch invasion.  I also had arranged —
- the year before I had found that a lot of Officers
who were situated down at the Claywheels Lane standby
point were too far away when we needed them, so I
arranged for two coaches to be available outside the
two ends of the Ground, with 50 Officers on board, so
that we could get them at very short notice, but
unfortunately that was not going to take place until
phase 2, which was after the kick-off.




        /Q* We have heard from
                                                      62


                                     B.D. MURRAY




Q. We have heard from one witness who says at about 2.35
   I think it was, wasn't it, he was coming along Leppings
   Lane towards the ground and he noticed a coach with
   about, in fact he said 50 Officers in it, parked partly
   on the pavement and partly on the road.

         Now before I ask you about the time, is that in
   fact the location where you would have wanted the coach
   to be between sort of on the roundabout and the stadium,
   somewhere along Leppings Lane? - A. I would have liked
   it to be right outside the turnstiles, opposite the
   turnstiles, because by that time there should not have
   been a particular problem there.  I would like the other
   one to be outside the Penistone Road end.

         I did hear a Sergeant from 'D' Division speaking
   the other day. The 'D' Division Officers were not
   part of our order. They had their own order and their
   arrangements were that they were to come down as escorts
   on the buses from the Railway Station at Midland Station
   with the Notts. Forest fans and then when they had dropped
   them off they were to go back and collect some more.   If
   they arrived at the ground after quarter-to-3 then they
   stood by in the gymnasium as reserve Serials.

Q. This is Sergeant Swift and his crew so to speak? - A.
   Possibly sir. I don't know them all by name.   It may
   well have been that if all the coaches were down from
   the Station several Officers - I don't know as many
   as 50 - but several Officers may have come down on
   one coach. That is the only explanation I can offer,
   but the coach I had arranged should not have been full
   of Police Officers until we got into Phase 2.

Q. Can I put it another way, this is with hindsight.
   I realise it may not have been in the forefront of
   people's minds but was any report made to you that the
   coach, the one you had in mind, was in that location
   prior to kick-off? - A. No, the coach may have been
   there.

Q. I meant with Officers in it? - A. Not with Officers in
   it, no, it would have been there I would have hoped
   with just a driver.

Q. So you are not in a position to explain that witnesses's
   evidence, certainly not in relatim to that time, unless
   you say it was the people who were coming from the
   Midland Station who for some reason were in that position?
   - A. It should not have been the coaches that I arranged.

                f
                                                          63


                                     B.D. MURRAY



Q. That was an aside, forgive me. And the other thing I
   think you organised was that you arranged for I think
   a radio engineer to be on site, is that right, in case
   you had further problems? - A. I did. We had had a
   problem with breakthrough, it was music that was
   breaking through the year before and not only I noticed
   it one of the Serials on the debrief sheet noticed it.
   I arranged for a radio engineer to be there.

Q. And the final point on this is we have heard from
   various people that the total number of Officers was
   reduced by I don't know how many, about 70 in the
   Leppings Lane, I don't mean in the immediate area of
   Leppings Lane but in the Liverpool sector? - A. Yes.

Q. Were these reductions made in the Middlewood Road area,
   not all of them but were some of them made up there?
   - A. They were certainly made right across the board
   with a reduction in what we call the public order
   serials of two Officers, reducing them to a Sergeant
   and eight.  I think we may have chopped one off what
   we call the Tango units which are the mobile Serials
   and put them down to a Sergeant and four or a Sergeant
   and five instead of a Sergeant and six. Certainly one
   Serial in the Middlewood Road area was taken out
   completely and one of the reserve Serials I think was
   also removed.

Q. One final question on this aspect of the matter and this
   is really relating to 1988. Have you got any recollection
   of any arrangements which were made for people to be
   checked at either Catchbar Lane, Leppings Lane, Penistone
   Road roundabout or indeed nearer to the ground to try
   and weed out ticketless fans? - A. I don't know of any
   specific arrangements.  I certainly did not make any
   arrangements but I would think that Serial Sergeants would
   brief their men as to what they wanted to do and if the
   numbers were controllable, amenable, that is a tack they
   may well have taken, but there were no specific arrange­
   ments made for them.

Q. Now I want to go on to 1989 and the Order had been
   drafted, it had been eventually signed and you were
   on the day now on the 15th April 1989? - A. Yes.

Q. We have already heard that Mr. Duckenfield gave a briefing?
   - A. He did sir, yes.

Q. And you were there I take it? - A. Yes, I was.

Q. Did you yourself on that day also give a briefing or
   not? - A. Yes, I did. Mr. Duckenfield gave an opening
   briefing.  Iffollowed him with my briefing and I think
   I was followed by the Divisional Intelligence Officer
   and also Inspector Sewell on some administrative
   arrangements.
                                                                64

                                        B.D. MURRAY



Q. Did you also brief Inspectors and above on the Friday?
   - A. I did indeed.

Q. So you did two briefings? - A. I did one to the Inspectors
   and above on the Friday and one to the whole assembly
   on Saturday.

Q. Did the briefings which you gave, were these designed,
   if I can use the word, this might be an incriminating
   question so if you don't want to answer it.

           Perhaps I had better give you a proper explanation
     the first time I say this and then I will shorten it.

          THE WITNESS:    Fine sir.

           THE CORONER: From time to time I or others may
     ask you questions which may tend to incriminate you.
     Because of the Rules in Coroners' Courts you do not
     have to answer any such question.

           As far as I am able I will try and warn you when
     I perceive that a question might have this tendency.
     It is a privilege which you may exercise or not as you
     wish.

           THE WITNESS:   I understand fully sir.

           THE CORONER: And if you choose to answer that is
     fine and if you choose not to answer it that is also
     fine, is that clear, but to save time I won't give all
     this detail everytime, just say "possible incriminating
     question" and you will know what I mean.

           THE WITNESS:   Yes, it is not necessary.

Q.         THE CORONER: What I was going to ask you with
     this warning was was your briefing, I am not talking
     about anybody else's, designed by you, did you sit down
     and write it out and decide what you needed to do?
     - A. Yes, I did.

Q. What was its - again it is an incriminating question -
   what was its main thrust? - A. The Chief Superintendent
   had shown me what he was going to say in his briefing,
   he had had it typed out.  I prepared a briefing touching
   on those matters that I thought it was important be
   made aware to the Inspectors and above who were at the
   Friday briefing.  I also examined it for the Saturday
   briefing because I was concerned that it was too long
   and that Officers would not concentrate through too
   lengthy a briefing and cut some items out that I considered
   the Inspector^ could well brief their own men on.
                                                               65

                                      B.D. MURRAY




Q. So can you sort of just give me headings if you remember?
   - A. The main thrust of the briefing would be the emergency
   evacuation procedure; the knowledge about communications;
   about call signs; about problem areas that we foresaw.
   That is about it without looking at my notes.

Q.   That will do as far as I am concerned. This having taken
     place, this all happened during the morning of course?
     - A. Yes sir.

Q. You eventually I think made your way to the Control Box?
   - A. Yes, I did.

Q. I think initially you were there on your own with your
   three support staff, so to speak, but without Mr. Duckenfield
   That is what I am saying? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q.   I think you had one or two visitors, people who were
     looking in to see how things .... A. We always do have
     visitors in the Control Box.

Q. But of course initially things are relatively quiet,
   aren't they, as far as the ground is concerned, but I
   am right in thinking that your job as Controller is not
   just restricted to the area, the pitch, you are controlling
   the whole of the match in effect? - A. No, we have the
   stadium, we have the immediate surrounds of the stadium
   and then we have the far away points such as the motorway
   checkpoints and the Grenoside checkpoints. We also try
   and keep liaison with Force Control and everyone else.

Q. Force Control communications are tape recorded. That
   is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, they are sir, yes.

Q. But Control Room communications are not, is   that right?
   - A. There is no tape recording facility.

Q. But you in fact attempted to keep a handwritten log
   as part and parcel on this particular year? - A. I did.
   Mr. Duckenfield asked especially for a handwritten log.

Q. And you would have liked to have had somebody there but
   there was not room? - A. There was not room in the Control
   Box.

Q. So you decided you would do your best? - A.      Yes, we did.

Q. We don't need to go into any details but between 12
   and half-past-1 you received calls from various outlying
   places with regard to the sort of law and order problems
   which one would have to deal with when a lot of people
   come along? - A. Yes sir, they were the usual problems
   that you associated with a big event.
                                                             66


                                     B.D. MURRAY



Q. And these were dealt with routinely and without any
   particular difficulty? - A. Yes sir.

Q. I think is it right that at about 10-to-2 Chief Superintendent
   Duckenfield actually came into the Control Box? — A. Yes,
   he did.

Q. You at that point said you were satisfied with the
   situation as it was? - A. Yes, he asked what was happening
   and was told that everything seemed okay.

Q. I think both of you then left the Control Room to go and
   find the referee and discuss with him the usual procedures
   about evacuation procedures and things of that nature?
   - A. That is correct, yes.
Q. I think you then returned at just after 2 o'clock? - A.
   Yes, it was a bit longer than I expected because the
   referee was not available. He was not in his office.
   He was on the pitch with the linesmen and by the time
   he came back we had to wait for him and then spoke to
   him.
Q. On that occasion you had another visitor, namely Mr. Jackson.
   Is that right? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. But he didn't stay very long, is that right? - A. He
   stayed and had a look what was going on. I don't know
   how long he stayed but he asked what was happening and
   then he went.
Q. Mr. Duckenfield stayed in the Control Room with you? - A.
   Yes he did sir.
Q. We have been to the Control Room, we know there is not
   very much room in it. Did he stand or sit? - A. I have
   difficulty in recalling but I know certainly at one
   stage he was behind me on the raised area standing next
   to the Video Operator.  I don't know whether he spent
   most of the time there but that was certainly where I
   expected him to be. He told me before the event that
   he would be spending most of his time in the Control
   Room environment.




                     Q. Say that again ....

                f
                                             B,   D.   MURRAY


Say that again? - A. Before the event Mr. Duckenfield had
said he intended to spend most of the time in the Control
Room where he could oversee the events.

So it wasn't a surprise to you he was there? - A. No,
sir.

It was different to what Mr. Mole would have done? - A.
Yes.

But you knew it was going to happen and that was that? -
A. Yes.   I think Mr. Duckenfield's was the textbook
position.

I think you looked round the ground at about quarter
past, or thereabouts?   I am not holding you to the
minute, but around that time.   Is it right that at the
point you noticed there appeared to be more Nottingham
people in than Liverpool? - A. Yes, there is no doubt
there were.

However, as far as you were concerned at that stage you
weren't too concerned? - A. I wasn't particularly
concerned.

At some point you received a message from
Superintendent Marshall that he wanted Leppings Lane
closed? - A. Yes, I did.l

Now I know there is a bit of dispute as to the timings
because you have given much earlier timings than
Superintendent Marshall seems to recollect? - A. Yes.

I think your handwritten note was 14.17? - A. Yes,
seventeen minutes past two I wrote.

I know you have probably thought about this many times,
but are you able to add anything to that now as to what
time you think it was? - A. I can't.   My own perception
is that was later, but the fact that I have put something
else in the log after that time, and timed it at 2.21, I
feel that that 2.17 is correct as far as I am concerned.

Though perceptually you feel that it was later? - A. Yes,
although times did tend to get very blurred.

In any event some time between quarter past and, say,
half past two - 14.17 - a request was made for that road
to be closed? - A. Yes.

That was the correct procedure, that he could come
through to you and ask? - A. Superintendent Marshall was
on the ground.    He wanted some action taking at another
part and so hef came through to Control and asked for it.
                                             B,   D,   MURRAY


The appropriate order was given? - A. When I say "me",
the radio operator carries out my instructions.   I very
quickly identified the Serial at the bottom of Leppings
Lane, that is the roundabout end.   I asked the radio
operator to contact them and tell them to close Leppings
Lane, which he did.   I then identified the one which was
at the other end, Catchbar Lane, tried to get him on the
radio and could not get him on the radio.   Tried two or
three times and could not get him.   I then went back to
Mr. Marshall and asked him, again through the radio
operator, if he could despatch somebody from where he was
up to Catchbar Lane to close Leppings Lane.

I think there were one or two other calls because the
buses were still coming through and you had to intervene?
- A. Yes, there was.    It is very difficult.   The
instruction to close Leppings Lane, it may well be that
this Serial at the bottom had decided that they would let
a bus, or a couple of buses through, but keep everything
else out.    The fact there was a bus actually coming up
the lane did not mean that the orders had not been
carried out.

You could not physically do it, all you could do was give
the instructions? - A. Yes, sir.

We now come to about 2.30.   At 2.30 did you have another
look round the ground, as far as you remember? - A. Yes.
I would be looking round the ground all the time, from
time to time, but yes at 2.30 I had a look round.

What was your perception at that point? - A. Again, there
were more Nottingham Forest fans in than there were
Liverpool fans.   I thought that probably the North Stand
looked about half full and the West Stand itself was
filling up.   The Leppings Lane end, there was plenty of
room at that stage.   The North West terrace and the
centre pens were filling, but there was plenty of room in
the rest of the ground.

You, of course, can't see the outside except by looking
at the TV screens? - A. I can see certain views outside
the ground from the TV monitors.

Were you at that point - presumably you were looking all
the time, but what I mean is, did anything strike you? -
A. At 2.30 I would be looking around.   I am sat in a
similar situation with the TV monitors above me and I
have got the ground in front of me and the radio operator
and telephone operators on the right hand side of me.

I could see there was a good crowd of people outside the
Leppings Lane turnstiles but when I say the Leppings Lane
turnstiles I mfean the whole turnstile conclave.  I was
                                              B,   D.   MURRAY


satisfied at that time that we would get those people in
for three o ’clock.

In fact that is what you told Mr. Duckenfield? - A. I did
indeed.   I said, "There is a good crowd there but we
will get them in for three o ’clock."

What happened after that? - A. As far as I can remember
the crowd sort of stayed about the same for the next five
minutes, ten minutes or so, and then we got a call from
the mounted Inspector on the radio asking for more
horses.   It was about that time that PC Bichard focused
in on a mounted Officer.   PC Bichard, his job is to
bring my attention to things that perhaps concern him, or
if I want something particular showing he will try and
pick it up.   I saw that the crowd was a lot denser than
my perception of it had been before.   Obviously the fact
that there had been a request for mounted Officers meant
that they needed some assistance.

Sergeant Goddard, who is very reactive, picked it up
straight away and radioed to Sergeant Sorsby, who was in
charge of the mounted Officers in Penistone Road and
said, "Send as many horses as you can spare round to the
Leppings Lane end. '   As I looked this crowd seemed to be
getting quite compact.    I knew that I had one spare
Serial to deploy, which was in the gymnasium;   the other
one having been deployed to the Penistone Road end some
time earlier.   I deployed that Serial down to the
Leppings Lane end to give what assistance they could.

Do you know which one that was?   Can you remember? - A.
That would be Inspector Delaney and Sergeant Higgins.  It
was the C&V Serial, and continued to watch the situation
that was developing.

Having done that, what was your next event in the Control
Room? - A. Again I asked Sergeant Goddard to pass a radio
message, which he did.     It was about that time that a
reply came in which was extremely distorted.
Sergeant Goddard said, "Would you repeat your message?
We can't understand what you are saying," or words to
that effect. Someone else came on the radio and said,
"It's not him, it's you, we can't hear you."     I could
see there was a situation developing in Leppings Lane.
I asked PC Ryan to get in touch with the sound engineer,
the radio engineer, the communications officer, but
before he could ring through to the gymnasium, or before
he could speak to anybody at the gymnasium, the guy
appeared at the door.    He said he had been monitoring
our messages.    He realised there was a problem and he
had come to have a look at it.     He said the messages
were breaking up.    They were breaking up quite badly and
we could not bfe understood.
                                              B,   D.   MURRAY


We have two radios.   We have one that we use normally
and one that is used as a standby set.   I am not quite
sure what he did.   My perception was that we operated
with a tulip microphone, which may or may not still be
there.   He undid the tulip mike and he attached some
other microphone or telephone handset. Sergeant Goddard
then started to try and pass messages out.   All the time
messages were coming in that we could not respond to, we
could not acknowledge, and some of them we could not
understand.   It was about this time
Superintendent Marshall was asking for some PA
announcement at Leppings Lane.

We obviously picked that bit up and PC Bichard tried to
get in touch with Force Operations to send a traffic car.
PC Buxton obviously heard that over the air, because we
were on talk-through and everyone could hear what
everyone else was saying, and I heard him because I
recognised his voice - he had worked with me - saying, "I
am on my way round to Leppings Lane."   He had a Land
Rover which had been specially fitted out with four loud
speakers for this very situation.

The radio that Sergeant Goddard had, the handset he had
did not work.   He tried to send the message out and the
replies came in that were terrible.   He actually threw
it down on the table and said, "That's no good."   The
engineer then tried to get to the relief set which was
under the desk.   This meant total disruption. Everybody
had to move out of their places while he got underneath
and fiddled about with the radios.

I do not know how long it took him, but it was
devastating.    It did destroy trains of thought, control
of what was going on.    During this time as well I had
noticed there was something wrong with the turnstiles.
I could see that people were not coming through the
turnstiles as they should have been.    The crowd - I
don't know whether it was getting any denser but it
certain did not seem to be moving.    I was then concerned
that there was something wrong, that they could not get
through the turnstiles.    I tried to get in touch with
the club.    I tried to get in touch with the Safety
Officer by the club's radio.

That is a different radio? - A. This is a different radio
system to our own.   This is a radio that we have.    I
tried several times and I could not get a reply.    I
tried to get Mr. Lock who was really the only one on the
staff I know and he is my point of contact and whom I had
done business with before.

As I say, all the time things were getting worse and we
still had no cbmmunication.
                                             B,   D.   MURRAY


Eventually the radio did start again and it was obvious
that we were getting through.   By that time we were
operating from the hand held radio sets which everyone
had.   I had one and Sergeant Goddard had one.   I
remember using mine at that stage and Sergeant Goddard
was using his.   We had totally given up the mains radio,
which would give us override and we were then in a
situation where everyone was on personal radios, on the
same channel, on talk-through. We were always on talk-
through, but it meant we were in the same position as
everyone else.

That is, in fact, the major disadvantage, that you have
no override on those radios? - A. The normal situation at
football matches, at that particular ground, is that the
talk-through facility is used.   That means that everyone
can hear every message, whether it is going out or coming
in.   However, with the mains set we are able to override
a signal that is coming in from someone else so if we
urgently wanted to contact a unit, we could drive them
out.




    Q. Sometime prior to this
                                                   B. D. MURRAY


Some time prior to this you actually had a conversation
I think about possibly postponing the kick-off, is that
right? - A. About half past two. About half past two
Mr. Duckenfield did ask me to remind him of what we had
said about delaying kick-off. All I knew it was what I
had discussed with Mr. Mole and it was the sort of
agreement that he would come to in the circumstances
that kick-off would be delayed. He gave the example to
me.  I had never been to a match where a kick-off had
been delayed except once as a spectator and wanted to
know what it was about. He said, "If we get a
situation whereby we have got traffic, the people don't
get there for some reason such as delay on the
motorway, a serious accident" or as in 1987 where the
Police actually carried out checks on the motorway and
prevented the Leeds United supporters from getting
there in time, then you would normally delay the kick-
off.

This was at some point before a real crisis had arisen,
is it not? - A. It was round about half past two.

I will just stick with the kick-off point though I am
taking it slightly out of sequence, and when I say you
I mean the Control Room at this stage, did you receive
any message from either PC Buxton or possibly Inspector
Ellis to the effect that they would like kick-off
delayed? - A. I do recall a message from someone and I
think it was probably PC Buxton.  It was about the same
time as the players had come out and Sergeant Goddard
who, as I say, is extremely reactive said, "It is too
late now, the players are out".  I agreed with that.
If I hadn't agreed with that I would have told him
different.

What you are saying is that he made the response, you
heard it, and you did not countermand it? - A. Sergeant
Goddard would often make responses, sir.

I am not complaining about that in any way. - A. He
would respond very, very quickly to any sort of call
for help or assistance that was made.  If I agreed with
it, fine.  If I didn't agree with it I would tell him,
no, we would do something else. There were very, very
few occasions when I had to, but there were times when
I had said, "No, we will not send them. We will send
someone else".

You are saying that the players had    just come out and
this would be at about five minutes    to three or
thereabouts? - A. It would be, yes,    sir.  I recall it
was after the fgates had been opened   and people were
already coming into the stadium.
                                                 B. D. MURRAY



Can we then retrace a fraction? You are taking me
through the problems with the radio. You had re­
established some form of communication? - A. Yes.

I think you were receiving messages from Superintendent
Marshall at that time? - A. Yes, we were.

In fact, he was not quite sure whether it was three or
four. Can you remember how many actually got
through? - A. I seem to think there were two.  I like
to call them two sets of two. We had had information
from Superintendent Marshall that he wanted the public
address system.  I had instructed PC Ryan to pass a
message just to tell people to stop pushing outside the
Leppings Lane terraces and to keep on passing it and to
continue to pass it until such time as ...

Is this across the tannoy you mean? - A. This is over
the Club's tannoy, yes, sir. Then we had the request
from Superintendent Marshall to the effect that we are
going to have to open the gates at Leppings Lane.   "We
have got a problem out here. People are being
crushed". About that time, I can't say whether it was
immediately before or immediately after, an Inspector
came through on the radio, Inspector Bennett, and said
he wanted assistance down at Leppings Lane. Before we
could ring the gymnasium Inspector Sewell rang and said
that some of the D Division serials who had come up
with the buses had arrived at the gym and were on
standby. He said that he had got ten serials.    I asked
him to dispatch 5 and 50 down to Leppings Lane. They
were eight man serials and so he actually sent 6 and
48. He sent them down to Leppings Lane. They were on
the way.   I didn't know how long it would take them to
get there.

    Before there was any improvement in the situation
Superintendent Marshall came through again on the radio
and said that the gates required opening, people were
going to be hurt, people were going to be killed, and
within a short space of time he followed that by, as
far as I was concerned, he just said "Open the gates,
open the gates".  I was satisfied at that point that we
had no more time. He was an extremely experienced
Officer. He was out there. He knew exactly what was
happening. We had bought a bit of time, if you like,
but there had been obviously no improvement in the
situation. My own decision was that we couldn't wait
any longer.  I said to Mr. Duckenfield, "Are we going
to open the gates?" and he said, "Yes, open the gates".
                                                B. D. MURRAY


How did Mr. Duckenfield know that these messages were
coming through? - A. He was with us, sir. He was with
us in the Control Room.

Could he hear? Were the messages being broadcast? - A.
The messages at that stage, I don't know whether they
were being broadcast on the loudspeaker or whether they
were just coming through the personal radio. My
impression was that everyone in the Control Room could
hear those particular messages and I do not think — I
can't remember whether I was sitting down or standing
up at that stage, whether I had sat down after the
radio engineer had been in or not.

Your view of the Leppings Lane turnstiles was limited,
was it not, because one camera was not working, the one
that looked at B gate, is that right? - A. I don't
think we can see B gate. We have already identified a
problem with that.

Which bit of the turnstile area could you see? How
much of it could you see on your monitors I mean? - A.
The monitor would only pick up obviously what it was
pointing it. It could point at the whole area of
Leppings Lane. We could see probably, I don't know,
150 yards down Leppings Lane to the right, towards the
round about. We couldn't see anything to the left. We
could see the turnstile enclave but not right up to the
wall because the camera was set back. We could
certainly see some of the concourse and C gate but not
B gate on that particular camera.

When Mr. Duckenfield said, "Open the gates", how did
you communicate that? You did not run out and do it
personally, did you? - A. No, it went by radio.
Sergeant Goddard, as I say, is very reactive and he
just said on the radio, "Open the gates, open the
gates".

Did he identify which gates? I do not mean by name or
number but which part of the ground? - A. I seem to
think he said "Leppings Lane, open the gates, open the
gates".  I cannot recall anything other than that.  He
certainly didn't say, "Open B gate, open C gate, open
whatever".

Do you know who received that message? - A. I don't
sir.  I had a mental picture. Between the requests
from Mr. Marshall, I ought to add this, which I put in
two sets, C gate as I know it did open. PC Bichard
drew my attention to it. He said, "C gate has gone" or
"C gate has buSrst", I cannot remember which.  I looked
up at the monitor and I could see that people were
                                                          75




   coming in through that particular gate.  I cannot
   remember how many I estimated but it wasn't a
   tremendous number. Possibly 200 came through, I don't
   know.
Q. This was before Mr. Duckenfield had given the order? -
    A. This was before the gates were officially opened,
    yes. That situation was recovered and the monitor or
   the camera stayed on that gate, and I have this vision
   of two people crouching behind the gate, two or more,
   and I can only say I think they were Police Officers
   because of what they appeared to be wearing, and then
   the gate being opened.

Q. So you can't actually tell us --- somebody must have
   received the message if it went over the radio? - A.
   Yes.
Q. And somebody activated it? - A. That is right.^ I can't
   say who but of course we work off the presumption that
   when we are working on talk-through everybody with a
   radio can hear the messages.

Q. I am going to stop. I haven't quite finished - I am
   taking a bit longer than I expected - but it is
   quarter-to-2, it is an hour and that is enough, so we
   are going to stop for today and carry on on Monday. I
   don't know how much longer I will be but I should not
   be that long and then we will just proceed, okay? - A.
   Yes, sir.

        THE CORONER:   On Monday we will stick to our
   10.30 start:

Q. Superintendent Murray, I say this to all the witnesses
   who break, you are on oath and you are technically in
   that witness box, so you must take it that you are not
   to discuss the evidence until we have finished? - A.
   Yes.

       (In the absence of the Jury and the Witness)

        MR. ISAACS:    Sir, it seems unlikely that Mr.
   Murray will have finished his evidence by Monday
   evening, by close of play.  If he does then the
   likelihood is that it will only leave a relatively
   short time. I would ask you to say now that you do not
   propose to call Mr. Duckenfield until Tuesday morning.

        THE CORONER:    I think that is fair enough, yes, I
   agree. Can I just ask something? Mr. Maxwell
   suggested written comments with regard to legal
   submissions?, and I said it did not sound unreasonable.
   Is there anybody who wants to adversely comment on
that suggestion?  (No response) So I take it you would
be entirely content if I agreed to that, very well.
You have your answer, Mr. Maxwell, and I agree with it
as well.

     MR. PAYNE:   I certainly agree that it is an
excellent idea. Our submissions are quite well
advanced and they are, in fact, already in writing, but
we will be asking for a ruling from you about how far
the submissions may go, because we are conscious of the
rule about not being allowed to address you on the
facts, and it is difficult really to draw the line
between where the submission moves from being a
submission of law to becoming a submission of fact, so
we will be asking you for a ruling about that and we
will be putting it in such a way that it will be
comprehensible, we hope. We will need a ruling about
that before we put our submission in, that is point 1.

     Point 2 is that depending upon what your ruling is
we would certainly then, I think, probably want to
amplify our written submission by having the
opportunity to address you.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I am more than happy for you
to do it viva voce, and in fact there there is a lot to
be said for that because I hear it and so does
everybody else. What I was trying to do was to make it
easier for those people who may find that difficult.

     I am glad you mentioned the point about addressing
me on the facts because I was going to add that as a
qualifier to what I had said. When you are addressing
me in Court, and supposing you   were to stray into an
area where I thought, hang on,   we have now moved from a
legal submission to something different, I can stop
you.  If you have written it down it is very much more
difficult because it is in black and white.   I may
ignore it, that is true, but in that sense I think the
legal submissions, if they are going to be written you
have to be even tighter than you would otherwise be,
and you have to take the view,   this is the rule,I know
what it says, and if I am doing this because it is
convenient and easier for me then I must stick by the
rule and draft what I am drafting in such a way that it
does not stray onto facts.

     I have thought a little bit about this myself and
it is exceedingly difficult because some aspects of
possible legal submissions may well have a factual
basis.

     MR. PAYNE:   It might be helpful, I am not asking
you, sir, to embark on a ruling or even think of one at
                                                      77




this stage, but it might be helpful if I indicated that
the area which we think might, not cause difficulty but
need to be addressed, is that what we have in mind is
to address you about which verdicts it will be
appropriate on the evidence you have heard to leave to
the Jury, and with regard to particular verdicts we
have it in mind that it will probably be appropriate to
submit to you that there is not sufficient evidence on
which a Jury properly directed would be able on the
evidence to reach that verdict, and accordingly that
verdict ought not to be left.

     That being the shape of the submission we
anticipate that in order to make the decision of law
about whether the verdict should be left as an option
to the Jury, it is necessary for you to look at the
evidence to decide whether there is sufficient evidence
on which a Jury properly directed would be able to
reach that verdict, so we think at that point really it
does become necessary to have a look at the evidence.

     Now, that is a question which we will be
addressing to you, as to how far it is permissible for
us to go into the evidence in support of that
submission of law. Our argument will be - it will be
helpful for us to mention it - that it is permissible
for us to address the evidence, in order to decide the
question whether the evidence is sufficient for the
verdict to be left.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.

     MR. KING:     Do I assume that if any of us wishes
to make purely   oral submissions you have no objection
to that?

     THE CORONER:   Not at all, in fact, I prefer it.
I don't want you to think that I want you to give me
written submissions. We have done everything orally,
in public, where everybody has been able to hear, and I
would much prefer that, but I do see the difficulty.

     MR. KING: I was not objecting at all    to that
course, sir, I  was wishing clarification as to the fact
one still had the option to do oral submissions.

     THE CORONER:   It is my preference that that is
the way it should be done. All I am trying to do is to
make it easier, as far as I can.

     I think, Mr. Catchpole, you raised the question of
whether we were going to have a breather so to speak,
so that one could think it out. The answer to that is
           r
yes, provided we have time, and if we do have a
breather it won't be very long.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I think we are all conscious of
the time, sir, and indeed I have been the one on ray
feet bleating about it recently.  It is just that even
half a day, just to collect the thoughts, may well
prove productive in being able to shorten it and
tighten matters.

     THE CORONER:   What I am hoping - ray hopes have
been dashed many times, I am afraid, already - is that
we will complete Mr. Murray either Monday or early
Tuesday at the very latest. We will then start Mr.
Duckenfield and allow maybe the same length of time in
planning, which means that by Wednesday we should be in
a position to read P.C. Smith's statement, which is the
one we need to read, and possibly deal with a few
little bits of tidying up, and on Thursday we should be
able to complete the matters which concern your clients
in particular.  I don't anticipate that should take
more than half a day at the very most because they are
specific points which are not controversial, from the
rest of your points of view, but very important to the
bereaved.  If that is right that means it may be
Friday, Saturday, Sunday would be available for
preparation, legal submissions the following Monday,
and I will start my summing-up sometime that week. The
Jury would then go out ....

     MR. CATCHPOLE:      That points to the Monday before
Easter.

     THE CORONER:   That is my intention, that the Jury
should go out on that Monday.

       MR. CATCHPOLE:    That is very helpful, thank you,
sir.

     THE CORONER:   I think if we all aim for that
hopefully we will be able to make it. Mr. Isaacs were
you objecting to any of that as an outline?




          /MR. ISAACS:   Objection is the wrong
                                                     79




      MR. ISAACS:  "Objection" is the wrong word sir.
Not knowing, as we all do not know, how this Inquest
was going to proceed in the future, I am afraid I have
a commitment on Monday which means I will not be here
and I was hoping ....

      THE CORONER:   Which Monday is that?

      MR. ISAACS: The Monday that you are intending
on your present timetable to start submissions sir and
I was hoping, and who knows what will happen, but when
I heard you say that you were going to start submissions
on Monday I knew that the world was going to collapse
and I just hope that I will be able to persuade you,
if that is the case, to actually start them on Tuesday.
It perhaps will not make a great deal of difference and
perhaps the Monday could be the day that Mr. Catchpole
was referring to when we could have the breather.  I
know it will be coming after a weekend when we will have
had a breather, but it would ....

      THE CORONER: Perhaps you could help me on this
with regard to the legal submissions. How long do you
think you are going to take?

      MR. ISAACS: I anticipate that my learned friend
Mr. Payne may be a good deal longer than everybody else.
No disrespect, but I have had some conversations with him
as to the approach he is going to take and he is bound
to be, if I may say   so. I think that two days is probably
the sort of time it will take.

      THE CORONER: You see this is the difficulty.
I have got to allow for the summing-up at least two days,
absolute minimum, sorry about that, I mean perhaps I will
do it in less but I don't think so, so really the latest
that I can start is some time on Wednesday if we are
going to let the jury out on the Monday. Perhaps I could
start on the Thursday and spill over into a little bit
longer on the Monday.

      MR. CATCHPOLE: As a matter of practical thinking
this through, it might be sensible sir to ask the jury
if they would be prepared to sit a normal Friday just
on that once in the   anticipation that you could finish
your summing-up that week so we have got a full day on
Friday.

      THE CORONER: No, that is the difficulty. The
problem is Mr. Isaacs. The summing-up has got to come
after the legal submissions, not before.

      MR. CATCHPOLE: Sir certainly but it would create
extra time at the end of that week which may assist with
the problem my learned friend is raising.
                                                       80




      MR. ISAACS: I think Mr. Manning has it. I mention
it now. Who knows what the situation will be, but it
would perhaps be foolish to spend extra time now discussing
it when we just do not know but I have put everybody on
notice and I would ask you to be mindful of the problems,
especially after so many days, and whilst I understand
my learned friend Mr. Maxwell will provide written
submissions, I think I would be failing in my duty to
my client if I was not here to hear the submissions that
are going to be made by other people.

      THE CORONER: I think that is probably right, but as
I say I would very much like to bring the Inquest to a
close this month, not just because of the length of time
but there are other reasons as well.

      Very well, have a nice weekend.


             (The Inquests were adjourned until
           Monday, 11th March 1991 at 10.30 a.m.)




              r
