                                                                                          M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                                                 QO
                                               Date and tim e raised    >*■ M                                Number


                                                   Q                               \-Vo^ag^                           ^u.cn^o^fo
ffyic^ide source and any document number i f relevant)
                                                              ~X-C£>'                U
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Ves/No
                                                                                                                            Receiver




                                                                                                                            Indexer
Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated
                                                                                                                            3Trz

No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                        Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                            Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                            SIO

                                                                                                       Sf*



Further action No(s)                                                                                                        Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                 ARTHUR HORROCKS




                     Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , B S , MRCGP

             (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                       At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                       On

                 24th April 1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
           Official Shorthand Writers,
      55,- Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                        APP EARANCES:




MR. D. FRASER               Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                            Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH                Medical and Dental Union of
                            Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                            Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN            Trent Regional Health Authority and
                            South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                            Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY              Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE              Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN            Police Federation of England and
                            Wales

MR. P.. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B,. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P,. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S . CATCHPOLE and        Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.    JACKSON
                         INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




OPENING BY THE CORONER

DR. JOHN CLARK Called

   By THE CORONER
   Cross-Examined by MR.    FRASER


POLICE INSPECTOR MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS Called

   By THE CORONER

DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

   By THE CORONER
Tuesday,   24th April,   1990


                 THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                         ARTHUR HORROCKS


        MR. FRASER:   Sir, the next summary relates to
   Arthur Horrocks.   Mr. Horrocks' wife is in court with
   some members of her family.    Sitting next to me, sir,
   is Mr. Jones, who is the family solicitor who has
   looked after them, but through the usual arrangements I
   will in fact address you on any matters which are
   relevant.

        THE CORONER:    Yes, thank you.   I will very
   briefly tell you what we are going to do so you can
   understand what will happen.    In a moment or two I am
   going to read the account of what ha ppened on the 19th
   of April, 1989.    There may be one or two errors in
   that, but I am reading it as it happe ne d and then if
   there are any mistakes I will correct these as we go
   along. ' Then I am going to tell you what the blood
   alcohol levels were.    Then we are going to listen to
   Dr. Clark, the pa thologist and when Dr. Clark has
   finished we are going to ask the Presenting Officers to
   present the summaries of the evidence which I have got
   and which is relevant at this stage.     When that has
   been done we will also have a look at one or two plans
   and the officer will demonstrate these on the big plans
   so you can see what we are talking about.

        When the evidence is being presented you will hear
   quite a lot of references, numbers and so on.-  Those
   are necessary so that when we come to read it again in
   the future we will know which plan we are talking
   about, but don't let that distract you from the
   substance of the evidence that is being given.

        This then is a resumed inquest which was opened on
   the 19th of April, 1989.   On that occasion Neil
   Anthony Parkin, acting Coroner's Officer said:

           "The body which is the subject of this inquest has
           been identified to PC 2662 Shiel of the South
           Yorkshire Police as that of Arthur Horrocks by
           Malcolm Horrocks, his brother.

           He was 41 years of age having been born on the
           19th January, 1948 at Liverpool.   He was a
           married man and he lived at
                                           the Wirral.          He was an insurance agent
                                by occupation.

                                He- died at the Northern General Hospital following
                                an incident at Hillsbo ro ug h football ground on
                                Saturday, 15th April, 1989.      PC 2662 Shiel caused
                                the body to be removed to the Medico Legal Centre
                    B           and there he identified it to Detective Constable
                                Simon Weigold who subsequently identified the same
                                body to Professor Usher.

                                It is the family wish that the body should be
                                cr e m a t e d . "

                          Then I adjourned the inquest and I wrote to you and in
                          fact on the 27th April, 1989, you signed a form on
                          which I had put all the details.     As far as I can see
                          everything was completely correct apart from the fact
                          we had spelt the address wrong.     It should be
                                           We have another version somewhere where
                          it was 1___________ 1'.  What is the correct spelling?

                                MR. FRASER:     It is one                I have never seen
                    D      it with two, sir.

                                THE CORONER:   The alcohol was measured by Dr.
                           Forrest.   He gave evidence of the levels on the first
                           day and the level in respect of Arthur Horrocks was
                           92 mg/100 ml.

                                Now we are going to turn to Dr. Clark.
                    E
                                           DR. JOHN CLARK Called

                                                By THE C O R O N E R :

                                THE WITNESS:   I am Dr. John Clark, forensic
                           pathologist at the University of Glasgow.

                        Q. This is an inquest into somebody who was identified to
                           you as Arthur Horrocks.   I think you had him down as
                           aged 42? - A. Yes.

                        Q. He is actually 41?   - A. Yes.

                        Q. He is also identified as case number 92? - A. That is
                           right, yes.

                        Q. You are quite satisfied that the evidence you are now
                           giving relates to the gentleman we are talking about,
                           Arthur Horrocks? - A. Yes.

                        Q. Can you take me through your post morte m findings? - A,
                           The ultimate cause of death was inhalation of stomach
                H
                                                   - 2 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                          contents, so it is 1(a) inhalation of stomach contents
                          and a contributory factor to his death was crush
                          asphyxia, which comes under 2.

                          This was based on finding evidence of vomit in his air
                          passages and he mo rrhage throughout the lungs, whi ch is
                          a reaction to that.
                    B
                          He also had some signs of asphyxia in his face, that is
                          blueness of the face, and small hemorrhages on his skin
                          and internally.    These were relatively mild but they
                          were present.   Both that and the inhalation of vomit
                          would be caused by crushing of his chest preventing him
                          breathing and also perhaps promoting vomiting and he
                          would inhale that.

                          He would have been unconscious when inhalation
                          occurred.     If he had still been conscious he would
                          have vomited and the vomit would have come out of his
                          mouth.     Because he was unconscious the vomit went down
                          his air passages and that really hastened his death.
                          He was in the process of dying from the crushing but
                          because he vomited and inhaled that really just
                    D     hast en ed it on.

                           As we have said wit h all the other cases, when the
                           pressure started on the chest he would have lost
                           consciousness probably within about ten to fifteen
                           seconds or so and thereafter the vomiting would have
                           occurred and he would have died probably fairly
                           quickly, within a minute or two.
                    E
                        Q. In fact what you are saying is that in these situations
                           where you are attributing the cause of death to
                           inhalation, the time from onset to death is actually
                           less than when you just attribute it to hypoxia? - A.
                           Yes, I think that is true.

                        Q. I just want to re-emphasise it.   The perception of
                           dying would have been very short.   He would not have
                           realised he was inhaling, that is right? - A. Yes.

                        Q. That is because of the crushing whi ch would have
                           rendered him unconscious within seconds, I think you
                           said? - A. That is right.

                        Q. Ten to fifteen seconds I think you said? - A. That is
                           right.    Apart from these findings, he had a number of
                           injuries.    He had fractured ribs on both sides of his
                           chest at the front.    He also had injuries on his face
                           and arms, grazes and bruises, and these are caused
                           either by contact with some surface, either another
                           person or some object - barriers or the ground.    Some
                           of the bruises on the arms were caused almost certainly
                H
                                                 - 3 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             by gripping - people trying to assist him at some
                             stage.

                             Apart from the fractured ribs there were no other
                             internal injuries at all.   He was not suffering from
                             any natural disease which could have played any part in
                             his death at all.
                    B        There is another possibility for the fractured ribs.
                             You may not have been aware of course at the time when
                             you did this, but in fact there were resuscitation
                             attempts made and at his age I suppose it is possible
                             to fracture ribs? - A. I think it is probably most
                             likely they were caused by re su sc itation because there
                             was no bruising - or very little bruising - associated
                             wi th them.   Had they occurred during the crushing I
                             would have expected a lot more bruising.      So this
                             implies he was dead or in the throes of death being
                             re suscitated when the ribs occurred, so I think almost
                             certainly resuscitation.

                               Q. In fact if thatso,is it underlines that in fact
                             although attempts were made they were actually
                    D        hopeless? - A. Yes, he was dead when they were done.

                                          Cr oss -Examined by MR.   FRASER:




                    E




                        Q. That certainly played no part in his death? - A. None
                           at all.

                        Q.         THE CORONER:    There is one other thing you have
                             missed and that is he had slight left ventricular
                             hypertrophy? - A. Yes, it was very mild.     He was a big
                             chap.     He was twelve and a half stones.   Enlargement
                             of the heart sometimes does go along with heavy
                             drin ki ng as well.   It is a common association, so both
                             that and the liver disease might just have indicated
                             that, but it certainly did not play any part in his
                             death.

                                    MR. FRASER:   Th an k you for that.       Thank you,
                             sir.
                H
                                                    - 4 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                THE CORONER:    Thank you, Dr. Clark.    Now I
                          beli ev e you are going to see somebody.    Am I right in
                          thinking that you are in no other cases this afternoon?

                               DR. CLARK:     That is right.

                               THE CORONER:   We are not trying to get rid of
                          you, but when you have seen the families if you want to
                    B     leave us, that would be perfectly in order.

                               Are you happy with that?

                                MR. FRASER:    I am perfectly happy,   sir.

                              POLICE INSPECTOR MA TTHEW ROBERT SAWERS Called
                    C
                                              By THE C O R O N E R :

                               THE WITNESS:   I am Mat thew Robert Sawers,    sir,   a
                          Police Inspector with the West Midland Police.

                        Q. Yes, officer, if you would take us through the summary.
                           - A. At about 0745 hours on Saturday, 15th April, 1989,
                    D      Mrs. Susan Horrocks saw her husband, Arthur Horrocks,
                           leave home with the intention of travelling to
                           Sheffield.  Arthur was to attend the FA Cup Semi Final
                           football match at Hillsbo ro ug h Stadium with some
                           friends.

                           Mr. Ma lc ol m Horrocks travelled to Sheffield in a hired
                           minibus with his brother Arthur, Mr. David Golding, Mr.
                    E      Keith Golding, Miss Nicola Karen Stewart and another
                           friend.      The party stopped en route to Sheffield at a
                           public house for a meal.      The party left the public
                           house at about 1400 hours and travelled to Hi llsborough
                           Stadium by bus.     They arrived in Leppings Lane at about
                           1415 hours and joined a large crowd outside the
                           turnstiles area.      The other man in the party left at
                           this time.
                    F
                           Arthur and these four witnesses eventually entered via
                           the turnstiles  and went into enclosure 3. David
                           Golding states  they entered the enclosure about five
                           minutes before the players came on to the pitch, which
                           would be about 1450 hours.

                           They were pushed forward by the pressure in the crowd
                    G      near to the front perimeter fencing.  David Golding saw
                           that Arthur Horrocks was in front of him and to his
                           left.   Mr. Golding was aware of severe crowd pressure
                           and after a couple of minutes he saw Arthur with his
                           head slumped forward and his eyes closed.   Mr. Golding
                           tried to arouse Arthur but without success.

                H                                 _ 5 _


J. L. Harpham Ltd
After some minutes Mr. Golding felt the pressure in the
enclosure ease and he saw Arthur slump to the ground.
Mr. Golding was pulled free from the crowd and assisted
to remove Arthur from the terrace, lifting him with
assistance over the lateral fence.

Mr. Golding was himself helped on to the pitch and to
the rear of the South Stand.     He later saw Arthur
being wheeled passed him on a trolley and saw attempted
resu sc itation being carried out.

For your information, sir, this witness   is actually
seated next to Mrs. Horrocks.

Mr. Ma lcolm Horrocks had managed to escape from the
crushing in the pen and saw his brother being carried
from the terracing.    He went on to the pitch and saw a
police officer performing resuscita tio n on his brother.
He thought that his brother was dead.    The police
officer has not been identified.

Mr. Richard Robinson was a spectator at the match and
went on to the pitch to assist.    He attempted to
resuscitate a man whom he now knows to be Arthur whom
he found lying on the pitch.    He was assisted by St.
John's Ambulance Officers who provided an oxygen bottle
and mask and they continued resuscitation.    The St.
John's Ambulance personnel have not been identified.

Mr. Robinson assisted to put Arthur on a stretcher and
took him through the stand where a fireman who has not
been identified gave further oxygen.   Mr. Robinson saw
Arthur put in an ambulance.

Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
terracing, Police Constable Earls entered enclosure 3
and assisted to remove casualties.   He assisted Mr.
David Golding on to the pitch and then towards an
ambulance at the rear of the South Stand.   The officer
saw a man who he had attempted to resuscitate in
enclosure 3, now known to be Arthur, and was laid by
him on a stretcher.   Mr. Golding on seeing Arthur
became very upset and Police Constable Earls assisted
to put Arthur into an ambulance and travelled wit h him.

The ambulance crew, Lynn Franklin and Brian Grady went
behind the South Stand and saw Arthur being treated by
a police woman and fireman who have not been
identified.

Arthur was put into the ambulance and Mr. Grady and
Police Constable Earls continued resuscitation en route
to the Northern General Hospital.   Police Constable
Earls noted the time the ambulance left the stadium as
being 1548 hours.   Upon arrival at hospital Arthur was
examined by a doctor, believe to be Dr. Rani Naidoo,
who certified life extinct.

Police Constable Earls assisted to escort the body of
Arthur to a plaster room which was being used as a
temporary mortuary.

Dr. Janet Doore, Senior House Officer, later r e ­
examined Arthur in the plaster room and confirmed life
extinct.

Police Constable Shiel attended the Northern General
Hospital and escorted Arthur's body to the gymnasium at
Hi lls bo ro ug h Stadium where a temporary mortuary had
been set up.

At about 2305 hours Mr. Ma lcolm Horrocks identified the
body of his brother to Police Constable Shiel at the
temporary mortuary in the gymnasium.

Police Constable Shiel later escorted Arthur's body to
the Medico Legal Centre and confi rm ed the
identification to Detective Constable Weigold.

On Monday, 17th April, following identification by
Detective Constable Weigold, Dr. John Clark carried out
an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of
death.

Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
blood sample from the deceased whe re the presence of
ethanol was detected.    The witnesses proving
continuity of the blood sample are Roger Wilson,
Detective Sergeant Turner and Detec ti ve Sergeant
Fletcher.   Dr. Alexande r Forrest carried out- the
analysis.

Al tho ug h no ticket was found in the personal effects of
Mr. Horrocks, the evidence is clear that they entered
the stadium via a turnstile.

That concludes   the summary,   sir.

I am asked to deal with one specific point raised by
the family in dis cussion before we came into court.
You will notice at the start of the summary, sir,
concern in g the journey to Sheffield that they stopped
for a meal at a licensed house.     I would wish to make
it clear to you, sir, there is no suggestion wh at so ev er
that Arthur Horrocks was the driver of the vehicle that
conveyed them from Liverpool to Sheffield.     I would
emphasise the evidence particularly in David Golding's
statement that on leaving the licensed house the
journey to the stadium was made by public transport,       by
bus.

Thank you.   It was not a point which I was worried
about, but that is perfectly all right.    I want to see
whether you can help with regard to the timing when
they actually came through the turnstiles.    I think I
am right in saying that in fact nobody says in so many
words what time they came through, but if you have a
look at page 20. - A. Yes.

This is the statement of Nicola Karen Stewart.  Am I
right in saying that she says that they came through
turnstiles and she says the boys went to the toilet.
That is about half way down.   Can you find it? - A.
Yes.

Then she goes on to say:

          "When they came back we made our way down the
          tunnel."

She goes on to say:

          "They had already opened up the gates twice by
          this time to allow the crowds through."

- A. That is what she says, yes.

She goes on to say:

          "I am talking about the concertina gates which had
          been pulled open."

Then she says that lots of people came through.   Those
gates were opened, as far as we know, about 1448 and
1452? - A. That is correct, sir.

Presumably when they were wa lking down the tunnel
towards the terracing, this group, they were going down
at around that time?   Would that be correct? - A. Yes,
sir.   I believe the witness David Golding also offers
some assistance here, sir, on page 6.    He describes,
sir, at the top of the page on line 3, arriving at the
ground in the vicinity of the stadium at 2.15.     Then
just below half way, sir, he refers to arriving in the
penned area about five minutes before the players came
out   .
Yes, that would tie in with that. - A. It is based upon
that, sir, I believe the approximated time of 1450 is
based.
1448 was the first opening and 1452 was the second
opening of the gate because Nicola describes two
openings? - A. She does, sir, and those timings you
have given me are correct.

This is dealt wi th again by Keith Golding in his
statement.   If you look at page 13. - A. Yes, sir.

He says:

       "We had been waiting for about twenty minutes when
       we got through the turnstiles."

Can you find it? - A.      Is it about half way down the
page, sir?

A little bit higher,      line 8. - A. Yes,      I have it.

Then presumably they went to the toilet and then he
goes on about seven lines from the bottom he says:

       "Then we saw the gate open and a crowd of
       supporters came through the concertina gate."

So they were already in the concourse area?            - A. Yes,
sir.

W hen they noticed this? - A. That is correct,             sir.

     MR. FRASER:      The family have no questions,           sir,
thank you.

     THE CORONER:   One other thing            I just want to
clarify.   The certificat io n by Dr.          Rani Naidoo.   I am
right in thinking that Mr. Horrocks            was re-certified by
Dr. Doore? - A. Yes, that is right,            sir.

The reason why we don't want to rely 100% on Dr.
Naidoo's cert if ic ati on is because her identification of
the person is not 100%.       That would be a fair comment?
- A. Yes, sir.      She was shown a photogr ap h and she
cannot say definitely that that was the person she
certified.    She refers to him looking similar.

       THE CORONER:     Anything else arising out of that?
(No)

       DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MIC HA EL LAYTON Called

                      By THE C O R O N E R :

     THE WITNESS:   Michael Layton,            Detective
Inspector, West Midlands Police.
Yes, officer. - A. An examination has been made of the
visual evidence in respect of this case and Arthur has
been identified apparently alive in enclosure number 3.

If I can refer you specifically to a photogr ap h wh ic h
has been given the reference number PR.1/10A, this
indicates the location of Arthur in enclosure number 3
and it is timed at 1503.

This identification, sir, was made by Mr. Golding who
in fact has signed a plan of the terraces indicating
the position of Mr. Horrocks.   That plan, sir, is
referenced DG.l.

Sir, when Mr. Go lding was seen there was reference to a
second pho tograph whic h has not been referred to this
morning.    That has been explained to Mr. Golding.
Basically, we feel that the first photogr aph PR.1/10A
is more accurate in terms of what we are seeking to
establish.

Mr. Ro binson has viewed a mortuary photograph and
confirmed that the man he tried to resuscitate was in
fact Mr. Horrocks and he also signed a plan of the
pi tch indicating the position at whi ch he attended
Arthur.    Sir, that plan is referenced RJAR.l.

Lynn Mary Franklin has viewed photographs and she has
confirmed that Mr. Horrocks was the man she conveyed to
hosp it al and she marked on a plan at the ground the
location at which she attended to Mr. Horrocks.     That
plan is reference LMF.l.

Fireman Peter Jose ph Mulcrone has viewed a pho tograph
of Arthur Horrocks and he believes he may have attended
to Arthur on the pitch and a doctor certified death.

W i t h the other evidence available this identification
must be in doubt and as such is only included for
information purposes.

It does not fit in really with the rest of the
evidence? - A. No, sir.     At the time of seeing Mr.
Golding in fact Mr. Mal colm Horrocks, who I believe is
Arthur s brother, was also present and he has seen the
photo gr ap h we have referred to, PR.1/10A.

Sir, could I refer you to a plan DG.l, which is the
plan made by Mr. Golding, which is a plan of the
terraces?

Yes.   Shall we use yours, Mr. Layton?   The plan of
David Golding is, for all practical purposes, identical
to yours?   - A. They are both in the same location,       sir,
yes.

Shall we use yours? - A. Yes.    In fact I should
perhaps add that Mr. Golding himself is also shown on
that photogra ph so we are aware that both were in that
location.   Sir, the plan I have prepared, if you will
just bear with me for a moment?

Yes,   indeed, MWJL.1/42?   - A. That is correct,   sir.

That is going to be C.76.     - A. Wou ld you wish to refer
to any other plan, sir?

I am just having a look.   I think maybe the only other
one that we might refer to is RJAR/1? - A. Yes, sir,
that is a plan prepared by Richard Robinson.

That is C.77.    Can you demonst ra te it for us? - A.
Sir, if I could refer to the plan MWJL.1/42, whi ch as
you say indicates an identical location to that which
Mr. Golding referred to, this is enclosure number 3.
The point at wh ich the photog ra ph PR .6/10A shows Mr.
Golding and Arthur Horrocks is at this point here in
enclosure number 3.

Sir, if we could refer to the plan RJAR.l,
Mr. Robinson's plan, if we look at the pitch, we have
got two locations.      One here and then the second
location h e r e , sir.

       THE CORONER:   Mr.   Fraser?

     MR. FRASER:    Sir, the family have no questions
but I rise because at this point Mrs. Horrocks
specifically wants me to express through you her thanks
for the valiant but tragically un successful attempts
that were made by a large number of people to revive
her husband.   We are fortunate in this case to have a
very well doc umented sequence of events which shows the
enormous efforts that was made to help this man.
Unfortunately they were un successful but Mrs. Horrocks
formally wants to record her thanks to the medical
teams and to the members of the public who did what
they could on this day.

     THE CORONER:      Thank you very much indeed.   I
very muc h ap pr eciate you saying that, Mrs. Horrocks,
and so will all the people to whom it is addressed.

     Mrs. Horrocks, and, indeed, Mr. Golding, and
everybody else who belongs to the family, thank you for
coming.   It is good of you, Mr. Golding, in particular
that you have come today to be here with Mrs. Horrocks.
I am sure she appreciates the fact that you are here,
though it must be quite hard for you yourself because
you were there on the day.

     Mrs. Horrocks, your husband of course was a little
bit older than some of the other people we have dealt
with but that does not make his loss any less tragic.
We are just as sorry and we think of you in the same
sort of way because as far as you are concerned that
was your hu sband and nobody else and we would like to
extend our sympathy.   As I have already said, I am most
grateful to you for your kind words to Mr. Fraser and I
am sure it is very much appreciated.    Thank you for
coming.

     Perhaps I could just add one other thing wh ich I
have just recollected.    You will notice that we have
said he died at the Northern General Hospital and
although it is pretty clear from the evidence,
particularly the pa thological evidence, that he must
have been dead at Hillsborough, we tend to take the
time of death when some identifiable medical
practitioner says a person is dead.    Perhaps you could
bear that in mind because otherwise you might wonder
why - you know, where does the certification come in.
That is why we pick that as the period.

   (The inquest on ARTHUR HORROCKS was adjourned
               to a date to be fixed-)
