HER MAJESTY'S COROWER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             fWEST DISTRICT)
                                            29
     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE
  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
            STADIUM DISASTER
         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before
. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP
          (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                    At
              The Town Hall,
                Sheffield.
                    On
            14th January, 1991




         TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




   Froa the Notes of J.L. Harphaa, Ltd.,
        Official Shorthand Writers,
    55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                    INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT



R. MARSHALL Sworn

     By The Coroner
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne
     Cross-Examined by Mr. Isaacs
     Cross-Examined by Mr. King
               TWENTY NINTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                    MONDAY. 14 th JANUARY 1991

     THE CORONER:     We will start with Roger Marshall then
please.

                      ROGER MARSHALL Sworn

                         Bv THE CORONER:

Q. It is Roger Marshall, is that right? - A. That is
   right, sir.

Q. You are a Superintendent in the South Yorkshire
   Police? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Mr. Marshall, perhaps before we begin, briefly just
   outline how long you have been an Officer and what
   experience, if any, you have had with the policing of
   matches, football matches in particular? - A. Sir, I
   joined the West Riding Constabulary as a Police cadet
   in 1960, becoming a Constable in 1962.   I served at
   Batley for a period of six years transferring on
   promotion with the rank of Sergeant to Stocksbridge
   in 1968.   In 1973 I went to Barnsley as a Divisional
   Training Officer and in June 1974 I took charge of
   the training of Police cadets in the newly formed
   South Yorkshire Police.   I remained in that
   occupation for about three years going to Hammerton
   Road in 1977.   That was my first experience of
   policing Sheffield Wednesday's football ground.

       In 1980, late 1980, I was promoted to the rank of
   Chief Inspector and I was posted to Barnsley.   I
   policed the football ground at Oakwell for a
   relatively short period.  I then went to the Police
   Staff College for a six months training course.   On
   return from that course I was posted to the Research
   and Development Department at Police Headquarters.
   In 1982 I was seconded to the office of Her Majesty's
   Inspector of Constabulary at Lincoln as a junior
   staff Officer. Whilst I was stationed there I was
   promoted to the rank of Superintendent.  I returned
   to Sheffield in 1983 and was posted to the City
   centre Subdivision.  I was in charge of that
   Subdivision for a period of three years.  I was
   responsible for policing Sheffield United's football
   ground during that time.  I policed most of the
   marches which took place in the Sheffield city
   centre.

        I was posted back to Sheffield North Division,
   my present posting, in - let us see - in late 1987
   and I have been in that posting since that time and
   again I went back to policing Sheffield Wednesday's
   football ground in 1987.  So in terms of my broad
   experience of policing football that is about nine or
   ten years on and off.
                                              R. MARSHALL



From that, I deduce that you did not police the 1981
match with Sheffield Wednesday?  I think there was a
Semi Final in 1981, would that be right? - A. I
originally thought I had not policed that match but I
do believe I had a job outside the ground but it was
some distance remote from the ground itself.

So whether you policed it or not you know nothing
about what happened inside the ground? - A. No, sir.

I think there was a Semi Final in 1977, is that
right? - A. That is right, sir, yes.

Did you police that? - A. Yes, I think Liverpool was
one of the teams present on that occasion but I
cannot remember - I think it was Arsenal.

1987 I am talking about? - A. 1987.   I am sorry, did
you say 1977 or 1987?

I might have said 1977 but I meant 1987? - A. No,
that was Leeds and Coventry.  No, I did not, sir.

But you did police the 1988 Semi Final? - A. Yes, I
did, sir.

Which was the equivalent to 1989? - A. Yes, sir.

I want to just spend a few minutes on 1988.  Your
task in 1988 was within the ground, is that right? -
A. Yes, although I did some patrolling in Penistone
Road and at the back of the South Stand.

What was your job? - A. My job was Ground Commander.

I do not want you to tell me in the greatest of
detail but just briefly what does that task involve,
the task of Ground Commander, as you understood it in
1988? - A. Sir, it is a wide-ranging role.  Basically
it is to see primarily that the spectators behave
themselves.  The job is one of public order and to
deal with outbreaks of disorder within the ground, to
see that Police Officers have a point of reference if
there is a problem, to see that members of the ground
staff, the Club management, have a point of reference
if problems arise, to keep an eye on the way that the
ground is being run, to keep an eye on the Police
Officers doing their duty and to have a general eye
on safety problems and basically to discharge a
normal policing role.

I take it you were assisted in this task by
Inspectors, Sergeants and Constables? - A. Yes, there
is a command structure which devolves down to the
                                               R. MARSHALL


Constables who have a duty in various parts of the
ground.

If I can use the term, above you is the Controller? -
A. Yes, the Chief Superintendent or the Assistant
Chief Constable who might well be in charge.

In 1988 do you remember who that was? - A. That was
Mr. Mole.

If you do not know the answer to this just say you do
not know?  do you know how many years Mr. Mole had
done that task at Sheffield Wednesday of
Controller? - A. I think he had probably done it. He
was certainly there in 1987 but he had been there for
a substantial period before that.  I think if I can
help you, sir, Mr. Mole was perhaps one of the most
proficient and knowledgeable Officers in policing
football.  In fact he was a visiting speaker at the
Police Training School at Wakefield talking about the
problems of policing football.

The preparation for that match, for the 1988 match we
are talking about, just concentrating on 1988 for the
moment? - A. Yes.

First of all, did you have anything to do with the
actual drawing up of the actual Operational Order for
1988? - A. No, sir.




                       /Q.   The preparation then so.
                                              R.   MARSHALL


The preparation then, as far as you were concerned, how
was that dealt with in 1988? - A. Well, again, the police
service is given quite short notice of these events and
the preparation tends to rely on precedent, insofar as if
there is a plan which is in existence which has been seen
to work well in the past then we dust the plan down, get
it off the shelf and revise it as necessary and use that
as/ a blueprint.

However, the planning involves not just the police, it
involves public transport, the other emergency services,
the football club itself and, of course, the FA.

Can you remember whether you had any briefings prior to
the start of the match in 1988?   It's a long way back, I
realise that. - A. The pattern is a fairly well
established one insofar as once the operational order has
been prepared, based on meetings which have Deen held
prior to the match itself, there is usually a briefing
for officers of Inspector rank and above.   Now that was
arranged both in 1988 and in 1989 at the ground itself.
Perhaps as will have become apparent to the Inquest, not
all tne officers who are on duty at a semi-final actually
come from the Sheffield Divisions and do not have an
intimate knowledge of the ground and the environment
surrounding it. Therefore it is necessary to have a
detailed briefing, based on the Operational order to
acquaint people with their particular duties and the
supervisory role which is expected of them.

The briefing in 1988, was that done by Chief
Superintendent Mole and others, as far as you remember? -
A. Yes, it was.

Was there anything said at that briefing which you can
still remember now, or has it all basically faded into a
blur? -A. I cannot remember specific items.

You have already told me you were responsible for the
ground and that would include the Leppings Lane Stand and
terraces? - A. Yes.

And, of course, the Spion Kop and the North and South
Stands? - A. Yes.

And the field?   - A. And the field.

It may include other things but it certainly includes
that? - A. It does, sir.

I want you to think back to 1988 and tell me first of all
whether in your mind there is anything that stands out as
exceptional in any way? - A. There were one or two
incidents, but my most lasting recollection is that the
                                              R.   MARSHALL


1988 semi-final was a policing success.    There was a
stabbing which took place in Hillsborough Park, which was
successfully resolved to our relief.    There was a
pyrotechnic, which is like a flare discharged during the
course of the game, which was clearly something which was
dangerous.   There were minor incidents of drunkenness
and obstructions, but in other respects the game passed
off without serious incident.

So your recollection of the game is that really
everything was fine?   These are isolated incidents that
you have mentioned, nothing of any major moment? - A.
Nothing of any major problems.

Can you tell me this: do you recollect whether it was
reported to you or whether you yourself knew of any
injuries in the 1988 match, apart from trivial things? -
A. There are always odd injuries, collapses and that sort
of occurrence, but nothing came to my attention which
caused me concern at the time which I can now recollect.

It would be fair to say that whatever there might have
been about injuries there were no deaths reported to you?
- A. None, sir.

None at all from any source, be they medical or... - A. I
cannot remember, sir.

I want you now to think back - we are still sticking with
1988 at the moment - to the Leppings Lane terraces in
particular because obviously that is the bit I am
interested in.   First of all, can you remember where you
were when at around kick-off time?   If you cannot
remember you will have to say so.   Can you remember
where you were? - A. I think I was round about the
players' tunnel.

Is there a reason why you might have been there? - A. Not
really.   I could have been anywhere.

Now that is about half way down the South Stand? - A.
Yes, sir.

Can you recollect anything at all about the state of the
Leppings Lane terraces at about that time? - A. Well, the
terraces were full.

Did they appear to you at the time in any sense worrying?
-A. Not at all, sir.

Can you recollect whether you saw anybody climbing up in
the Stands? - A. Into the West Stand?
                                              R.   MARSHALL


Yes, into the West Stand. - A. There is always some
movement between the Leppings Lane terrace and the Stand
itself, but as to the reason for that is a matter of
conjecture.   It may be that people find the terrace not
as good a viewing position and enlist the aid of others
to lift them out of that situation to a better viewing
position.   There is always some movement of people being
lifted out and it is something which the West Stand
serials try to prevent.

Have you policed league matches there as well? - A. Yes.

Are you saying that the transfer, for whatever reason, of
spectators from the terraces to the stands at the
Sheffield Wednesday ground is something which happens
relatively regularly at matches? - A. No, I wouldn't say
it happens regularly because, of course, the number of
times that that terrace is full to capacity is few and
far between.




        Q. Are you saying then
c

                                                       R.   MARS FIA LL




        0. So are you saying then that it happens more when the
           terraces are full as opposed to when the terraces are
           sparsely populated because say the following happens to
           be smaller? - A. Yes.

        G. So the fuller the terrace the more likely the transfer?
    B      - A. Yes.

        Q. Going back to 1988 for a moment again, did you sse any
           of these transfers taking place? - A. Yes.

        0. Do you recollect - perhaps I ought to stress, whenever
           I ask you a question I expect you to answer to the best
           of your ability, of course, but I don't want you, as I
           don't want any witness, to guess.  I want the truth as
           far as we can get it and that is all I am interested
           in. Now, do you recollect firstly about what time
           these transfers were taking place?  I call them
           transfers because I am trying to use a neutral word? -
           A. There was some movement from the terrace, people
           being lifted out of the terrace into the stand, I
           suppose from the time when the terraces became
           congested which would be nearer kick-off, and that went
           on, on and off, I guess throughout the game.

        Q. What do you mean by the word congested? - A. Well, I
           have the greatest of difficulty in saying when a
           terrace is crowded or over-crowded.  It is not
           something I can estimate with any reliability but I
           have a mental picture of no concrete steps being
           visible and people packed into the standing area.

        Q. In 1988 do you recollect whether anybody was going over
           the front fencing? - A. No, sir.

        0. Can you recollect whether people were climbing over the
           radial fences?  Do you know what I mean by the radial
           fences? - A. Yes, that again is something which does
           take place quite frequently.

        0. Can you recollect whether the movement in 1988 was both
           ways or just one way? - A. I can't remember, sir.

        0. One final question on these transfers, were these
           isolated individuals or were they groups or was there a
           period of time when there was more and it calmed down,
           and then there was another batch when they went up.   I
           am talking about the transfer from terrace to stand at
           the moment. - A. I could not be specific about that,
           sir.

        Q. You can't remember, okay.   We heard from one or two
           witnesses that they felt quite tight, shall we say,     on
           the terraces in 1988.   First, at the time when the




    H
                                                             8

                                                    R.   MARSHALL




       match was on were''you aware of that? - A. I wasn't sir,
       no.

    Q. After the match was over were you made aware by anybody
       or did you yourself discover by whatever means that
       people had felt uncomfortable on the terraces in the
B      1988 match? - A. No, sir.

    0. It think it is normal practice for debriefs to take
       place, isn't it, after a match? - A. Yes.

    0. Forgive me, perhaps I should know but the Jury won't
       know anyway so you had better tell us, are these
       debriefs in writing or are tney by way of a meeting
       where everybody gets together and shares experiences? -
       A. They are of both sorts, sir.  Each serial sergeant
       is required to complete a written debriefing sheet of
       difficulties, events, problems which he has had to cope
       with, and that is collated by the inspector who makes
       the logistic arrangements for the game.  There would
       then follow a debriefing at which the sector
       commanders, i.e., the chief inspectors and
       superintendents, would attend to discuss what if
       anything had gone wrong and how things could be
D      improved and taken forward.  There would be matters
       which would affect the club and following on from that
       there would be some liaison with the club management to
       bring to their attention matters which were of concern.

    Q. The intention is at this meeting which you have just
       described that all the people of the levels you have
       described, whether they be inside men or outside men,
       if I can use that word, to attend?  It isn't that you
       have separate debriefs for the ground and separate
       debriefs for the outside? - A. No, there is a coming
       together of all the senior people involved in the
       operation.

    0. Are the serial sergeants reports circulated or are they
       merely submitted to the inspector who co-ordinates the
       debriefing? - A. They would go up to Inspector Sewell
       who is the officer who has the logistics task.

    0. I may be wrong on this but did you actually attend the
       debrief? - A. I cannot actually remember attending the
       debrief on the '88 semi-final.

    Q. If there had been any adverse report, let us assume
       that for a moment, had there been an adverse report -
       let us also assume that you had not attended - would
       there have been any mechanism, or would you have found
       out about it by some means? - A. If there had been
       really serious problems they would, of course, manifest
       themselves in the planning stage for the next semi­




H
3                                                               9
                                                       R.   MARSHALL




           final, and so far-as I was aware there were no serious
           problems arising from the 1988 semi-final which in any
           way radically altered the plans for the '89 semi­
           finals.

        Q. As far as you are aware, in 1988 - I am sorry to spend
    B      so much time on 1988 but I want to find out what it was
           like from you because you were the ground commander -
           as far as you were in 1988 was there any provision in
           the operational order for officers to be located on the
           terracing for crowd control or safety purposes? - A.
           Certainly not in the first phase.  There are officers
           deputed for that duty in the second phase of the
           operation, which is once the game has kicked off.

        Q. Where are they supposed to be in the second phase? - A.
           There is normally either one or two serials of officers
           in the central tunnel and a serial of officers in the
           tunnel to the north pen, which is pen numbers 6 and 7.

        Q. Are they supposed - never mind what they do - are they
           supposed to stay within the confines of the tunnel or
           are they expected or are they allowed to issue forth,
           so to speak, and watch the match? - A. I would think
           most policemen that I know are quite human and they
           would be watching the match, sir.

        0. The reason why I ask is because I nave got the feeling
           I have seen a video of 1988 where I can see officers on
           the terraces.  Now, have you any recollection of that?
           - A. I haven't but they would have the greatest of
           difficulty in doing anything on a packed terrace.  In
           fact, my perception would be that their function would
           be strictly limited.

        0. Yes, I am not interested in what they could or would or
           should do.  At this stage I am trying to find out
           whether you recollect whether any officers would have
           ventured, if I can use the word, onto the terracing? -
           A. They would go onto the terrace if it was necessary
           for them to do so, to break up a fight or to render
           first aid if someone collapsed, or to deal with any
           other particular problem, but as a matter of routine
           they would not be patrolling the terraces.

        0. They would also go on, as I think you have already
           indicated, if all was peaceful so that they could see
           what was going on on the field? - A. They would watch
           the match, sir.



                         /Q. Pre kick-off




    H
                                                      10




                                      R.   MARSHALL


Q.   But pre-kick-off, they were not expected to be on the
     terraces? - A. No sir.

Q.   Was there any reason for that that you were aware of,
     or did you have any reason why you did not put - that
     might be a better way of putting it - the officers
     onto the terracing in 1988 pre-kick-off? - A. No, I
     cannot visualise a serial of officers walking about on
     that terrace prior to kick-off.   The reason for that
     is that the fans were generally expected to find their
     own positions within the terrace.   There was a serial
     of officers, or probably more than one serial, two
     officers, in the concourse area behind the terraces
     who had a variety of jobs to fulfil.

Q.   I will come to that in a moment, if I may, but. can you
     tell me, you have mentioned that the fans like to find
     their own position, I think you said? - A. Yes.

Q.   Can you tell me whether there is any methodology for
     ensuring that the fans find their own position in,
     first of all, a semi-final? - A. Well, the issue of
     overcrowding basically should not arise at a semi­
     final because the capacity of the ground, as approved
     by the Local Authority, is known and only that number
     of tickets have been sold by the clubs involved and,
     therefore, it is assumed that the ground will fill to
     its safe capacity and, therefore, there is not the
     need to anticipate overcrowding within the ground
     itself.

Q.   If you look at the ground as a whole,   I think your
      logic must be right, but did you know in 1988 that the
      Leppings Lane terraces were divided into segments by
      radial fences? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   And the main entrance, I think, to those terraces is
     through a tunnel which leads into the centre two pens?
     - A. Whether that is the main entrance is again a
     matter of opinion.  There are three.

Q.   It is a major entrance? - A. It is a major entrance.

Q.   You would agree with that? - A. Yes.

Q.   Perhaps I ought to just deal with that for a moment.
      The concourse area was in your province? - A. In 1988,
      yes.

Q.   Do you recollect what signing arrangements to direct
     fans were in existence in the concourse area as the
     fans entered through the turnstiles? - A. I have no
     recollection of that, sir.  It would not be fair or
     reliable to say.
                                  R.   MARSHALL


You do not know? - A. No sir.

Is it right - and again from your experience I want to
know this - that fans, or a proportion of fans, like
to stand behind the goal, for whatever reason? - A.
Yes.

My question to you is how   did you ensure, or was it
unnecessary in 1988, that   the fans were spread evenly,
if I can say this, across   the whole of the width of
the terracing? - A. There   were no positive steps taken
on my part to ensure that   that happened.

As far as you were concerned in 1988, how did you
anticipate that the fans would spread out across the
terracing, or did that problem not present itself to
you? - A. It was largely left to the discretion of
individual fans as to exactly where they wanted to
stand.  There was no means of actually counting people
into the pens that I was aware of, and the expression
has been used that fans found their own level and that
is precisely the arrangement that existed.

It sounds to me as if, although you have had obviously
quite a bit of experience of football matches, you
have had relatively little experience of semi-finals
at Hillsborough, is that right? - A. That is a fair
comment.

So it is difficult for you to say whether that system
had worked in the past, would that be true, the
finding of their own levels? - A. Yes, that was the
generally accepted means of distribution of the fans
on the Leppings Lane terrace.  I was aware of no
specific arrangements or requirements that the fans
should be counted into pens, or there should be strict
monitoring of overcrowding in any of the pens.

If you had noticed, and you have already told me that
you had not, severe overcrowding in any pen - it does
not matter which one - what steps, if any, were open
to you to remedy it in 1988? - A. Well, I think, sir,
with respect we are in an area of speculation.  I had
the greatest of difficulty in telling when a pen is
overcrowded just by looking at it and I do not think I
am on my own in that particular area.  If, however,
there is some perceived problem which really does want
some solution, then the only way to deal with that
would be to put a serial of police officers into a pen
and get people to move and physically do that, but it
is not an easy task.

I said I was coming to the concourse a little while
ago.  Did you at any time in 1988 give any orders to -
                                                         12



                                      R.    MARSHALL


     I use the words "seal off" and I do not mean by that
     hermetically seal off but I mean have either temporary
     barriers or officers across the central tunnel
     entrance in order to either prevent fans going down it
     or to divert them round the sides of the building? -
     A. No sir.

Q.   You did not do it? - A. No.

Q.   Have you got any knowledge whether, in fact, anybody
     below you but at, say, Inspector level, gave any
     orders to that effect, that that should happen at any
     point? - A. No sir.

Q.   Or, indeed, above you I should have said? - A. No.

Q.   Did you know, in 1989, whether or not anybody had
     taken any action to try and divert fans round the
     sides? - A. I am sorry, sir, would you just repeat
     that question again, please.

Q.   What I want to find out is, you did not give any
     orders and you did not know of anybody giving orders.
     What I am trying to find out is whether you had any
     knowledge that, in fact, an attempt was made at the
     concourse end of the tunnel to prevent fans going down
     the tunnel? - A. I was not aware of that, sir.

          MR. HALE:   Sir, you said 1989.     I wonder if you
     meant 1989.

          THE CORONER: I meant did he know in 1989 whether
     this had happened in 1988.
Q.   Have you understood what I am saying, because you may
     well know now, you see.  If I said, "Do you know now?"
     you may give me a different reply. - A. That is
     precisely the point I was going to make, sir, insofar
     as it emerged after the tragedy that there was a
     suggestion that the tunnel had been blocked off by
     police officers and by barriers in 1988.  Now in 1989
     I was not aware of that fact.




                                    /Q. That is what
I

                                                               13



                                                         R. MARSHALL


        Q. That is what I am trying to find out? - A. Yes.

        Q. You may not have been aware of it, I accept that
           entirely because you have just told me, but do you
           know - and I realise you were not at the debriefings
           and so you do not know what was said at the
    B      debriefings - from your research since whether that
           fact was reported to the debriefing or was in any of
           the Serial Sergeants' reports? - A. It was not
           reported, sir.

        Q. It was not reported as far as you know? - A. So far
           as I am aware, sir.

        Q. We are now dealing with 1988 for the time being. - A.
           Yes, sir.

        Q. In 1989 the FA decided again to hold a Semi Final at
           Hillsborough? - A. That is right, sir.

        Q. By coincidence or skill the same two teams happened
           to have reached that same position? - A. Yes.

        Q. That is right, is it not? - A. Yes.

        Q. Again it was decided that Liverpool would have the
           Leppings Lane end and Notts Forest would have the Kop
           end? - A. Yes, sir.

        Q. Which was identical to the previous year's
           arrangements? - A. Yes.

        Q. Because of your position you anticipated that you
           would have to have something to do with this match? -
           A. Yes.

        Q. But this year - and when I say this mean I mean
           1989 - you took a different role or function.   What
           role did you take? - A. I was in charge of the
           Liverpool end, the policing of the Liverpool fans
           outside the ground, sir.

        Q. Outside the ground? - A. Yes.

        Q. Do you know who took your place as Ground
           Commander? - A. Superintendent Greenwood.

        Q. When the match was first proposed for Hillsborough I
           think Chief Superintendent Mole was still in post, is
           that right? - A. That is right, sir.

        Q. Was it already known at that time that he was
           leaving, so far as you can remember? - A. Yes, it
           was, sir.




    H
                                               R. MARSHALL


His successor had. already been nominated, is that
right? - A. Yes.

That was Chief Superintendent Duckenfield? - A. Yes.

Can you remember when it was decided the match would
be played at Hillsborough? - A. We had in effect 17
working days between the decision being made that the
match once again would be played at Hillsborough and
the match itself.  So we had 17 days to meet and plan
it.

Were you in this year involved with the drawing up of
any Operational Orders or anything of that sort? - A.
No, sir.

The Operational Orders would have been supplied to
you? - A. Yes.

The 1988 one for 1988 and the 1989 for 1989? - A.
Yes.

Can you remember whether there were any significant
differences in the format of the two Orders? - A. I
don't think there was any difference.

There was some reduction I think? - A. Yes, I was
going to come to that.

Please tell me? - A. There was a reduction of
manpower because in certain areas in 1988 it was felt
that we had Police Officers who were not fully
employed and there was an attempt made to reduce the
level of manpower to what was seen as a better level.

Am I right in saying that a large part of this
reduction was in your sector, the Liverpool sector? -
A. Yes, sir.

Your sector, of course, extended quite a distance
away from the ground did it not? - A. Yes, it covered
the southern approaches to the Leppings Lane end of
the ground, the western approaches and roughly the
north west as well, sir.

It did not, strictly speaking, include the turnstile
area, did it? - A. It did not, sir.

That was ground command territory, so to speak? - A.
Yes.

Had that been the same in 1988 as well? - A. Yes.

So in 1988 you were responsible for the serials in a
hierarchical sense within the concourse area and the
                                                           15



                                                     R. MARSHALL


      ones immediately outside the concourse area? - A.
      That is right, sir, and the reason for that was that
      three of the serials of Officers had actually an
      inside duty at Phase 2 of the game and so they would
      move inside.

B   Q. You had to put them somewhere and that seemed the
       most convenient way of doing it? - A. Yes.

    Q. From a practical point of view you are saying.
       Perhaps I ought to have asked you, going back to
       1988, did you have occasion to go out and look at the
       Leppings Lane turnstile area in 1988? - A. I cannot
       specifically remember doing so, sir.

    Q. You would not be able to help us where the serials
       were posted in detail because you cannot remember? -
       A. No.

    Q. Was it understood in 1988 between you and the Outside
       Commander - was the Outside Commander Superintendent
       Greenwood in that year, can you remember? - A. I
       think it was, sir.

    Q. Was it understood that although the serials were
       nominally yours, the Outside Commander if he was in
       the vicinity would take charge of any action which
       needed to be taken? - A. Yes.

    Q. That was an informal understanding, would that be
       right? - A. Yes.

    Q. In 1989 did you reach such an informal arrangement
       with Superintendent Greenwood who was now on the
       inside or was it just assumed that that would be the
       case? - A. It was an assumption, sir.

    Q. The reductions we are talking about in manpower which
       you have mentioned, and if you cannot remember please
       say so, can you recollect whether there were
       reductions in your command area or were there also
       reductions in the serials which were outside but
       which nominally you looked after in Phase 1? - A.
       Yes, the reductions were achieved by reducing the
       level of serials from one Sergeant and ten Constables
       to one Sergeant and eight Constables.  There were
       also reductions achieved by eliminating one or two
       serials completely because it was felt, as I said
       earlier, that these people had not been fully
       employed.  The mobile resources were reduced from one
       Sergeant and six Constables to one and five.  The
       searching serials, of which there were one at
       Tankersley and one at Oughtibridge, were kept at full
       strength but the bottom line was that we had about 70
       less Police Officers on duty in the Liverpool sector
       than had been there in 1988 but looking at it as a




H
                                                            16


                                                     R. MARSHALL


      percentage we still had the biggest percentage of
      Officers in the Liverpool area.  38 per cent of the
      total Officers deployed were in the Liverpool sector.

    Q. Are we talking about the Officers directly
D      responsible to you now or are we including the ones
B      around the turnstile and concourse area? - A. I think
       I had a total of about 230 Police Officers who were
       actually responsible to me.  If you want to include
       the serials around the turnstiles which were one
       Chief Inspector, two Inspectors, four Sergeants and
       forty Constables you are talking about a total of 290
       Officers.

    Q. You received a copy of the Operational Order.   So it
       was 290 Officers in round terms? - A. Yes, plus
       mounted men by the way.

    Q. Yes, plus mounted Officers.  The mounted Officers are
       in a slightly unique position because they tend to be
       a law unto themselves, do they not, to a certain
       extent? - A. I would not describe them as a law unto
       themselves but they operate within their usual terms
       of reference.  They are briefed usually by their own
       supervisory staff and fulfil a role within the
       general operational deployment of Police in respect
       of their function.

    Q. I am not saying they would not take an Order from you
       but they had a very specialist function, had they
       not? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Having received the 1989 Operational Order and noted
       what you have just told me, were you concerned that
       the Order itself at the time - I am not talking about
       since - was defective in any material way so far as
       you could tell? - A. Not at all, sir.  I saw it.  I
       read it through.  I read very carefully the role that
       was expected of me and of the people who would be
       working with me and registered nothing at that stage
       which was in any way unusual or was in any way a
       departure from that which had been tried and tested
       on previous occasions.

    Q. Did you attend a pre-match briefing or not? - A. Yes,
       I attended one or two meetings in the preparatory
       stages but I went to the pre-match briefing which
       took place at the ground on Friday, 14th April 1989.

    Q. That was mainly for senior Officers? - A. That was
       for Officers of the rank of Inspector and above.

    Q. That was chaired by? - A. Mr. Duckenfield.

    Q. I do not want every single detail that was said but
       can you sort of name the main points, if any, he made




H
                                                        17



                                                  R. MARSHALL


   that you remember? - A. Mr. Duckenfield had earlier
   prepared a written briefing which he gave to all the
   people who were present. Mr. Murray, who was to be
   the match controller in the control box, he too gave
   a briefing and then Inspector Sewell gave a briefing
   about the meal arrangements and various
   administrative details which were not of a strictly
   operational nature.  I was then given the opportunity
   of speaking to the people who were working both with
   me and for me and I had earlier prepared a briefing
   paper myself and I took the people who were working
   for me off to one side and briefed those people as to
   what I expected of them.

Q. At the briefing which you received, Mr. Duckenfield,
   Mr. Murray and Mr. Sewell, was anything said which
   caused you to be concerned about the policing o f .this
   match in 1989? - A. Not at all, sir.




                        /Q. Or that anything different.
                                              R.   MARSHALL


Or that anything different was to be expected from 1988?
- No, sir.

You have just explained to me that you re-briefed your
own Inspectors, basically? - A. Yes, sir.

Would I be right in thinking that on the whole your
briefing tended to be directed towards law and order
questions? - A. Yes, sir.

The next day there was another briefing on the 15th? - A.
Yes.

You attended that, did you? - A. Yes.

In common with about 800 others? - A. Yes, sir, about 850
people.

As a matter of interest do you know what percentage that
is of the total South Yorkshire Police Force? - A. Yes,
there was 38% of the total South Yorkshire Police
employed on this one fixture.

Is it right that if you have - say there are four or five
thousand men in the South Yorkshire Police Force... - A.
Three thousand, sir.

They have to give a 24 hour cover? - A. That's right,
sir.

It may be that the spread is not even because you may
have more officers on at different shifts.   However, I
take it there are three shifts per day? - A. Yes, sir.

Do you by chance know what the maximum number of officers
are deployed on any one shift, in a normal situation?   I
am not talking about a match where you make special
arrangements. - A. Well, that number...

Do you divide the 3,000 by three and say it is 1,000 per
shift, or do you have 1,500 during the daytime and only
500 at night, or don't you know? - A. I wish it was, sir.
The situation is always complicated.   First of all you
have got to divide it by four for a start because you
have always got a number of people on their day off.
Then you further reduce that number by abstractions for
annual leave, for sickness, attendance on courses, that
sort of thing.   You end up with a basic minimum police
deployment, which you strive to achieve so you can
provide the service to the public of South Yorkshire.

When we say South Yorkshire we are not talking about
Sheffield, are we, we are talking about the whole of
South Yorkshire? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                R.   MARSHALL


That's Barnsley, Doncaster, Rotherham and Sheffield as
well? - A. Yes.

The whole lot for that is 3,000? - A. Yes, sir, in round
figures.

Which you have to divide, as you have explained to me, to
get shifts, subject to adjustments? - A. Yes.

About 850 men were actually employed on this one fixture?
- A. The total in fact did exceed that because the
officers from D Division, that is the city centre
Division, mounted their own operation to meet trains,
along with officers from the Traffic Division who were
also mounting an operation for traffic control.

I just wanted to get an impression of the numbers
involved.   You attended the next briefing on the 15th
where you had all these chaps, including yourself, being
addressed by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield? - A. Yes.

At that briefing was anything said firstly with regard to
law and order? - A. Yes.   Mr. Duckenfield went through
the briefing which he - it was basically a repetition of
what he had given on the Friday previously.

Pick out the main points he made as far as you can
remember. - A. Well, there are a whole list of points.
If I can start by saying that we wanted the fixture to
take place properly.   We wanted to police it
professionally.  We were concerned about the safety of
people, both outside and inside the stadium.   We were
concerned that the life of the community which surrounds
Hillsborough Football Ground should go on in as normal a
way as possible.   We were concerned to see that people
who were coming into Sheffield from Nottingham and from
Liverpool behaved themselves in a manner which was
proper.   We were concerned to see that people got to the
parking areas and what would happen to them at the
parking areas, both from the point of view     of beingmet
and spoken to.     The general ethos was one   of
professionalism, determination to see that the event went
off properly and to do a good job.

Can you remember   when any specific mention     was  made of
any difficulties   anticipated? - A. Well, there is always
provision in respect of emergency evacuation and that is
clearly something which every officer needs to be aware
of.   There is a strict code of practice laid down in
respect of that.   A coded message exists which is passed
out over the tannoy and that was stressed.    If officers
heard that message coming out on the ground tannoy they
would be aware that some emergency existed and they would
need to gear up their level of thinking to what they were
                                                             20




                                                     R.   MARSHALL


      supposed to do when that happened and be prepared to
      await a further message which would tell them exactly
      what action was required of them.

B   Q* When that briefing was done did you then have a further
       briefing with your people? - A. Yes. Well, Mr. Murray
       had a further briefing and then Detective Sergeant
       Charlesworth, who was the Intelligence Officer, gave out
       details of people who were subject of exclusion orders
       and passed over what intelligence existed about
       anticipated trouble that we might expect from both sets
       of supporters.   I think Inspector Sewell had a few words
       about meals and so forth and then the briefing moved to
       people like myself.   I spoke to my Chief Inspectors but
       not in any formal sense at that stage.   That had been
       done earlier.   The Inspectors in charge of their
       particular serials were asked to brief their own officers
       as to what was required of them.

    Q. Can I just go back on this Intelligence Officer because
       the jury may not be familiar with what that means.   It
       doesn't mean he is the most intelligent man in the group,
       it means he collects information? - A. That's right, sir.

    Q. His job is to collect it. Does he shift it and order it?
       - A. Yes.   His job basically is to garner intelligence
       from people who are likely to assist him and that can
       range from the proprietors of public houses co the
       football liaison officers of the visiting team.

    0. As far as you remember did he say anything to give you
       any suggestion that anything unusual was to be expected
       in relation to this particular match? - A. No, sir.

    Q. I think you had condensed the Order for your own personal
       use? - A. Yes.   It is impossible to walk round with an
       Operational Order of the size that covers this sort of
       fixture.   I had Inspector Sewell condense my order by
       miniaturising it on a photocopier and I used this because
       it would fit in my pocket.

    0. I think you supplemented it with colour coding stickers
       and stuff like that? - A. Yes.

    Q. Then the formalities, so to speak, having been done, you
       went outside the ground? - A. Yes.

            THE CORONER:   Now I think we will pause there.
       Superintendent Marshall, I remind you that you are on
       oath, and although we are pausing you are technically in
       the witness box so please don't discuss the evidence.

                         (Short adjournment)




H
                                              R.   MARSHALL


     THE CORONER:   Mr. Marshall, I think we had got to
the point where you had more or less finished with the
briefings and you were now on your way on to your patch?
- A. Yes.

What time was that? - A. 10.45, sir.

I think it had always been your intention that you would
return to the Leppings Lane turnstile area prior to kick-
off? - A. Yes, sir.

Can you say what time you were aiming to get back? - A.
Yes, between about two o'clock and 2.15.

From 10.30 to the time you got back to Leppings Lane, in
brief tell me how you spent your time and what you saw
and what you did? - A. I patrolled the area of Middlewood
Road, Wadsley Lane, Leppings Lane, Penistone Road North,
Claywheels Lane, Halifax Road.   I was busy throughout
the sector all the time, meeting police officers, talking
to constables, sergeants, inspectors, about how the
operation was going.   I dealt with one or two minor
matters involving Liverpool fans during that timetf
Visited shops, tne supermarket area down at Hillsborough
Corner, the precinct, off-licences.   Generally busy
throughout that time.   As I say, dealing with queries
from people and police officers alike, sir.

Do I gather from that that you had no problems in this
period of any substance? - A. No, there were no problems
to speak of.

Your officers whom you spoke to - presumably that is the
way you would operate?   Your main objective is to work
through your officers? - A. Yes, to be a point of
reference for them and occasionally to tell them what to
do, if they weren't, shall we say, doing their job as I
expected them to do it.

They didn't report anything to you during that time which
gave you any concern? - A. There were two or three
incidents which did concern me.   I think about twelve
noon there was a report on the radio of a substantial
number of people who were at the Fox Inn in Fox Hill, who
were - I wouldn't say they were causing a problem but
they were spilling out on to the car park and I think
local people were expressing some concern about that.    I
used my radio to contact ground control to direct one of
our Tango units to the public house for someone to see
the licensee and just ask him to use his commonsense
about serving people who had had too much to drink.

A similar sort of occurrence involved the public house in
the Wadsley area, the Horse and Jockey.   Again local
                                                             2 lB




                                                     R.   MARSHALL


      concern from residents that 200 or 300 people were
      spilling out on to the car park of the public house,
      drinking in the sunshine, and on that occasion I sent
      Police Constable Pierce, who is a dog handler.   I met
B     him at the bottom of Uadsley Lane.   I sent him up to the
      pub, again to look at that situation, keep an eye on it.

      The scenes were as I expected them to be.    Lots of
      noise, a lot of people about, fast food outlets obviously
      very, very busy indeed.   People from Liverpool of course
      not knowing the area too well asking for pubs that were
      open.   A lot of people drinking from four-packs.    Off-
      licences that were open were very busy.   Supermarkets
      with an off-licence facility were very busy.    People sat
      around in the sunshine, a carnival atmosphere.   Eager
      anticipation, I think, on the part of the Liverpool
      supporters.   The sort of atmosphere that one would
      expect with a semi-final.

    Q. As time went on you then returned towards Leppings Lane?
       - A. Yes.

    0. I was going to ask you another question before we get to
       that.   The fans whom you saw in that time - let s
       concentrate on the time between one and two? - A. Yes.

    Q. The numbers which you were seeing, were they the sort of
       numbers you would have expected? - A. Yes.   A lot of
       people about, very, very crowded.

    0. I don't know whether you can answer this question, but in
       your recollection were they moving towards the ground or
       away from the ground? - A. No, there was no immediate
       rush at that stage to get into the ground.    There were a
       lot of people just ambling too and fro.    Moving too and
       fro past the turnstiles as though they had come for a
       look at the turnstile area and then move away to perhaps
       look for something to eat or somewhere to get a pint, and
       moving about like that, sort of too-ing and fro-ing.




             Q. It didn't entirely surprise.




H
                                                            22

                                                   R.   MARSHALL




    0. It did not entirely surprise you that, did it, at that
       time? - A. Ho, it did not surprise me.

    Q. Did you at that time notice ticket touts or anything
       like that about? - A. I can only recollect seeing one
B      ticket tout, and that was a chap who was standing, I
       suppose, in the entrance to the Century Motor Company
       in Catch Bar Lane, and he was selling tickets.

    Q. At that time, of course, the selling of a ticket was
       not an illegal act? - A. It is not an illegal act - it
       is still not an illegal act.

    0. It is the obstruction which me might cause which might
       be an illegal right, that is right, isn't it? - A. That
       is right, sir, yes.

    0. If it is not illegal to sell a ticket, am I right in
       thinking it is not illegal to buy one? - A. It is not
       illegal to buy one.  In fact, I could expand on the
       role of touts if you wish me to do so, sir.

    0. No, I don't think it is necessary.  I am just trying to
       find out what the legal position is with regard to the
       buying and selling of tickets? - A. It is not an
       offence, sir, no.

    Q. Similarly, it is not illegal to drink pints either at
       pubs or, indeed, on the street? - A. No, sir.

    Q. So long as you do not misbehave yourself in some way? -
       A. That is right, sir, yes.

    0. It is a very difficult question for you to answer, but
       before you returned to the Leppings Lane area, in other
       words up to quarter-past-2, did you at that time form
       any impression on the number of people who were there,
       who did not have tickets? - A. Yes.   I guessed there
       were quite a few people present because there was much
       ambling to and fro, and people were asking for spares.
       That was not an expression I had heard before and it
       gradually dawned on me they were asking for spare
       tickets.  There were a lot of people doing that, trying
       to buy tickets from other supporters.

    Q. I suppose it would be true, wouldn't it, that if I am
       looking for a ticket and saying, "Spares?  Spares?",
       you might well see a limited number of people asking
       many times, would that be true? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Are you in any position to hazard, not a guess - I
       don't want a guess because that is useless - a
       reasonable estimate as to the number of people who you
       thought you heard, different people, who you thought




H
                                                            23

                                                   R.   MARSHALL




      were asking for spares, or otherwise asking for
      tickets? - A. I would find the greatest of difficulty
      in giving you any reliable answer about that, sir.

    0. At about quarter-past-2 then, you returned to the
B      ground? - A. Yes.

    0. Hot having been particularly dismayed at that stage by
       anything? - A. What did dismay me, sir, were the
       numbers of people who were drinking in the street.
       That was something which I personally felt rather sad
       about, that people would need to drink such a lot of
       alcohol really to enjoy what should have been a
       pleasant afternoon of sport.

    Q. But it is fair to say although you personally did not
       like it, in itself .... - A. There was not a great deal
       I could do about it.

    0. They were not actually doing anything which you could
       have done anything about? - A. No, despite the amount
       of drinking which was going on the prevailing mood was
       quite good, no real problems.

    0. You then returned to Leppings Lane, right, and do you
       know about what time you got there? - A. It would be
       about 2 p.m., sir.

    0 . When you first got there at that time what was it like?
       - A. Again it was very congested with people moving
       about, queues at the turnstiles, people going into the
       ground, a lot of people milling around.

    0. Problems, at 2 o'clock? - A. Nothing that as not
       anticipated at that stage.

    0. Describe to me then what happened from then onwards as
       far as you were concerned? - A. well, I patrolled in
       the area; I checked on the deployment of the police
       officers who were working there.  There was a Chief
       Inspector Creaser who was in charge of police
       deployment at Leppings Lane turnstiles; Inspectors
       Sykes and Purdy who were botn experienced officers
       working there, along with four sergeants and forty
       constables, both male and female; five or six police
       horses, again both South Yorkshire officers and
       Merseyside officers, working in that area; busy,
       carnival atmosphere, a lot of people, nothing at that
       stage to become anxious or alarmed about.   My
       perception was that this was a typical semi-final and
       at that stage everything was going to plan.

    0. Was this when the train contingent had already arrived
       or had it not got there then as far as you remember? -




H
                                                          24

                                                 R.   MARSHALL




     A. The train arrived about 2 o'clock at the station.
     There were officers deployed to meet the train, two
     serials of police officers and I think four mounted
     policemen, and it was their job to bring down the
     crocodile of visiting Liverpool fans to the Leppings
     Lane turnstiles.

Q.    Did you see them come down Leppings Lane or not? - A.
     Yes, it takes some little time for it to happen. They
     arrived, I think, round about 2.20-ish.

0.   Would it be fair to say that it was a perfectly
     ordinary and controlled group as far as you could   see?
     - A. Yes, quite orderly, no problems.

0.   And they came along the side of Leppings Lane where the
     sweetshop is, is that right? - A. Yes.

0. I don't know whether you can remember, did they enter
   the ground without any particular difficulty or not? -
   A. Yes, they joined the files of people who were still
   waiting to get in, queueing to get in.

0. I don't know whether you can remember, but the ground
   has got perimeter gates. - A. Yes.

Q. Do you recollect whether at that stage they were open
   or shut? - A. Apart from the pair of gates which are
   next to the river, alongside the bridge, those two
   gates were shut because they allowed access to the
   south stand service road, and those were closed.   The
   rest were open though.

Q. You, of course, had never done this job before on the
   outside had you? - A. No, sir, not at a semi-final.

Q. Are you saying you had done it at league matches? - A.
   Oh yes.

0. Perhaps I ought to ask you, although it is an aside,
   obviously you swapped your task at this semi-final -
   was there a reason for swapping, can you remember, for
   taking the outside job as opposed to doing the inside
   one? - A. No, there was no particular reason.

0. That was an aside.  Normally in league matches when you
   have done the job outside are those perimeter gates
   open or shut, as far as you remember? - A. They are
   open.

Q. So there was nothing about those gates which made you
   think different? - A. No, sir.
                                            R.   MARSHALL




It is about 20-past-2 now, right? Just take me through
the next ten or fifteen minutes. - A. The situation so
far as the movement along the pavements of Leppings
Lane was becoming difficult, insofar as there were a
lot of people actually spilling off the pavement into
the road, and at that stage traffic was moving
reasonably freely but the prospect of there being a
road accident involving fans was becoming more and more
apparent, so I discussed with Inspector Sykes the
question of closing the road to traffic.  We agreed
that we would do that and that would enable the fans to
have the whole of the road surface without risk of
anyone being injured.

Did you do this on your own initiative or did you radio
through to control? - A. No, I could not achieve what I
set out to achieve without contacting control and I did
that, and asked them to close off Leppings Lane to
traffic.   Now, that would have meant someone needed to
put police officers on the roundabout at Leppings Lane,
to redirect traffic, and also at Middlewood Road at the
junction witn Leppings Lane, to achieve the same
objective.   Now that road closure was not immediately
effective so I spoke to ground control again, and asked
that they should try to achieve that, and
simultaneously to inform Mr. Middleton, who is the
traffic controller of South Yorkshire Transport, that
buses would need to be diverted.   I had earlier been to
the top of Leppings Lane at its junction with Catch Bar
Lane, where a young constable was holding three double
decker buses.   He asked me what he was to do with them
and I told him to let the buses come through.   They did
this, and it was at that time that I re-addressed
ground control and asked them to ensure that the
diversion was effective.

Can you remember what time it was (a) when you first
requested it and (b) when it was effectively closed, as
far as you know? - A. As far as I know, I think it was
round about 2.25, although the Public Inquiry tended to
suggest that took place a little earlier.  It was my
feeling that it was at 2.25 rather than the earlier
time.

Nothing has happened to make you change your feeling on
that? - A. No, sir.

When you gave the second message and you told them who
to contact and so on, did you manage to get control of
the road in the sense of having traffic stopped? - A.
Yes.

By this time you were back near the Leppings Lane
turnstile end, would that be right? - A. Yes.
                                                         26


                                                 R.   MARSHALL




Q.   Had the situation changed in any way at that stage, as
     far as you  were concerned? - A. Yes, it was becoming
     increasingly congested as more and more people came
     into the turnstile area to try and enter the ground.

Q.   Did people  have any problems as to knowing where they
     were going or not? - A. Yes, this was a constant
     problem insofar as people had tickets and tne
     information on the tickets was perhaps, I might best
     describe it as ambiguous in the sense that the
     information did not, without considerable mental
     effort, actually show the entrance which people had to
     go into to get into the ground.   The turnstiles were
     labelled out of "sync" as it were.   If you needed to
     get into the north stand, for instance, you needed to
     have a ticket with "A" on it.   If you wanted to get
     into the west stand you had to have a ticket with "C"
     on it, and if you wanted to go into the terrace you
     needed a ticket with "B" on it, so in that sense they
     were out of "sync" and I was approached by numerous
     fans asking directions to actually get into the ground.

Q. And you were able to give these directions? You were
   able to point them in the right direction? - A. Yes.

Q. At that stage although there were a lot of people
   there, you were not particularly anxious over this
   situation were you? - A. Not at that stage, no.

Q. In fact, did you discuss with Inspector Sykes what you
   might do when the match kicked off with regard to
   ticketless fans? - A. Yes, clearly there were
   considerable number of people still hanging about, and
   it is a fact of life that people do come to big games
   and don't have tickets.  We discussed together what we
   would do with the non-ticket holders.  Now, unless you
   are prepared to police the non-ticket holders quite
   positively, there can be difficulties, insofar as they
   will move round about the environment of the ground,
   round the outside, and cause problems and be a nuisance
   to local residents and so forth, so we said that we
   would try to hold them on the Leppings Lane Bridge.
   Usually someone will have a portable radio, turn the
   radio on, absorb the atmosphere from inside the ground
   - obviously you can hear the shouting and the cheers
   and roars outside - and that would enable the non­
   ticket holders to at least get a flavour of what was
   happening inside.



                    /Q. So what you are saying
                                R.   MARSHALL


So what you are saying is, let us assume for a minute
that this had not been a tragedy, if you have a group
of ticketless fans close to the ground, even if they
cannot actually see, if they can hear, this helps the
enjoyment if they can listen to the radio or watch a
TV I suppose? - A. Well, it achieves two things, i.e.
it helps the non-ticketholders to get a flavour of
what is happening and it solves the policing problem.

Would it have been a practical proposition to try and
weed them out and disperse them elsewhere? - A. This
is an enormously difficult problem, insofar as people
will not readily admit to being a non-ticketholder.
If asked, there is usually some explanation, that
their mate has got a ticket, or their brother has got
a ticket, or they are going to buy a ticket, or some
other explanation, but it is no easy task when there
is a crowd of many, many thousands of people to
actually tease out the people who do not have tickets.

Supposing that this had been done, say, at the coach
reception points, or the mini-van reception points.
Would it have been possible to do it there, or when
they were coming down Halifax Road, for instance? -
A.  So far as the coach visitors were concerned, there
were two checks, one at Tankersley as one leaves the
motorway and one at Oughtibridge, which is a couple of
miles on the west side of the ground, to try at that
stage to discover people who were attending without
tickets and people who were carrying intoxicants on
coaches, and so forth. When coaches had been
searched, they were given a sticker to put on the
windscreen which would obviate further searching.
There was coach parking in Clay Wheels Lane and in
Halifax Road, and space for mini-coaches in Wardsend
Road.  At each of those locations were serials of
officers who were working under my control who had
been briefed that they must check that the coach
passengers and mini-bus passengers had tickets.   Now
that was generally achieved, but as I am sure the
Inquest will appreciate, it is a different proposition
to actually stop and ask every other person who is
attending who has not been a coach passenger whether
he or she has a ticket for the fixture.

What I am trying to find out - I have heard what you
have said - is assume for the moment that your
officers at Tankersley, or somewhere else, got onto a
coach and said, "Everybody got a ticket?" and half-a-
dozen people put their hands up and said, "No, we
haven't".  What could they have done, and what powers
did they have? - A. They have no powers whatsoever in
respect of detaining those persons.  The fact is they
would note the presence of people without tickets and
                                                          28




                                          R.   MARSHALL


         they would discourage them from entering the ground,
         or trying to enter the ground, with some appropriate
         advice, but there is no lawful way of detaining those
         persons and really the powers of the Police are
         extremely limited.
B        So this was really an attempt to advise people, but
         you had no real powers to do anything about it? Even
         if it had been a coachful of non-ticketholders, you
         could not really have stopped them proceeding? - A.
         Well, that is true, although if the situation arose, ]
         think, with a coachful of non-ticketholders, then it
         would be possible to take those people back to the
         motorway and send them back from where they had come.

         It did not happen like that? - A. But it is an
         enormous dilemma for an officer who is in charge of a
         searching serial as to what he must do.

         Yes.  Back to Leppings Lane.   You had closed the road?
         - A. Yes.

    Q.   You had given instructions and that had been done.
         That is an unusual thing, is it not? - A. It is
         unusual to close Leppings Lane before a game.   It is
         not unusual to close it for 5 or 10 minutes after a
         League game.

    Q.   I see.   - A. That is done usually at a League game.

    Q.   You then carried on in the Leppings Lane area.    Can
         you take me further on? We are at 2.25/2.30 time. -
         A. Yes, I was myself engaged in crowd control.    I was
         is amongst the crowd.  Again I was not particularly
         anxious at that stage.   The event was going as
         planned, a lot of people queueing to get in and the
         situation was basically as I expected it to be.
         Sadly, as we all know, the situation deteriorated from
         about 2.30/2.35 p.m. onwards as more and more people
         came into the area trying to gain entrance into the
         ground.  I was in the middle of the crowd and I think
         I was filmed at that stage by some BBC TV cameramen
         and I was at that stage encouraging people not to push
         because we were getting people joining at the back of
         the crowd pushing forward.   As I emerged from the back
         of the crowd I spoke to the BBC cameraman, whose name
         I am sorry I do not know but I had seen him on
         numerous previous occasions at incidents in Sheffield,
         and he suggested that I should go and stand on the
         parapet of the bridge where I would have a better view
         of the entire turnstile area, and I did that.   I
         climbed onto the bridge and from thereon the situation
         deteriorated by the minute.




H
                                                      29



                                      R.   MARSHALL


          Round about 2.40-ish/2.42 I realised that we
     needed some assistance and I tried to radio ground
     control for that assistance.   I also asked for a
     tannoy announcement from the turnstile tannoys which
     are erected on the front of the turnstiles, and I
     asked for P.C. Buxton, who is our Land Rover driver,
     to bring the Land Rover into Leppings Lane and use the
     public address system to actually tell people to stop
     pushing.  The only acknowledgment I got of that radio
     message was actually from P.C. Buxton, whose voice I
     recognised.  He said, "I'm on my way", and he was as
     good as his word, he came.   I can't say at this stage
     now how long it took him to get there, but I was
     conscious at some stage of the Land Rover to my left
     with P.C. Buxton imploring people, or at least an
     announcement coming out.   I cannot now remember
     precisely the words of that coming from the PA system
     on the loudspeaker.  It dawned on me that the radio —


          MR. KING:  Sir, I am awfully sorry to interrupt
     because it is important that the witness flows, and I
     appreciate that, but as you are not now taking it
     question and answer it is so much more difficult to
     take it down as he is giving his evidence.  I do not
     criticise the witness at all because he has been
     invited to give it that way, and properly so, but I
     just wonder whether he might slow down.

          THE CORONER:  Yes, certainly.  Just pause for a
     moment to allow people to catch up with you. We can
     always come back to questions and answers, but it is
     useful to hear the story as it comes out.

          MR. KING:  Sir, I am not criticising it at all.
     I am pointing out that when we adopt that procedure it
     is that much more difficult.

           THE CORONER: I understand that, yes.
Q.   I think, Mr. Marshall, you had got to the point when
      you said that you recollected P.C. Buxton's Land
      Rover, and you have a recollection of hearing an
      announcement but you can no longer remember what was
      said, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q.    Can I just check that with you and then I will let you
      carry on with the story.  You did not hear the tannoy,
     did you, or did you? - A. Well, there was a problem
     before I get to that.
Q.   Yes, go on then. - A. In the sense that it dawned on
     me that the radio was dead, it had stopped working.
     At least I was not getting any acknowledgement of my
     messages from ground control. I had a Motorola multi­
      channel set and I was able to change channels from the
                                                          30




                                         R.   MARSHALL


         ground conununications channel, which is 25, to channel
         35, which is Hammerton Road, the sub-division covering
         Hillsborough.   It is the Hammerton Road UHF frequency,
         and I passed a message to the police officer at
         Hammerton Road along the lines of the one that I had
B        given earlier, i.e. that we needed assistance and we
         needed a tannoy message broadcasting over the
         loudspeakers in front of the turnstiles, and that was
         actioned, I subsequently found, at 2.44.

    Q.   2.44? - A. Yes.

    Q.   At the time, apart from P.C. Buxton, you did not see
         what action was taken, in what way it was actioned?
         You knew P.C. Buxton had turned up because you saw
         him, but did you see anything else in the shape of
         assistance? - A. Not at that stage, although we were
         joined very shortly afterwards by some mounted
         officers.

         I wanted to find out to what extent you were able to
         hear messages.  That is what I am trying to find out,
         because you did get through by this circuitous route,
         but you got through at 2.44? - A. Yes.
D
         Did you hear any messages? - A. When my request to
         Hammerton Road was acknowledged, and then I turned
         back, I re-adjusted my set to channel 25 again and by
         that time I think radio transmissions had resumed from
         match control, but you really do have to be in a crowd
         of noisy, noisy people to appreciate the absolute
         inadequacy of radio communications at an event such as
         this.

         I think you have misunderstood me. At this stage all
         I am trying to find out is whether you, with your own
         ears, heard any tannoy messages.  I am not in any way
         blaming you whether you did or whether you did not.
         All I am trying to find out is whether you did hear
         it. - A. I did hear a message, but I cannot now
         remember what was being said.

         But was it from the tannoy or was it from the Land
         Rover, can you remember that? - A. Yes, there were
         messages from both points, from the front of the crowd
         and from the back of the crowd, but I cannot remember
         what was said.

    Q.   What they were, okay.  But you did hear a sound coming
          over the noise of the crowd? - A. Yes.

    Q.   As far as you can recollect? - A. Yes, as far as I can
          recollect.




H
                                                         31



                                                 R. MARSHALL


Q. You have mentioned that there was pushing twice.  You
   have mentioned that.  Can you describe what you mean
   by that term? - A. Just a strong pressure moving
   forward all the time, completely oblivious of the
   welfare of other people, a completely unprecedented
   experience in my experience, people aggressively
   pushing forward completely resistant to advice or
   instructions from the Police Officers who were there,
   from the mounted Officers and from other members of
   the crowd.

Q. Could you hear members of the crowd communicating
   with people or not? - A. Not in so many words.  There
   was an enormous amount of anger and aggressiveness.
   People were upset that they were being subjected to
   that sort of treatment.

Q. This is a deduction you have made from looking at the
   crowd? - A. Yes.

Q. Time was marching on at this stage? - A. Yes, it was,
   sir.

Q. So far as the match itself was concerned? - A. Yes.

Q. Could the anger have been that they felt they were
   not going to get in? - A. Yes, that is possible.   The
   situation was deteriorating by the minute, from 2.35
   onwards.  There wasn't an enormous amount through the
   turnstiles that I could see and so clearly there were
   difficulties there.   Time itself was imposing an
   urgency on the crowd.

Q. When you say there was pushing and aggressiveness,
   and you have used various words to describe it, can
   you say from where it was emanating from? I do not
   mean can you deduce, but did you see where it was
   emanating from? - A. It was emanating really from the
   back of the crowd.

Q. Clearly we have heard from many other people but the
   people right at the front, say at the turnstiles,
   what was happening to them? - A. They were being
   crushed.

Q. They were not in a position to do much about that? -
   A. That is right.

Q. You would agree with that, would you not? - A. Yes, I
   would.

Q. What I am trying to find out is how far back in the
   crowd did you notice forward activity? - A. There
   wasn't a finite line to the crowd.  The crowd was
   being supplemented all the time from two sources,
   from people coming from the Leppings Lane roundabout
and from the traffic lights at the junction with
Catch Bar Lane.
What other steps did you then take? - A. As I say,
the situation was deteriorating all the time.   I can
remember Inspector Purdy, who was standing on the
barrier beside Turnstiles A to G which were the
terrace turnstiles, and he was gesticulating, he was
urging people to stop pushing.  By that stage people
were starting to climb over the facade of the
turnstiles themselves. I remember seeing Inspector
Bennett standing on the roof of the turnstiles
actually talking to people.  He was not sending them
back into the crowd.  There was something clearly;
there was some action clearly needed to be taken in
respect of the situation because at that stage I felt
that we had lost the ability to do anything about it.


     I saw Inspector Purdy gesticulate to me and I
went to the perimeter gate that was closed and Mr.
Purdy said that people were being crushed at the
front and we would have to get the gates opened.   I
did not want to take that step because to do so would
have negated everything we had tried to achieve in
the build up to that time and that was to keep out of
the stadium people who had had far too much to drink,
people who were non-ticket holders and people who
didn't ought to have been in there.  So I was most
reluctant to take that step but he said well unless -
I don't remember his exact words - but he said unless
the gates are opened people will be crushed and he
was deadly serious and he was anxious.  He was not
the only one.  So I came back.  I said to him, "I'll
speak to ground control".

     So I came back to the bridge, climbed back up on
to the parapet of the bridge and once again radioed
ground control and said that I needed the gates at
Leppings Lane to be opened because at that stage
there was no other option which seemed to me that I
could take which would resolve the situation.       Again
there was no acknowledgement from ground control.        So
I jumped back down off the bridge and I ran across to
the Land Rover.       There was a Land Rover which PC
Buxton had brought there and Inspector Ellis was by
the Land Rover.       I took his radio from him.  It was
an old B u m d e p t type of radio.  It is not a multi­
channel.    It is a three channel radio and once again
I asked for the gates at Leppings Lane to be opened
and again I got no reply.       So I went back to the
bridge again and my recollection is that I changed to
Channel 35 again but I am not sure.       I again radioed
ground control and said that unless the gates were
opened at Leppings Lane people would be killed and
that message I think was acknowledged but nothing
                                                       33



                                                  R. MARSHALL


   immediate happened. We are talking about a time
   interval now of about four minutes between my request
   for tannoy announcements and my request for gates to
   be opened.  The first opening of Gate C I found this
   out - and I lost all perception of time I have to say
   at that stage but at 2.47 or 2.48 Gate C was opened
   for the first time and a trickle of people went in.

Q. Can I just stop you there one moment? The time you
   have just given me you did not know.  You have been
   asked about it since, have you not? - A. Yes.

Q. I am not complaining about it.  I just want to be
   sure about that.  It is not that you were looking at
   your watch and saying, "My goodness, it is 2.48"? -
   A. I most all perception of time at that stage.   I
   got the time subsequently from the video timing which
   showed the opening of the gates at various times.

Q. Let us just stop for one moment on this opening.   Do
   you recollect - not from the video but from your
   recollection - how long the gate was opened for on
   that occasion? - A. I cannot be specific.  I think it
   was just for a very, very short time.  I could see
   Inspector Purdy actually dragging people from under
   the barriers, particularly youngsters.  He was
   dragging youngsters from under the barrier beside the
   turnstiles and thrusting them bodily through the
   gate.

Q. Did you notice whether anybody else was entering at
   that time? - A. I think a small number of people went
   in at that stage.

Q. You assumed, would it be right, that that opening was
   in response to your request? - A. That is right.   I
   did not find out that Gate C had been opened to eject
   someone who had managed to get in who should not have
   been in until the Public Inquiry and the video was
   shown with a highlighting technique which showed
   someone actually being ejected from that gate.

Q. From your point of view you would have been quite
   happy for that gate to be opened because you had
   requested it three times? - A. Yes.

Q. You also can confirm that you saw Inspector Purdy
   actually directing people? - A. He was physically
   dragging people from under the barrier and thrusting
   them through the gates.

Q. What happened after that?   - A. The gate was opened
   again a short time later.    I cannot be specific as to
   what time that took place   and it seemed to me that
   there was a brief respite   gained, particularly in
   front of the Turnstiles A   to G, but the situation
                                                         34


                                                  R. MARSHALL


   across the concourse, by the perimeter gates and
   beyond, was unresolved because no other gates had
   been opened at that stage.

Q. This is 1 to 16 you are talking about now? - A.
   Yes, in front of Gate A and 1 to 16 that was
   unresolved.  People were still being crushed in that
   area.

Q. The mounted Officers of their own volition tried to
   close the blue perimeter gate which fed Turnstiles A
   to G and they managed to get that closed and I think
   it was Lionel Proctor, Sergeant Proctor, who was
   behind that gate along with a mounted Officer.   That
   gate, the closure of that gate, again produced a
   brief respite but that gate did not hold.   That gate
   was thrust open bodily and people flooded into the
   area in front of the turnstiles once again.
   Eventually Gate C opened again.  I think that was
   subsequently found out to be about 2.52.   There was I
   think a roar from inside the ground round about that
   time and that led people to enter through Gate C in
   substantial numbers.  I have said earlier the
   situation in front of Turnstiles 1 to 16 and I asked
   for the gate to the North Stand to be opened because
   that gate was being shaken and that gate was also
   opened and people went into that area.   I didn't see
   Gate B opened at any time but I couldn't see Gate B
   from where I was standing.

Q. Was Gate C shaking as well? You have mentioned Gate
   A but did you see any movement on Gate C? - A. No, I
   never saw Gate C shaking, no.

Q. When you say shaking in which plane was it moving,
   Gate A? - A. Gate A is a concertina gate and it was
   being pushed.

Q. Backward and forward? - A. Like that (indicating ).
   flexing.

Q. Flexing? - A. Yes.

Q. You have mentioned the mounted Officers of their own
   volition making a cordon? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you remember whether that was done after the
   gates had been opened or before or what? - A. The
   mounted Officers were working valiantly all the time.
   There were eventually 17 mounted Officers forming
   cordons and working as individuals both within the
   crowd and on the exterior of the crowd.

Q. This crowd which was outside the turnstile area, the
   perimeter gates and so on was a substantial crowd,
   was it? - A. Yes.
                                                            35



                                                      R. MARSHALL



    Q. Can you estimate how many about? - A. It is very hard
       to be accurate but probably about 6,000 or 7,000
       people.
    Q. It is difficult for you to answer this question
B      because you have not done many Semi Finals but have
       you done big League matches in that area? - A. Yes.
    Q. With what sort of numbers? - A. 3,000 and 4,000.

    Q. Pardon? - A. 3,000 or 4,000, probably more.
    Q. I am sorry, 3,000 or 4,000 supporters? - A. The
       situation really is, if perhaps I can explain, is
       somewhat different at League games in so far as it is
       easier to get people actually into the ground because
       normally coaches are permitted to unload in Leppings
       Lane and you can control the numbers of people
       actually getting off coaches and going into the
       turnstiles at will but when you have virtually a
       capacity crowd that is not feasible.

    Q. So you had a very big crowd there? - A. Yes.
D   Q. Outside those gates and, in fact, bigger than you
       ever had before would it be fair to say at that time?
       - A. It was the same numbers that had been there in
       the year previous in 1988.

    Q. No, I am talking about you? - A. Personally, yes,
       sir.
    Q. The situation outside the ground then ameliorated.
       It improved? - A. Not immediately, sir.
    Q. Tell me? - A. Because large numbers of people still
       were flooding into the area. In fact, after three
       o'clock there were still substantial numbers of
       people coming into the area of the turnstiles but the
       opening of the gates alleviated the pressure on the
       people who were at the front of the crush.
    Q. Are you saying to me that the primary reason for
       opening the gates was to relieve the crush of the
       people in the front? - A. That was the reason. I
       felt that unless the gates were opened people would
       be crushed to death in front of the turnstiles.
    Q. You had a concern, rightly or wrongly, that there
       would be injury or perhaps even worse? - A. I had an
       awful decision to make, sir, and I made that decision
       based on what I thought to be the circumstances
       prevailing at that time.




H
                                                 R. MARSHALL


     THE CORONER:   I think we have got to stop for lunch.
I have not got very much more but I think we will stop for
lunch and start again at two o'clock if that is all right.
Q. I give you the same warning as before about being on
   Oath? - A. Yes.
                   LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT
                                              R.   MARSHALL


     THE CORONER:   I think we had got to the point where
the gate had been tully opened, a lot of people had gone
in and the pressure outside had been relieved? - A. Yes,
sir.
Can you remember whether the gate was shut again on that
occasion and then re-opened or can you not recollect
that? - A. The gate was opened three times and closed
after the third occasion.

The third occasion was after the match had kicked-off or
what? - A. Before the match had kicked-off.

Did you enter the stadium at all in any point in the
proceedings? - A. Not until after the disaster occurred,
sir.

Had the gate been closed by then? - A. Yes.

Gate C I am talking about now. - A. Yes.

Do you remember whether the third opening was an opening
where the gate was only opened partially or was it fully
opened on the third occasion? - A. I cannot remember,
sir.

I think you mentioned that some mounted officers had come
to assist at some point? - A. Yes.

Did you know that at the time or did you discover that
later?   Had you seen them? - A. I saw them come.

You did see them come? - A. Yes, sir.

I think you have also mentioned that a cordon was placed
in front of the perimeter gates? - A. That's right, sir.

Do you, from your recollection, remember whether that
cordon held or not?   If you can't remember please say
so. - A. I remember the horses being across the area to
the front of the perimeter gates, but there was an awful
lot happening and I cannot be specific as to how long
that lasted or in what format it existed.

I think you mentioned that you heard a roar from within
the stadium at one point. - A. Yes.

Can you refresh my memory on what you actually said
happened at that point.   Was the gate open, that is the
first question? - A. Yes.

Was there any alteration in movement amongst the crowd,
that you noticed? - A. No.
                                                              38


                                                     R.   MARSHALL


    Q. You have told me there were maybe 5,000, 6,000, 7,000 - a
       lot of people there - thousands.   Were they all within
       the area between the perimeter gate and the turnstiles at
       this crucial time, say, twenty to three/quarter to three
       onwards? - A. No.   There were still many, many people
       approaching the ground from both directions.
B   Q. Was the roadway - by this time traffic ought to have
       stopped on it? - A. It ought to have stopped but I think
       the video actually shows vehicles still moving backwards
       and forwards along that road long after it was supposed
       to have been stopped.

    Q. What I am trying to find out is whether there was any
       impediment to the people who were coming down, which
       prevented them from utilising the Leppings Lane road as a
       holding area? - A. In front of the turnstiles you mean?

    Q. Going back as far as you like. - A. No, there was no
       impediment at all, apart from the officers who were
       actually on duty outside the perimeter gates.

    0. From your experience, would it have been a practical
       proposition to try and hold the crowd I 11 say higher up?
       Do you know what I mean by "higher up"?    I mean further
D      away from the turnstile area? - A.    No, sir.

    Q. Why do you say that? - A. Well, sir, because for a start
       it had never been done before.    The situation would have
       been difficult to envisage in a sense that one would - if
       you are thinking about some form of filter, that filter
       has either got to be made up of police officers or
       barriers of some description manned by police officers.
       You would have to impose those filters in two specific
       locations.    The problems flowing from that would be you
       would be halting an enormous mass of people, both
       approaching from the south and from the north-west.    You
       would need to have to speak virtually with every person
       who was going to pass through that filter. You would
       have to be prepared to deal with prisoners because
       inevitably you would have confrontational situations
       developing between police officers and members of the
       public.    You would have to deal with ordinary members of
       the public who were perhaps resident in that area.

       You would be in a difficult position insofar as people
       who hadn't got tickets would be saying to police
       officers, "Well, someone has got my ticket at the
       turnstile.   I am meeting somebody," because the
       spectators, the fans, wouldn't expect that sort of
       barrier anyway.
       Having regard to the events on the day I doubt that any
       sort of human or physical barrier would have actually




H
                                                        39


                                                R.   MARSHALL


  prevented the sort, of numbers approaching the turnstile
  area as came in the last twenty minutes.

  Again, the actual correct working, or successful working
  of those sort of barriers would, I suggest, require a
  good deal of co-operation from members of the public
  anyway, who would have to submit themselves to being
  stopped and questioned and their tickets checked and so
  forth.   The historical precedent for that sort of check
  didn't exist and it didn't exist on the day.

Q. Did you by any chance hear any messages, either broadcast
   or radioed, relating to the possibility of postponing the
   kick-off? - A. I personally did not ask for the kick-off
   to be postponed.   In hindsight perhaps that is something
   which I should have addressed.   Having said that, the
   fans outside the turnstiles took no notice whatsoever of
   tannoyed announcements from the front of the turnstile
   area.   They took no notice whatsoever of the public
   address announcements being made from the Land Rover.

  At tent minutes to three I know that Inspector Ellis was
  standing on the bonnet of the Land Rover shouting into
  the public address system that the kick~off was being
  postponed, when it was not in fact.   He was doing it as
  a tactic to try to bring some sense into the crowd.
  That was ignored as well.

   Whilst I have castigated myself many times for not
   thinking of that, nevertheless I think that at the end of
   the day it would not have been effective anyway.

Q. I have got one other question.   Once the gates were
   opened and the crowd had entered into the concourse area,
   your responsibility for them ceased, would that be right.
   - A. Well, there was a residual crowd.

Q. I am talking about the crowd that got through, so to
   speak.   It then became somebody else s responsibility to
   deal with them as they saw fit? - A. Yes.

Q. You mentioned three messages of Control asking for the
   gates to be opened? - A. Yes.

Q. Is that right?   Was it three or was it four?   Can you
   remember? - A. I think it was probably four because I had
   this feeling I had changed my radio back again to the
   Hammerton Road station and passed a message.   However, I
   don't think in retrospect there was any record of that at
   Hammerton Road, and there would have been.
                                                          40


                                                   R.   MARSHALL




Q. What you are saying is that as far as you know three
   are recorded, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. But you might have put a fourth one through as well? -
   A. Yes.

0..Would it be right to say that certainly the last
  - message that you put through had an element of urgency
    attached to it? - A. Yes.

          THE CORONER:   Mr. Hale, I will let you go last.
     We will follow, subject to that, our normal practice.
     Mr. Payne, I will let Mr. Hale go last.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

0. Mr. Marshall, there are only two subjects that I would
   like to ask you about, please.  The first deals with
   your requests to the control to open the gates.  You
   have given evidence about that and I am not going to go
   over what you have already said at all, but can you be
   clear, please, that when you made that request did you
   refer to any particular gate? - A. No.  I asked for the
   gates to be opened.

Q.   To be opened? - A. Yes.

Q.   To your right hand there is  the folder which we have
     been using, which contains a number of photographs, and
     in the bundle I wonder if you could find photograph
     C258? - A. Yes, sir.

0. I just want to use this to illustrate the question I
   would like to ask.  You will, of course, recognise the
   entrance approach to the turnstiles? - A. Yes,

0.   You see just to the left of  turnstiles A-G onecan     see
     side view on the big blue gate B? - A. Yes.

Q. The Jury know where that is.   Now we can't see, because
   it is just round the corner, but we knowwhere gate C
   is round to the right? - A. Yes.

Q. And gate   A is off this picture butover   to   the left,   as
   we know?   - A. Yes.

0. At the time you gave these messages with increasing
   urgency, that area was jam-packed full of people? - A.
   Y e s.

0. Your request was that the gates should be opened? - A.
   Yes.

0. By that did you include gate B? - A. Yes.
* //                                                              41


                                                             R. MARSHALL




           0. And of course also C to the right? - A. Yes.

           o. And A to the left? - A. Yes.
       B   o. Do you know by what means the order eventually was
              given to the people who actually operated the bolts and
              pulled the gates back?  Do you know how they received
              the message? - A. I can speculate as to how they
              received it.

           Q. No, I suppose you had better not do that.    You did not
              yourself thougn speak to anybody? - A. No.

           0. Of course, as the Jury know from the model and tne
              other diagrams that we have seen, if one goes tnrough
              big gate B into the concourse, one then comes out to
              the left hand side of the dividing wall? - A. That is
              right.

           0. Which goes across the concourse? - A. Yes.

           0. Unless you go through the gateway in the wall your way
              onto the terrace would be round to the left through the
       D      other tunnel and down into pens 6 and 7? - A. Correct.

           Q. Once you nad given the request for tne gates, plural,
              to be opened did you have any control or did anyone
              have any control, as far as you know, over the order or
              sequence in wnich the gates were opened? - A. No.

           0. But from the position of gate B that is the one that is
              nearest to the big crowd jammed up against the
              turnstiles? - A. Yes.

           0. If it had so happened that that one had been opened
              first, then the crowd jammed up against the turnstiles
              would most easily have been able to flood to the
              crowd's left through gate B? - A. That is right.

           0. I just wanted to ask you please just to deal with that
              sequence so that one can see what the significance of
              each of the gates may have been if things had just gone
              differently.  I want to ask you, however, a question
              about your own feeling at the time at which the gates
              were opened.  When you saw that nappening what was your
              own feeling about it? - A. I was immensely relieved at
              that stage that the situation had been resolved and
              that the people who were being crushed at tne front had
              managed to get into the stadium.  That was tinged with
              regret insofar as also having entered tne stadium were
              numerous people who probably did not nave any tickets.

           Q. Did it at that moment occur to you to tnink that this
              influx could cause injury to anyone inside the ground?
J                                                                 42


                                                           R.   MARSHALL




              - A. Not at all and the reason I say that was because
              there were five or six different places that people
              could have gone, having entered througn the gates.
              They could have gone round the south corner of the west
    B         stand to the area by the police control cabin; through
              the tunnel; through tne gate in the dividing wall which
              goes across the concourse; if they had gone through
            • gate B they would have gone into pens 5 and 6, or^pen
              7; entrance through gate A would have taken them into
              the north stand; and of course there were the two
              entrances to the west stand which fed into the
              concourse either side of the dividing wall, so there
              was not just tne one place that people could have gone
              to.
        0. It is not difficult to see with hindsight that things
           might have been done differently but at the time, in
           the lisnt of the knowledge that you then had, did it
           cross your mind that this was going to cause any risk
           of injury to anyone inside the ground? - A. No, sir.

                         Cross-Examined by HR. ISAACS
    D   0. Mr. Marshall, just one or two points if I may so I can
           see if we can put this in perspective.  Following your
           experiences in 1988 there was nothing that you learnt
           of which caused you to think that the operation had not
           been a successful one? - A. No, sir.

        0   . Notningthat on the face of it appeared to be necessary
             by way of change to any future arrangement, any
             operational order, so far as the policing of
             Hillsborough for a semi-final was concerned? - A. ho,
             sir.

        0, You had been in the ground in 1988 and so far as in tne
           ground was concerned, no reason to do anything
           differently in 1989? - A. No, sir.

        Q. You were asked by the Coroner about the transfer of
           people from the terracing at Leppings Lane to the
           stand, and as I understand your evidence you say this,
           taat to see as a police officer people transferring,
           being helped up by friends or by people they don t
           know, but by people who are in the stands, is not
           unusual? - A. That is right, sir.

        0.    People often want a better view? - A. Yes.

        Q.    Or they merely want a free stand - and by stand I mean
              sitting down seat - as opposed to a place on the
              terraces? - A. That is right, yes.

                                  /0. Particularly ....
                                 R.   MARSHALL


Particularly if they see someone they know who they
can share a seat with? - A. Yes.

In terms of police officers being stationed on the
terraces prior to the game, I do not just mean in the
tunnel or against railings but dispersed throughout
the crowd, there would be very little that they could
usefully do, in ones or even in twos? - A. Yes.

Insofar as self-levelling had been used as a means of
allowing the crowd to find its place on the terraces
in 1988, that without any more so far as you were
concerned had proved to be entirely successful? - A.
Y e s.

That would also be the position as it appeared to any
senior officer having overall command? - A. Yes.

Mr. Mole in the first instance? - A. Yes.

So far as the command structure is concerned, we know
how it works with the Commander, then senior officers,
Superintendents, Inspectors and the like.  As you go
down the scale it does not mean, does it, dealing with
senior officers that there is no degree of
responsibility, that there is no room for independent
action? - A. I would expect every police officer to be
able and willing to take independent action whenever
it was necessary to do so.

So, as far as you were   concerned, having the degree of
experience and expertise that you had,     you  would hope,
I expect, that if you indicated that in your judgment
something should be done, your superior should take
some notice of that? - A. Yes.

And be able to rely on   the advice that     you   were
giving? - A. Yes.

We have heard something of a suggestion, and it is
only that to a degree, that for a limited period of
time in some way the tunnel had been manned by one,
two police officers in 1988 and fans re-directed.   Let
us treat that as something that happened. - A. Yes.

Whether it be right or not one does not know.      If that
decision were made by an officer on the ground     at that
time in answer to a situation that he had seen     had
developed, would you complain about that? - A.     No, not
at all.

Would you, as perhaps an officer senior to the one who
had made that decision, feel aggrieved that it had
been made without reference to you? - A. Not at all. I
                                                         44



                                         R.   MARSHALL


         would be pleased that an officer had reacted to a
         situation which he perceived needed a Police reaction.

    Q.   Is there anything in this, that to a degree, if such a
         situation had developed and been obvious to such an
B        officer, you might have expected it to take place? -
         A. If he had seen it, I would have expected him to do
         something about it.

    Q.   But, of course, it all depends on the circumstances at
         the time and what people are doing? - A. That is
         right.

    Q.   And how far what is going on within the concourse or
         outside is distracting them from concentrating on the
         matter at hand? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Although we are here in Sheffield talking about these
         matters - and I do not think anybody forgets this -
         and we are talking reasonably coolly about these
         matters, at the time the situation must have seemed
         horrendous? - A. Are we talking about outside the
         turnstiles?
D   Q.   1989, yes. - A. Yes, it was.

    Q.   On that particular point you have described the
         pushing, and it may be suggested to you, Mr. Marshall,
         "Well, it is all very well saying that people were
         pushing, but apart from those right at the very back
         everybody else was in a position where they could do
         nothing else but carry on going forward;   their means
         of independent action had, in fact, come to an end".
         That may be suggested to you.   I want to ask you some
         questions about this.  My suggestion to you is if that
         is put to you, that is a rather simplistic approach to
         what was actually happening, would you agree with
         that? - A. Yes sir, I would.   Every member of that
         crowd had got a brain.  Every individual within it was
         capable at some stage of independent, individual
         action.  I think under normal circumstances people
         will exercise some sort of care and influence over
         their fellow human beings, and I think that sort of
         care and that sort of influence was markedly absent in
         a proportion of the crowd.   I do not think that was
         anything more than a very, very significant minority
         because not all the crowd were of that persuasion.

    Q.   Is the position this, that you have a situation where
         there is a body of people waiting to get into the
         concourse area through the turnstiles, that, as you
         said to the Coroner, there is no finite line to the
         back of the crowd, but those who join the back are
         pushers in the first instance, have independent action
                                                          45




                                         R.   MARSHALL


         at that time, and then you saw them themselves
         becoming the pushed? - A. Yes.

         But there is a time when they are, in fact, partly
         responsible for the crushing that is going on until
B        they then cannot do anything about it? - A. That is
         right, yes.

         And the stage where the pushers become the pushed goes
         further and further back as more people join? - A.
         Yes.

         Am I right in understanding your evidence to be this,
         that up until about 2.30 you still did not have
         serious concerns that you would be able to deal with
         the matter satisfactorily? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Then more and more and more people came to join the
         throng? - A. Yes.

    Q.   When you finally got through your message to control -
         "Unless the gates are opened at the Leppings Lane end
         people will be killed" - and I know this is very
         difficult, Superintendent, but what sort of timescale
D        did you think that you had before you felt somebody
         would be killed? Are we talking about seconds here,
         in your own mind, the urgency of the situation? - A. I
         never thought of it in terms of time because it is now
         so difficult to describe in a quiet room such as this
         the sort of things that were happening before my eyes.
         It was hot, noisy, pushing, shoving, people crying
         out, clearly people crushed against the walls by the
         turnstiles, not much evidence of people going through
         the turnstiles, anguish written on faces and the
         mounted officers in the thick of it, anguish written
         on their faces, police officers just pushed against
         the walls, and I just felt that unless something was
         done to relieve that situation we would be counting
         the bodies outside the ground.

    Q.   You put the urgency as you saw it in your voice as you
         put that message through? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Just one final matter:  even after people had gone
         through the gate there were still a large number of
         people to go through the turnstile and they continued
         to do so? - A. Yes.

                     Cross-Examined by MR. KING

         Mr. Marshall, can you help us on this.  You mentioned
         that grounds such as Hillsborough have a capacity
         which is worked out in advance as to how many people
         should be allowed to enter the ground? - A. Yes.
                                                          46




                                         R.   MARSHALL


    Q.   What is worked out in advance is how many people
          should enter a particular part of the ground even, is
          it not, that is to say one looks at terraces, stands,
          as separate entities? - A. Yes.

B   Q.   It may be an obvious question with an obvious answer,
         but I would welcome your help on this.  Why is it that
         capacities are fixed in advance and we do not, for
         example, say to the football public, "Well, you enter
         the ground and keep going until you decide for
         yourself that you are not going to go in"? Why do we
         have them in advance? - A. The capacities are
         determined by the Fire Service having regard to the
         available space on the terraces and are linked into
         the exit facilities in the event of there being an
         emergency evacuation.

    Q.   Is it solely for that purpose, or is it also to do
          with ensuring that not too many people get into a
          particular area for their own safety? - A. Yes.

    Q.   You would agree with that? - A. Yes.

    Q.   It is a safety measure, is it not? - A.   Yes.
D
    Q.   One does not, from experience, simply say to people,
         "Well, here is a section of the ground, see how many
         of you can get in before one of you starts
         complaining"? That would not be a sensible way of
         approaching the filling of a ground for safety
         reasons, would it? - A. No.

    Q.   In this instance you have told us very frankly that as
         regards the Leppings Lane terrace, that is the west
         terrace, you yourself, as a senior officer - in 1988
         of course the Commander inside the ground and in 1989
         outside the ground - did not consider that one had to
         anticipate a problem of overcrowding on the west
         terrace.   That was the evidence you gave us this
         morning. - A. Yes.

    Q.   You agree.  That was a very frank answer and, as I
         understand it therefore, it means this, that from your
         point of view no advance thought was given in the
         planning by the Police to the problem of overcrowding
         or potential overcrowding on the terraces because it
         was a problem which did not have to be anticipated -
         that is correct? - A. Yes, that is right.

    Q.   You were not in charge of planning, were you? - A. No.

    Q.   So I can ask you this question because it does not
         really reflect on you;  it reflects on those who
         planned it.  I want to take you through some points




H
                                R.   MARSHALL


arising out of that to suggest to you that that
approach is not only highly dangerous, but is highly
irresponsible.  This is not a reflection on you,
officer, because you are not in charge of planning.   I
want to take you through those points.  Let us take
the west terrace, the Leppings Lane terrace, and if we
can ask Mr. Griffiths to take his pointer and if you
would turn, Mr. Marshall, and look, this is the
terrace on which you say that fans were simply
expected to reach their own level because only a
certain number of tickets had been sold in advance? -
A. Yes.

Because only a certain number of tickets had been sold
in advance, one could assume, do I understand from
that, that therefore the terrace could not get
overcrowded because the number has been worked out in
advance as to what is a safe number? - A. That is
true, although with hindsight the terrace, in fact,
could have been even more overcrowded than
subsequently it was found to be because - this did not
occur to me at the time ---




                                     /Q.   Just pause
                                          R. MARSHALL


Just pause there,. - A. The gates, the turnstile
gates, or rather the turnstiles themselves...
Mr. Marshall, I am sorry to stop you but I am not
asking you a question about what actually happened on
the 15th April 1989.  I will come to that.  I am
talking about the planning stage and the reasoning
behind your evidence of not anticipating overcrowding
because of the notion that because there was a fixed
capacity for the terrace and the number of tickets
sold was within that capacity therefore there should
be, anticipation-wise, no problem.  That is what I am
investigating, all right? - A. Yes.

Because of that anticipation, you see, you have very
frankly told us that there were no specific
instructions as regards Police Officers, for example,
on the perimeter track to look out for overcrowding.
You have told us very frankly about that? - A. Yes.

Indeed, you have told us very frankly that in your
judgment it is really impossible when simply looking
into a crowd to decide whether or not it was
overcrowded or not. That was your view? - A. Yes.
It is very important then to look to see whether this
anticipation and the decision in effect not to pay
attention to the problem is a justified one. - A.
Can I just take issue there? You have used the word
"decision".  That implies the question has been
considered in the positive and the negative.  Now
that is not the case.

Are you saying... - A. I am saying that the question
did not even arise.  There was an assumption that
because Liverpool had been allocated 24,000 or so
tickets then the question of overcrowding would not
arise because if 24,000 people came and occupied the
area for which they had purchased a ticket that was
the safe capacity of the ground and, therefore, the
question of overcrowding was irrelevant.

Yes, I understand that and that is what I want to
investigate. You have very frankly said that the
question did not arise in the planning. It was not
discussed in the planning because of the assumption
you have just made? - A. Yes.
Let me look at the West Terrace with the pointer of
Mr. Griffiths.  This is the terrace which, so far as
capacity goes, is treated as a whole unit so far as
you were concerned.  It was a terrace which could
take a fixed capacity I think of 10,100? - A. Yes.

In fact, the terrace is divided up into pens, is it
not? - A. Yes.
*A 2 .

                                                                      49



                                                          R. MARSHALL



             Q. If I am somebody, a spectator, who is entering the
                terrace and I enter Turnstiles A to G, and let the
                pointer show it perhaps? - A. Yes.

             Q. And I have never been to the ground before, postulate
         B      that for the moment? - A. Yes.

             Q. But I am a fan who, on the arrangements, is being
                allowed to find his own level, do you understand
                me? - A. Yes.

             Q. You would appreciate, would you not, that one of the
                natural and obvious routes on to the terrace is down
                the tunnel which is in front of you on the concourse
                with the big word "Standing" over it? - A. Yes.

             Q. Let me take a fan who goes down through that tunnel
                into the centre pens, all right? - A. Yes.

             Q. Let us take somebody who is arriving at a time when
                the pen looks pretty congested when he enters? - A.
                Yes.

             Q. But he sees in the distance, in the corner, plenty of
                space, all right? - A. Yes.

             Q. When I say by the corner, so that you know what I
                mean, shall we say Pen 6, something like that.  He
                makes his way through the pen which he has entered
                and tries to get across to that empty space? - A.
                Yes.

             Q. Will he be able to do so? - A. Yes.

             Q. How? - A. He went to the gate which is beneath the
                canopy of the West Stand.

             Q. Can you just point to the gate you are referring
                to? - A. I cannot see it from here.  The back of the
                terrace.

             Q. Are you talking about the gates at the very back of
                the terrace? - A. Yes.

             Q. Let us take a situation where he cannot see that gate
                because of the crowd already on the terrace which is
                blocking his vision of that gate, all right? - A.
                Yes.

             Q. You would agree with me that that gate is behind you
                as you enter the middle terrace, is it not? - A. Yes.

             Q. If you do have an opportunity to see it you actually
                have to turn round and go backwards to get to it, do
                you not? - A. Yes.




         H
                                                          50


                                                 R. MARSHALL



    Q. Let us take the situation of a fan who walks through
       that tunnel on to the middle terrace, does not see
       the gate to his left until he is back, shall we say,
       because there is a lot of people already on the
       terrace, and tries to make his way across to the
B      empty space.   He cannot do it, can he? - A. If the
       terrace is very, very congested he would have the
       utmost difficulty.

    Q. How does he do it even if it is not? - A. He can walk
       towards it.

    Q. How does he walk across the terrace to the far - from
       the middle section pen, shall we say Pen 4, right
       over to Pen 6? How does he do it? - A. I am afraid I
       cannot postulate.   I am afraid I cannot put myself
       into the mind of the fan.   If he looks round and he
       sees a gate and he wants to move in that direction he
       will go through it.   In my experience, if a fan wants
       to end up in a particular location, if there is a
       fence there he will climb over it.

    Q. If the gate is not visible to him he will simply come
       up against a radial fence, will he not? - A. Yes.

    Q. That radial fence bars his way to the other terraces,
       does it not, the other part of the terrace? - A. Yes.

    Q. Indeed, we know that if one goes from Pen 4 which is
       the one as you enter left down the tunnel and you
       come to the radial fence, immediately on the other
       side is a little sterile area of no man's land, which
       is a little pen, Pen 5, and then there is another pen
       beginning with a radial fence? - A. Yes.

    Q. Apart from the existence at the back of these gates
       there is nothing, is there, to enable somebody to
       filter across the terrace to say the far terrace 6,
       that is right, is it not? - A. Yes.

    Q. Do you not agree with me, therefore, that the terrace
       pens become in effect self-contained as regards
       people entering them once that upper gate is blocked
       and no-one can see it? - A. Yes.

    Q. Let me ask this question;  do you agree with me the
       fact that the pen may become so full that people
       could block the back of it so that no-one could see
       the gate is not an unusual fact, is it? - A. In terms
       of normal League games probably it is an unusual
       fact.

    Q. It is an unusual fact? - A. Yes.




H
                                             R. MARSHALL


Q. But in terms of the Semi Final it is not, is it? - A.
   No.

Q. it is fairly obvious, and one can see as many
   photographs as we like, that if one looks at the
   middle pens it is nigh impossible if it is crowded to
   see any gate at the back just by looking.  You would
   agree with that? - A. Yes.

Q. There was no provision in the planning which you have
   described for a Police Officer or anybody else to be
   signalling the existence of that gate, was there? -
   A. No.

Q. It means, does it not, in simply allowing fans to
   find their own level there was the obvious danger
   that if fans went down that obvious tunnel you may
   get too many people, still all ticket holders, but
   too many people for safety purposes in the middle
   pens as opposed to the side pens? That was an
   obvious danger which could be seen in advance, was it
   not? - A. In terms of being obvious I would perhaps -
   I wouldn't accept that because there are all sorts of
   problems associated with football grounds and put in
   the way that you describe clearly it is a very
   difficult situation.  I would disagree with the word
   "obvious".

Q. From what you have frankly told us no thought and no
   provision was made in the planning for ensuring the
   even distribution of fans across that terrace, that
   is right, is it not? - A. Yes.

Q. If any thought had been given to the even
   distribution of fans across the terrace, why would it
   not be obvious that you have got to have some method
   of getting them into the side pens when the centre
   pens become over-full? Why is that not just obvious
   that you should have some system for ensuring that
   they can get into the side pens? - A. Can you just
   repeat that question please?

     MR. PAYNE:   Yes, I can understand why he is asking.
I am deliberately not interrupting at an important point in
the questioning but there is a big distinction between
asking what was known at the time and what is obvious now.
Sir, my friend must make that distinction.   His last
question actually asked, "What is obvious?".   That is not
the question in the case.

     THE CORONER:   I think what you were trying to ask
was, what was obvious, is it not?

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am talking about planning and I
think all my questions have been talking about planning.   I
have not sought in any of my questions so far to relate to
                                                       52



                                               R. MARSHALL


what actually happeried but to thinking about it in advance
and I thought I had made that fairly clear.

     THE CORONER:   When you are ready, if you would help
the witness by repeating your question.

Q.        MR. KING:   I will perhaps put it in a slightly
     different way. What help, so far as you know, was
     given to a fan entering the back of the West Stand
     terraces through A to G who wanted to stand on the
     terraces? What help was given so far as you know in
     the planning to enable him to know how to get to the
     side terraces if, for example, there was plenty of
     room there and not in the middle terraces? - A. Again
     it is a matter of speculation.  There are Police
     Officers present in substantial numbers on the
     concourse and there are stewards wearing the tabards
     of Sheffield Wednesday Football Club also available
     on the concourse to direct fans to the area in which
     they want to end up.

Q. You did not quite understand the question, Officer.
   What planning in advance was made to help the fans as
   opposed to what might happen by chance? - A. Short of
   putting Officers on the concourse and having with
   them an experienced Officer who has the job of
   actually briefing the Police Officers and indeed
   briefing the stewards, if you choose to call that
   planning then that is planning, but I don't think
   there is anything written down in an Order that says
   that the Police Officers will direct fans to that
   part of the terrace where they wish to end u p .

Q. It is not simply where they wish to end up, is it,
   Mr. Marshall?  It is also where there is room for
   them to be in safety.  That must be an important
   consideration in any planning, is it not? - A. As I
   say, I have tried to answer that question in terms of
   the capacity of the ground.

Q. There may not have been and if the answer is there
   was not, so be it, but what system was there, if any,
   to ensure that once the middle pens had got so
   congested that really one should not have any more
   people on them to communicate to anybody coming into
   the ground, "Don't go down the tunnel to where those
   pens are. They are full.   Go round the sides”? What
   planning was there to give them that assistance, any?
   - A. There was no planning to that effect but that
   does not mean to say it would be something which
   would be ignored.  I have told the Inquiry myself
   about the difficulty which one has without any sort
   of formal counting devices to actually identify the
   numbers of people who found their way into a
   particular area.  It is not an exact science and
   relies on observation and under normal circumstances
                                                           53


                                                     R . MARSHALL


       that observation would be communicated and action would
       be taken.
    Q. As far as the individual fan is concerned he cannot know
       before he goes down the tunnel) to take that example,
       whether or not the middle pens are going to give him
B      access or not to the side pens?   He doesn t know, does
       he? - A. You are not seriously suggesting that none or
       the Liverpool fans who came to the 1988 semi-final had
       not been to Hillsborough before?

    Q. I am suggesting there was absolutely no way in which
       anybody who hadn't been there before, or hadn t been to
       the side pens before 9 would know that to get to them they
       had to go round the side and not go down the tunnel.    I
       am suggesting that to you, yes.    How would they know? -
       A. I would have thought it was obvious td anyone who
       entered the concourse, who took their time to look round,
       and if he entered through turnstiles A to G he would have
       four distinct places where he could go.    He could go
       down the tunnel.   He could go into the West Stand, up
       the steps.   He would see four or five stewards there,
       standing at the bottom of the stairs*    He could ask any
       of those people.   He could go round the corner of the
       West Stand, the south corner of the West Stand and find
       his way on to a terrace.

       Now football fans are like other people.   They have got
       intelligence and can stand and take in their surroundings
       and use their own intelligence to find a place to go to.

    Q. Let me take those four points.   Why would it be obvious
       to a fan that he could enter the terrace down the tunnel/
       -    Because above the tunnel there is a sign that says
       "Standing".

    Q. In large letters? - A. Correct.

    Q. You would agree with me that if you hadn t been to the
       ground before and knew that those pens on the terrace
       were divided up into segments, you might also believe
       that by going down the tunnel you could make your way
       across to the far corners? - A. If you had never been to
       the ground before that would be an assumption, yes.

    Q. I understand then why it was obvious you could get on the
       terrace down the tunnel.   Why was it obvious you could
       get on the terrace by going around, shall we say, to your
       left through that little gap in the wall?   Why was it
       obvious? - A. Well, again, it was not obvious because
       there was no sign which indicated that.   It was a way to
       go.   Clearly anyone looking at the West Stand would be
       entitled to make the assumption, "If I go through this
       gate I am going to get into an area of terrace.   I am




H
                                                            54


                                                    R. MARSHALL


     going to get on to, the terrace or I am going to go into
     the West Stand."

Q. Why was that an assumption that anybody should   make when
   they have the tunnel in front of them with the   huge word
   "Standing" on it?   Why was that an assumption   which
   would ever even enter your head? - A. I cannot   say.

Q. The fact is, and I won't labour this point any longer,
   that you frankly concede that no provision was made in
   the police planning to take any positive steps to ensure
   the even distribution of fans across the West Terrace,
   the Leppings Lane terrace, you agree with that? - A. Yes.

Q. You have frankly also told us that no positive steps, as
   I understand it, were taken to ensure that a given pen
   didn't get too many people in it, other than relying on
   the observations of an individual officer who might be
   looking into the pen? - A. Yes.

Q. You have already told us in your judgment that is a
   hopeless system because it is nigh impossible to tell
   whether a pen is over-crowded or not? - A. Yes.

Q. Wasn't then planning, therefore, for the distribution of
   fans across the terrace to prevent over-crowding itself,
   completely absent? - A. No.

Q. Let me move on to something else.   Dealing with the
   situation outside the ground, and talking still at the
   planning stage, Mr. Marshall, if one looks at the
   Hillsborough Ground from outside at the Leppings Lane end
   it is obvious that the turnstile area A to G is a self-
   contained area which is   bounded on allsides by certain
   means of boundary? - A.   Yes.

Q. I am sorry to labour it     but I will just take usthrough
   it to show how it is self-contained. We obviously have
   the dividing wall which goes between the two sets of
   turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q. We have the turnstiles themselves? - A. Yes.

Q.   We have a smallish barrier which  is down themiddle  of
     the turnstile area, but we also,  of course,have the
     fencing by the River Don? - A. Yes.

Q.   Then we     have the perimeter    gates? -   A. Yes.

Q.   That isa self-contained area? -   A. Yes.

Q. It is obvious looking at it, without any experience at
   all of any football match, that that area can only take a
                                                            55


                                                      R. MARSHALL


       certain number of people in safety?    That is obvious,
       isn't it? - A. Yes.

    Q. It is obvious that if too many people get into that area,
       and are not moving out of it one way or the other, that
       you could get very serious crushing?   That is obviously,
B      isn't it? - A. Yes, but having said that, it depends on
       the mood of the individuals.

    Q. I will give you as much opportunity as you want to deal
       with particular situations which arose on the day.    What
       I am dealing with now is just looking at it coldly in
       advance.   Leave aside the mood of the people.   If you
       have too many sardines in a tin you will crush the
       sardines? - A. Correct.

    Q. You will have static things which will get crushed,
       whether they are animate or not.   What planning was there
       in the Planning Order which you have told us about which
       was designed to ensure that too many people didn t get
       into that self-contained turnstile area for their own
       safety?   In other words to ensure that too many people
       didn't get in to prevent crushing.    What planning was
       there in the Planning Order, what provision was made, to
       ensure that? - A. The serial instructions require the
       officers who were at Leppings Lane to ensure that
       initially orderly queues were formed.

    Q. I understand that.   That is orderly queues? - A. Yes.

    Q. Mr. Marshall, I didn't ask   that question, with respect.
       I asked what provision was   made to ensure that too many
       people didn't get into the   turnstile area? - A. The
       provision I have mentioned   was the only one that was
       made.
    Q. That, of course, is dealing with queuing between the ^
       perimeter gates and the turnstiles, first of all, isn t
       it? - A. Yes.
    Q. You were in charge of this area, but had you yourself had
       any experience of queuing outside that ground at a semi­
       final? - A. No.
    Q. Had you had any discussions at all with Inspector Sykes,
       who has already given evidence to us and who clearly has
       had a lot of experience of that part of the ground? - A.
       Yes, I work with Mr. Sykes.

    Q. Were you aware that Mr. Sykes' judgment and experience
       was that once you got the turnstile area full, and he
       wasn't even talking about so full there would be
       crushing, but just a maximum sort of crowd, that orderly
       queues were impossible? - A. Yes.




H
                                                             56


                                                      R. MARSHALL


    Q. You were   aware of that? - A. Yes.

    Q. What was   the purpose of the provision in the Operational
       Order asking officers to achieve the impossible?     It
       says in serial 16:
B           "The Leppings Lane turnstiles.   They^will maintain
            and ensure orderly queues are formed."

       What was   the purpose of asking them to achieve the
       impossible on a maximum gate crowd? - A. In the early
       stages it is perfectly feasible and possible to have
       queues, although the concept of queues, as you are
       probably aware, was widely debated at the Public Inquiry.
       If people are prepared to stand in a line, then that is a
       queue.   Inevitably in an area such as Leppings Lane, the
       queues disintegrate once the turnstiles come under any
       sort of pressure.    However, in the early stages queuing
       is perfectly possible.

    Q. I understand that, but that is dealing not with the
       problem of ensuring that too many people don t get in.
       You have frankly now just told us that that is dealing
       with the problem where you don't have too many people at
       all. - A. I am sorry, can you say that again?

    Q. Certainly.   You have agreed with Inspector Sykes that if
       you get a maximum crowd - not too many, but a full crowd
       - you can't form queues. You have agreed with that? - A.
       Yes.
    Q. I was asking you about what provision was made to ensure
       that the turnstile area didn t get further crowded than
       that, that is to say, so crowded it would be unsafe.
       Your answer was, "Well, there is a provision in the
       written order that the serials will maintain order and
       ensure that orderly queues are formed."   You have agreed
       with me that that is an impossible order to carry out
       even if you don't have too many people in terms of
       safety, but you just have a full crowd? - A. Yes.   As I
       have said, it is possible until the crowds build up but
       thereafter it is impossible.

    Q. The order about maintaining orderly queues has nothing to
       do with a provision to prevent too many people, for
       safety reasons, getting into the turnstile area?    That
       is right, isn't it? - A. There is nothing in the match
       Operational Order that says that officers on duty, shall
       we say, at Leppings Lane turnstiles will prevent an
       abundance of people moving into the area between the
       perimeter gates and the turnstiles.   There is nothing in
       the Order that says that.   However, on the day there
       were forty police officers, forty constables, four
       sergeants, two very experienced inspectors, a chief




H
                                                          57


                                                    R. MARSHALL


      inspector, six mounted officers, some of whom were from
      Merseyside, whose specific duty was to safeguard and
      marshal the crowds coming into that area.   If that is
      not a safety provision, even though it doesn t
      specifically say in the official order that they should
      prevent what you have described, then I would argue that
B     they are there for that purpose, amongst other purposes,
      but that is one of their duties.

    Q. Are you saying that at any briefing you attended that
       first of all foot police officers who might have been
       involved at the Leppings Lane turnstiles, that is,
       serials 16 to 18, that they were specifically instructed
       that part of their duty was to control the numbers
       entering the turnstile area? - A. I am not saying that at
       all.
    Q. The fact is that at the briefings you have described
       there was no instruction about the numbers entering the
       turnstile area at all?   That is correct? - A. Yes.

    Q. Again, therefore, there was no planning at all, was
       there, designed to ensure that too many people for safety
       reasons, crushing reasons, would get into the turnstile
       area?   There was no planning for that at all, was there?
       - A. Maybe I am not making myself clear.    The officers
       who were doing that duty do that duty week in, week out.
       They know what is expected of them.   It is not necessary
       to write into an official Order what they are supposed to
       do because in that particular location they know what is
       required and do their best to carry it out.

    Q. In other words, you leave the individual officers to
       their own devices, is that right? ~ A. No, that is not so
       at all.    The officers work in serials, with a sergeant
       responsible for them, and an inspector in charge as well,
       to carry out precisely the function which you have
       described.




                   Q. But those officers,




G




H
o
                                                            58


                                                       R. MARSHALL




        Q. But those officers were here in 1989 dealing with a
           semi-final with a capacity crowd expected, right? - A.
           Yes.

    ®   0. They don't have the experience of dealing with that day
           in day out, do they? - A. No.

        0. As I understand it, the only semi-finals in recent
           years which had been at Hillsborough were '87, '88 and
           the one we are investigating today? - A. Yes.

        0. The operational order goes into a lot of detail about
           matters concerned with law and order, doesn't it? - A.
           Yes.
        0. They are not left to the good sense and experience of
           individual officers, are they?  It is written in what
           they should do about alcohol, weapons, fighting and so
           forth? - A. Yes.

        0. Can you help - you may not be able to - why it should
           be thought they ought to go into writing and be in
           detail in a planning order, but matters relating to the
           numbers getting into a particular area for safety
           reasons isn't, is it? Can you help on that? - A. Yes,
           I certainly can.  I wonder if you have thought about
           wny there were 850 officers on duty for a football
           match? The reason why there were 850 police officers
           on duty for a football match is because the game of
           football has over the last, I suppose, 20 years,
           standards of behaviour have deteriorated to the extent
           that there are public order problems, which I do not
           think I need to elaborate on, and the reason why the
           police are there in sufficient numbers, in substantial
           numbers, is to counteract the problem of disorder.
           That is why the details of action to be taken in
           respect of prisoners, searching and the control of
           alcohol are written into official orders.

        0. I understand that, I have sympatny with it.  Wnat I
           don't understand, unless the police don't regard it as
           part of their function or important, is why equal
           importance is not given in the operational orders to
           problems of crowd safety and overcrowding and crushing.
           Why don't those problems figure as well as the others
           in a planning order? - A. I submit that they do figure
           in the sense that part of Mr. Duckenfield's briefing
           related to safety, and he spoke about the need for
           safety of fans, both inside and outside the ground, but
           The main reason that police are there is to counteract
           public disorder.




    H
                                                          59


                                                    R. MARSHALL




    0. Just let me make a note of that because I want to come
       back to it:  "The main reason the Police are there is
       to counteract public disorder" - correct? - A. Yes.

B   o.   And undoubtedly therefore, if that is the main
         function, tnat is probably an explanation why the
         planning order devotes itself almost exclusively to
         tnat aspect? - A. Yes.

    0. Indeed, there is nothing in writing, is there, about
       any specific aspect of crowd safety in the operational
       order?  1 know there is the general phrase at the
       beginning about tne aim of the order being to ensure so
       and so and so forth, and crowd safety, but specifics,
       there are not any specifics, are there? - A. Not in so
       many words, but why are the police there?  In the first
       instance they are there to control fans who have a
       tendency to fight with each other.

    Q. Is that how you view the police function? - A. That is
       an important aspect of the police function, but we have
       equally a role so far as safety is concerned.  The
       police officers who turn out from West Bar Police
       Station this afternoon do not have to be briefed about
       the safety of tne general public.  If they are walking
       around the streets of Sheffield and they see a
       situation where tne safety of the public is being
       threatened they don't need a piece of paper to tell
       them what to do, they do it. That is why the police
       are present in society.  It is one of our functions.

    0. With respect, Hr. Marshall, they do not need a piece of
       paper to tell them if they see somebody with an
       offensive weapon, they deal with it? - A. They do.

    0. Of course they do. - A. That is right.

    0. Was the police planning this, that one could assume
       that individual officers would know in advance about
       safety problems, about capacities, numbers, crushing,
       over-crowding - that was just something you would
       expect them to know about, full_stop? - A. Well, I nave
       gone into that, sir.

    Q. So be it.  If I can summarise, it is quite clear tnat
       in the written operational order, and unless you
       contradict me, nothing to your knowledge was said at
       tne briefings to officers, about controlling the
       numbers into the turnstile area - you agree with that?
       - A. Yes.
    Q. There was no reference in the planning order or indeed
       verbally at briefings to tne need of avoidance and




H
    >
                                                                60


                                                           R. MARSHALL




              detection of overcrowding on the terraces, you agree
              with that? - A. Yes.
\
            0. There was no detailed provision even in tne operational
        B      order about the duties of, for example, the mounted
               officers who were patrolling in front of the perimeter
               gates.  There was nothing specifically in the order
               about that? - A. Not to my recollection.

            Q. Let me then move on to another part of planning.  The
               late arrival of fans at a football match, by which I
               mean large numbers coming, shall we say, in the last
               hour or half hour, is not an unknown phenomenon, is it?
               - A. No.

            0. You frankly on other occasions have always agreed with
               that proposition? - A. Yes, sir.

            0. It is something which one can anticipate? - A. Yes.

            0. The turnstiles are designed to take people through them
               one at a time, aren't they? - A. Yes.

            Q. Did you yourself have any knowledge, any thought as far
               as you know given to you, about the rate of flow which
               these individual turnstiles, and I will take for
               example A-G, could operate on - in other words, how
               many people they would get through in an hour? - A.
               This is an area which I am unsure about.  I certainly
               did some work on flow rates through turnstiles after
               the disaster but I cannot be sure at the time of the
               disaster what the Green Guide said about flow rates
               through turnstiles.

            Q. I will come to the Green Guide pernaps in a moment but
               I want to know about planning, foresight, dealing with
               '89, not after the disaster. - A. Yes.

            0. You agreed with me that turnstiles can only take people
               one at a time? - A. Yes.

            0. You v/ould agree witn me therefore that inevitably you
               can only get so many people through seven turnstiles in
               that sort of narrow confined area which is tne
               turnstile area outside A-G, only a certain number of
               people in, say, an hour? - A. Yes.

            0. It is only a finite number? - A. Yes.

            Q. Question number one, to your knowledge was any planning
               done in advance to work out what that number would be?
               - A. Ho.




        H
                                                          61


                                                     R. MARSHALL




    Q. So are you saying from your knowledge that the police
       had not put any thought at all in their control of the
       turnstile area as to how many people could get through
       in a given time, and if too many people arrived you
B      would not get tnem through in time - any thought given
       to that? - A. The turnstiles opened at 12 noon and I
       think it was a reasonable assumption based on the 1988
       semi-final that that time of opening would enable all
       the fans from Liverpool to get into the ground.

    0. But you have agreed with me that the late arrival of
       people, people arriving later and later, is not
       something which is unusual, it is something you can
       anticipate? - A. That is right, but tne key of course
       is the actual behaviour of those individuals.

    0. Pause there for a moment while I challenge that. You
       have a capacity of 10,100 people who have to go through
       seven turnstiles? - A. Yes.

    Q. Let us assume that the flow rate which turnstiles can
       operate on is, snail we say, 500 in half an hour.   Let
       me just assume that for the moment, all right? - A.
       Yes.
    0. It follows from that that in half an hour seven
       turnstiles could only cope with 3,500 people? - A. Yes.

    Q. Regardless of their mood that is what it could cope
       witn? - A. Yes.
    Q. It follows from that that if you nave got 10,000-odd
       people who are going to go through those turnstiles,
       that you have got to have two-thirds of them already
       through, roughly, before the last half hour arrives, if
       you are going to get everybody in before kick-off.
       That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

    Q. If in fact two-thirds of the people who were due to go
       on a terrace have not yet arrived then you would know
       in advance just from that fact that you are not going
       to get everybody through - all with tickets for this
       purpose - in the last half hour.  You would know that?
       - A. Yes.
    q   . Are you aware of what the flow rate is according to
          that which you described as the Green Guide? - A. Yes.
          I think the Green Guide talks about 750 persons per
          hour when money is changing hands but tne assumption is
          that a turnstile would cope with 1,000 per hour when
          tickets are in use.




H
                                                        62


                                                   R. MARSHALL




    Q. I won't produce through you the Green Guide because I
       would get into serious trouble, I am sure, for holding
       matters up, but are you saying that that provision is
       in the Green Guide about 1,000 .... - A. I think that
B      was Sheffield Wednesday's assumption, that they could
       deal with 1,000 an hour when tickets were in use rather
      .than money.

    0. I did not ask you about Sheffield Wednesday's
       assumptions, they may be right, they may be wrong.  I
       was asking you, what you understood the Green Guide was
       telling us and you have told us what you think it said.
       - A. Yes, 750 per hour.

    Q. Full-stop - it does not refer to money, it does not
       refer to anything, does it, just says 750? - A. Yes.

    Q. I nave already put to you a notion of 500 in half an
       hour, which of course is the 1,000 in an hour.  We have
       already agreed that if you have 500 in half an hour, if
       two-thirds of the people have yet to come you are in
       trouble for the last half hour.  You have agreed with
       that? - A. Yes.

    q. Of course, if 750 is the number only which you can get
       through a turnstile, then you are in an even worse
       position for the last half hour because you have got to
       have about three-quarters of the people for turnstiles
       A-G having arrived before the last half hour comes? -
       A. Yes.
    0. So just thinking about things in advance, not now
       talking about mood of fans or anything, is it not
       obvious just looking at seven turnstiles and knowing
       that 10,000 people have to go through them, that you
       have got a problem, and a real problem, if the vast
       majority of fans have not arrived with half an hour to
       go - that is obvious? - A .Yes, it is now obvious with
       the benefit of hindsight.

    Q. With respect, Mr. Marshall, this is not hindsight,^this
       is looking at seven turnstiles, planning how long it
       takes 10,000 people to go througn seven turnstiles? -
       A. Jell we cannot ignore the 1988 situation, where the
       turnstiles coped quite easily with the numbers that
       arrived, because the arrival pattern was different.

    0. Have you heard of a concept called contingency
       planning? - A. Yes.

    Q. What is a contingency? - A. A contingency is perhaps an
       unforeseen occurrence which it is necessary to make a
       plan to cope with.




H
                                                                 63


                                                          R. MARSHALL




        0. A contingency can also cover something which you can
           foresee could nappen? - A. Yes.
\
        0.    But has not happened on the previous occasion? -   A.
    B        Yes.
        Q. Are you saying that merely because something did not
           nappen on a previous occasion, one should ignore
           contingencies as to what could happen when you are
           planning? - A. No, 1 am not saying tnat at all.

        Q.   Were you aware that the Green Guide had a provision
             that contingency plans in planning for a match should
             be made to deal with situations where tne available
             entrance at a ground proved insufficient to stop unduly
             large crowds from gathering outside? - A. Yes.

        0. What contingency plans if any were in existence to your
           knowledge in the planning of this function in 1989 to
           deal with the possibility that in the last half hour
           too many people arrive for the turnstiles to cope with?
           - A. None.
        0. Yet you have agreed with me from just the arithmetic
           that tnat is a possibility which if it arises means you
           cannot get people through on time, that is right, isn t
           it? - A. Yes.
        0. It is also an obvious phenomenon, and it is obvious
           isn't it from your experience, that the nearer kick-off
           arrives, that time has an influence on the behaviour of
           people? - A. Yes.




                           /0. You yourself
                                    R. MARSHALL


You yourself have indicated that one of the problems
which existed in 1989 was the influence of the sheer
time element, the fact that there was so little time
left to kick-off on the determination of people
wanting to enter the turnstile area? - A. Yes.

So was that not something which should be dealt with
by way of a contingency plan, what to do if people do
turn up in too many numbers to get them through the
turnstiles on time? - A. Yes.

And there was no contingency plan? - A. There was not
a plan, no.

Let me then proceed.  The problem which you saw at
2.15 when you arrived on the day was that there was
already a large number of people in the area outside
the turnstiles and out into Leppings Lane, was there
not? - A. Yes.

At that stage, at 2.15, what do you estimate the
numbers to be? - A. I would say about 6,000 or 7,000
people.

2.15 there were 6,000 to 7,000 people? - A. Possibly
less.

I am not disputing it. - A. It is very hard to
estimate numbers.

If necessary I can show you, but it would appear that
your evidence now is what you have always recollected.
I think on a number of occasions you have suggested
that at 2.15 there were 6,000 to 8,000 people there? -
A. Yes.

Those people were not only in the turnstile area;
they were spilling out into Leppings Lane and also up
to Catch Bar Lane in all directions? - A. Yes.

We know, because we have had a lot of evidence and I
think you would not disagree with this, that the crowd
was getting bigger and bigger all the time? - A. Yes.

And the   turnstiles were not able to cope, for whatever
reason,   they were going slowly? - A. I find it very
hard to   actually determine the numbers who were going
through   the turnstiles.

Did you not observe   - certainly other officers have
given evidence, you   may not have - that there came a
time, 2.30 onwards,   when it appeared that the
turnstiles were not   operating efficiently? - A. Yes.
                                  R. MARSHALL


So if there were 6,000 to 8,000, taking that, already
in the area at 2.15, how many do you say roughly were
there in the area by the time Gate C was opened? - A.
About the same sort of numbers.

But they were being added to all the time on your
evidence? - A. Yes.

So there ought to be more than 6,000 to 8,000 people?
- A. As I say, it is very difficult indeed to make an
accurate estimate of the numbers who were there when
the gate was opened.

Let me go back to 2.15 and then onwards.  At any stage
were you given any information from ground control
inside the ground as to the state of the ground inside
as regards the numbers who had already arrived? - A.
No.

You yourself were not able then to make any judgment
as to how many more people had yet to come? - A. No.

But you would agree with me, and you have agreed with
me, that because you know there is a problem if too
many people arrive in the last half-hour for the
number of turnstiles, that is information which I am
sure would be not only useful but would be vital to
you for good policing, would it not? - A. Yes.

Ground control was under the charge of whom? - A.
Superintendent Murray.

And above him inside the ground was whom? - A. Mr.
Duckenfield.

You do not know where they were positioned, but the
normal way, because you can speak of 1988, is that
ground control is in that box which overlooks the
pitch which we have looked at? - A. Yes.

Also inside the ground who was in charge of the actual
Leppings Lane terraces inside, the numbers inside? -
A. Mr. Greenwood.

Who was your equivalent and you had swapped? - A. Yes.

They not only had the view through the windows of
their ground control box inside the ground, but can
you confirm, as far as you know, that there was a
video television system whereby they from inside the
ground could see what was happening outside the
ground? - A. Yes sir.
                                                          66




                                           R. MARSHALL


              MR. RUSSELL:  Can we please establish who "they"
         are?  I think we have had three police officers
         referred to in the last minute and the last one was
         Superintendent Greenwood, and this question has become
         who "they" and where "they" were.
B
              THE CORONER: It is a fair point actually.

              MR. KING:  Sir, I do not disagree.
         It may be you cannot help.  I am only thinking in
         conceptual terms of ground control.  I will come back
         to who "they" were for my learned friend in a moment,
         but ground control, that is whichever officers made up
         ground control, would be positioned, as far as you
         understand the system, in the match box? - A. Yes.

    Q.   In that match box there were video screens? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Which gave a view of what cameras were showing outside
         the ground? - A. Yes.

    Q.   And specifically showing what was the scene in the
         turnstile area? - A. Yes.

    Q.   As regards who was in the match box, you would not
         actually know on the day but you may be able to help
         my learned friend whom you, from the planning order
         and your experience, would expect to be in the match
         box.  Would you expect Mr. Duckenfield to be in the
         match box? - A. He might well have had a roving
         commission.

         Who would you expect to be in the match box? - A.
         Superintendent Murray, P.C. Goddard, P.C. Bichard,
         P.C. Ryan.

         Mr. Greenwood, who was your position the previous
         year, so you can tell us in 1988, would he necessarily
         be in the match box? - A. No.

              MR. RUSSELL:   Thank you.

              MR. KING:  I think that was the point which I was
         being asked about.
         But whoever was in the match box - I am not interested
         at the moment, it was not you but there were certainly
         other senior officers - they would have, therefore,
         the means of seeing how many were already on the
         terraces? - A. Yes.

    Q.   And they would have a view of how many were outside
         through the camera? - A. Yes.

    Q.   And any information you gave them? - A. Yes.




H
                                    R. MARSHALL


You yourself were fed no information at all as to how
many people you should expect? - A. But, in fairness
to them, I didn't ask for it either.

It may be - I do not know whether it be right or wrong
- as far as planning goes and the feeding of
information, the numbers which should be expected to
arrive did not figure in the information you were
given? - A. Yes.

And it does not figure in the planning, in the
anticipation of the problem of people arriving in the
last half-half, that does not figure in the planning,
does it? - A. No.

Undoubtedly on 15th April 1989 too many people for
safety reasons got into the turnstile area, did they
not? - A. Yes.

And they got into the turnstile area via the perimeter
gates? - A. Yes.

Steps were taken, and you have told us about them -
the cordon being put across the perimeter gates? - A.
Yes.

At a time after too many people had already got in,
that is right, is it not? - A. That is not necessarily
true.  There were police officers present outside the
perimeter gates right from 12 noon.  Police officers,
serial 19 was across the outside of the perimeter
gates right from the start of the operation.

Mr. Marshall, just let me take the individual steps
first of all.  The use of a cordon, because we have
heard about it - I think Mr. Hand-Davis told us about
it.

     THE CORONER: Several people.

     MR. KING:  Several people, but a cordon of
mounted officers, police on horses, was used to try
and prevent people from getting into the turnstile
area? - A. Yes.

That was one of the measures which you told us about?
- A. Yes.

That measure was put into operation after too many
people had already got into the turnstile area, that
is right, is it not? - A. "Too many" is a subjective
term.  The area was certainly congested and full.
                                  R. MARSHALL


It was not only congested and full, Mr. Marshall, but
on your evidence, as well as the other officers'
evidence, there were people being crushed and
everybody was worried about the numbers getting in? -
A. Yes, but there were police officers on horseback in
that area from a much earlier stage.  The cordon
certainly was put across, I suppose, about
2.40/2.44/2.45.

We have actually heard as to those who were in it when
it was and I need not concern you with that for the
moment, but it is clear that the mounted officers,
that cordon, was put across after there was concern
about the crushing in the turnstile area? - A. Yes.

So to that extent, and that is obvious from that fact,
that cordon was already too late to prevent the
crushing occurring because it already had occurred? -
A. Probably, yes.

The closing of the perimeter gates, which we have
heard about through you and other officers, which was
not successful, that was attempted at a time when
there were so many people in the turnstile area that
officers were concerned for the safety of those within
it? - A. Yes.

So again that measure of closing the gates was too
late for the purpose of preventing the numbers getting
into the turnstile area reaching such a point that
there was a safety problem because it came afterwards?
- A. Yes.

As I understand it, apart from those two measures
there wasn't any specific measure ever taken to
control the numbers getting into the turnstile area
before those two measures were taken, that is right,
is it not? - A. As I say, there were foot and mounted
officers operating on the exterior between the road
and the turnstile area from a much earlier stage to do
precisely what you are saying.

We have heard evidence from them and we may be hearing
from other officers, I do not know. You are not
saying - if you are, tell us - their specific job was
to look at the numbers in the turnstile area, make a
decision as to how many there were there and whether
there were too many for safety reasons or just about
right, and then take a step to cordon off or close off
the turnstile area? You are not saying that was their
job? - A. Well, that was part of their job.

Where would they get that instruction from? - A. As I
have tried to say, those self-same people do that job
                                                           69




                                             R. MARSHALL


         week in week out, and are sensitive to the situation
         at Leppings Lane.

         To be fair to those officers, Mr. Marshall, those
         junior officers, they had not, day in day out, been
B        dealing with large crowds arriving at a semi-final,
         had they? - A. No.

         So where would we find the instruction that their job
         was to look to see how many were in the turnstile
         area, make a judgment as to how many were already in
         and then make a decision as to whether to close off
         the area until those already in had got through? - A.
         I don't think that would be an instruction that would
         be put into the words which you have described, but it
         is part, nevertheless, of the variety of instructions
         which they would have received, and I feel quite sure
         that Inspector Sykes, knowing Sykes as I do and the
         experience which he has, would be the sort of
         individual to have imparted that sort of information
         to the officers.

         We have the evidence of Mr. Sykes, so we can look at
         that. You are saying that that would be their
         specific instruction? - A. Specific instruction is
         the wrong word.  I would not say it would be a
         specific instruction.  It might be more of a general
         nature.

    Q.   Whatever it be, a general instruction or a specific
         one, they did not carry it out, did they? - A. No.

    Q.   Because on any   view, before you had the problem of the
         crushing there   had not been the prevention of the
         people getting   into the area, before you had the
         crushing? - A.   No, that is true.

         The problem here is that steps were taken to reduce
         the numbers getting into the turnstile area at too
         late a stage? That is the problem which occurred
         outside the ground on the semi-final, was it not? - A.
         That is a very simplistic explanation of that problem.
         The problem seems to ignore the fact that spectators
         have not got a responsibility to themselves and to
         their colleagues.  I cannot understand how people
         would crush into an area where people are obviously in
         distress.  Let us not beat about the bush, we have got
         a situation where we have got the best efforts of the
         police officers, and at the time when the problem
         started arising I am talking about 70 police officers,
         17 mounted police officers, all doing their best to
         stop people crushing into an area which is already
         congested.  Now it seems to me it is a fact of common
         sense that if you are a member of a crowd like that




H
                                  R. MARSHALL


you don't crush into the area;   you wait until the
crush has been relieved, you wait until common sense
prevails.   You do not just barge in and expect to gain
entrance to a turnstile when clearly the turnstiles
are clogged up already. What you are suggesting
implies that the Liverpool fans, either a minority but
a very, very influential minority, just waited until
police officers allowed them to gain entrance to the
turnstiles.   Now that is not so. They pushed into the
turnstile area, despite the best efforts of a
substantial body of Police that was there trying to
prevent them doing that, and I don't think that fact
should be obscured.




                             /Q. I am not trying
                                           R. MARSHALL


I sum not trying to obscure it, Mr. Marshall.  I am
investigating what was done before the area became so
congested that you had the problem.   Your words to me
were... - A. Really you are expecting me to look into
the future.   You are expecting me to deal with a
situation that I have not foreseen.   I have not
foreseen that after twenty to two that thousands of
people...

Twenty to three I think? - A. Twenty to three, I sun
sorry, that thousands of people would come into the
turnstile area, push and crush to the extent that
people were injured - and don't forget that there
were 37 people injured - outside the turnstiles and
tried to get into the ground.

Mr. Marshall, I want to take it in stages.   You have
described to me about the behaviour of people, you
would say deliberately, others would say through
momentum from behind, or for whatever reason, they
get into an area which is already congested.   Those
are your words, already congested? - A. Yes.

What I am investigating is what steps were taken, and
the answer seems to be none, to prevent the area
getting congested in the first place? - A. I can only
say what I have said, that Police Officers were doing
their best to stop that happening.

We can go round the houses on that. You would agree
with me there is no specific measure designed to that
end which you can point to? - A. Only the presence of
the Police Officers.

It is obvious also, if one is talking about what is
obvious, that if you do have a congested area and
people coming from both directions adding to it all
the time, as you have described, that that is going
to make the position worse and worse? - A. Yes.

There was no provision in any of the planning order
for the control of people approaching the perimeter
gates before they reached it, was there? - A. No.

There was no planning at all about controlling the
numbers as, for example, they reached the roundabout
and started to enter Leppings Lane? - A. How do you
suggest they should be controlled?

I sun not now talking about when it got out of hand.
I sun talking about much earlier on. What is wrong
with much earlier on having a cordon of some sort
well away from the perimeter gates to ensure that
they get through first and you do not have people
adding on the whole time? What is wrong with that? -
A. I think I tried to explore with Her Majesty's
                                                           72



                                                    R. MARSHALL


       Coroner this morrting the situation in respect of
       cordons and filters.   There was nothing which
       occurred in 1988 which suggested we needed a cordon.

    Q. Mr. Marshall, it seems to be the case the whole time
       that because fortunately nothing happened in 1988
B      which resulted in death, so it drew your attention,
       therefore you thought everything was sweetness and
       light and you really did not need to have any
       contingency planning at all.   Is that what you are
       saying? - A. I am not saying that at all.   I am
       saying that in 1988 a Semi Final took place at
       Hillsborough football ground involving Liverpool and
       Nottingham Forest and that event was policed
       properly.   It went off without any major problems
       whatsoever.   Clearly that fact affected the planning
       of the 1989 Semi Final.   You know, one would have to
       have remarkable powers, of clairvoyance almost, to
       see into the future to see that these problems that
       we had to cope with in 1989 would occur.

    Q. Why do you need clairvoyance? - A. Well...

    Q. Just bear with me. Why    do you need clairvoyance to
       realise in advance that   if too many people get into
       the turnstile area for the size of the turnstile area
       there is going to be safety problems? You do not
       need clairvoyance for that, do you? - A. No, you do
       not.

    Q. You do not need clairvoyance to realise in advance
       that if that situation does arise, that you have got
       to, unless you are just going to let it happen, have
       some provision to prevent people joining an already
       congested area. You do not need clairvoyance for
       that, do you? - A. No, but you need some sort of
       intelligence to suggest   it is going to exist
       because...

    Q. Does it come down to... - A. There was no
       intelligence.   There was no intelligence given to us
       that told us or would prepare us for the situation
       which existed from about twenty to three onwards on
       the 15th April.

    Q. Mr. Marshall, you do not need clairvoyance to deal
       just with planning as to size of an area outside a
       ground and planning in advance for dealing with large
       crowds arriving when the area outside has already
       proved too small and is too congested for them to get
       through.  You do not need clairvoyance for that, do
       you? - A. You need some intelligence that that sort
       of thing is going to happen.  You need to make
       manpower provisions for that sort of thing when it
       happens.




H
    v>.5
                                                                        73


                                                                R. MARSHALL
\

               Q. I sum now going to hold up something for the first
                  time, something called the Green Guide.

                    MR. HALE:  He is not allowing him to finish his
               answers, with respect.
           B        THE CORONER:   Actually a totally different matter.  I
               do not like interrupting you, Mr. King, but there is a
               problem with one of the Juror members and we need to rise
               for two or three minutes, or perhaps five.

                    MR. KING:   Sir, it is quarter to four now. Mr.
               Marshall has had a long day in the witness box.  I have had
               a long day on my feet but it is not for me that I am
               speaking.  I am thinking - and Mr. Marshall may not believe
               it - actually of Mr. Marshall as much as anybody else.  It
               might be a convenient time just to rise, sir, because he is
               an important witness.

                    THE CORONER:   As long as you do not feel I sun
               interrupting your flow.

                    MR. KING:      Not at all, sir.

                    THE CORONER:      Ten o'clock tomorrow ladies and
               gentlemen.

                                (The Jury retired from Courts

                    THE CORONER:      I am not going to keep you long. I am
               just checking that there is nobody who wants to say
               something without the Jury here or are we all happy today?
               No problems. G o o d . Why do we not carry on tomorrow
               morning at ten o'clock and see how we get on? You will
               remember, Mr. Marshall, all the bits about not talking.

                       (The Inquests were adjourned until 10 o'clock
                                   the following morning1




           G




           H
