                                                                                                  M I R . 15



                                                                                       «T   O -
     OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised                                        Number



     Title                                                                  H A T rtf^ S ,                  —
     (Include source and any document number i f relevant)          (^.X ~g 5>oL             is 3 *|    \


    A l
* vip^Heceiver's instructions - urgent action - Yes/No                             '
                                                                                                                             Receiver
    \ .


                                                                                                                                 Indexer
      Document registered/indexed as indicated

      No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                         Statement Reader
      Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                                 Indexer
      Indexed as indicated

      No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                          0 /M         SIO
      Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                                                 Indexer
          Further action No(s)

      When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
      HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                   (WEST D I S T R I C T )



              INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

        VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                     STADIUM DISASTER

                  ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



                 INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                BRIAN CHRISTOPHER MATTHEWS




                            Before

DR.    S.L.    POPPER,   LL.B,    B.MED.Sci,   B M , BS,   MRCGP

                  (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                                 At

                 The Medico-Legal Centre,
                      Watery S t r e e t ,
                        Sheffield.

                                 On

                         1st May 1990




                 TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




        From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.
             Official Shorthand Writers,
         55. Queen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX
                          APPEARANCES:



MR.    D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors'   Group
                              Steering Commi ttee

MR. S. SMITH                  Medical and Dental Union of
                              Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                              Forrest)

MR.         CALLAGHAN         Trent Regional Health Authority and
                              South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                              Ambulance Service

MR.         GREGORY           Sheffield City Council

MISS         THORPE           Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN              Police Federation of England and
                              Wales

MR.    P.    ISAACS           Chief Superi ntendent D. Duckenfield

MS.    B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable,   South Yorkshire
MR.    P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR.    S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.      JACKSON
                    A




                    B
                                                       INDEX


                         DR. JOHN CLARK - Called

                           By THE CORONER ..............
                           Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER.


                         DETECTIVE CONSTABLE PETER GADSBY

                           By THE CORONER ..............


                    jy   DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON

                           By THE CORONER .................




                    E                              - -o o- -o o




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
  INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF BRIAN CHRISTOPHER MATTHEWS

     MR- FRASER:    Sir, the evidence you will now hear
relates to Brian Christopher Matthew.   Brian's wife,
Margaret, is in Court along with family members both on
Brian's side and hers, sir. The solicitors who represent
Mrs. Matthews are a member of my Group and I therefore
appear in the usual guise as their agent through the
Steering Committee.

      THE CORONER:    Good morning, Mrs. Matthews, and welcome
to all of you.    I don't know you by name but you are very
welcome.   Mrs. Matthews I will explain to you the format in
principle.   What I do is I read to you what happened on 18th
April 1989 which is when I dealt with the release of the
body of your husband and I correct any mistakes which were
made at that time, if any.    There is one error at least that
I can see and when that has been done I will tell you what
the blood alcohol was which Dr. Forrest has already given
evidence of and Dr. Clark is going to give evidence of the
pathology.   Then we will turn to the West Midlands
presenting Officer who will take me through the summary.    We
will deal with anything that arises out of that and then
Inspector Layton over there will talk about the visual side
of the evidence.    He has got to refer to plans, numbers and
so on. He does that at first.     It is a bit confusing at
that point but then when he has finished he comes over here
and shows us on these big plans what he is talking about so
that it all becomes a great deal clearer.    Don't worry when
you hear all these numbers and you wonder, "What on earth
are they doing?" We just have to record it so that later on
we know what we are talking about otherwise we would all be
lost.   Is that all clear? (indicating agreement)

     This then is the resumed Inquest, ladies and gentlemen,
which was opened on 18th April 1989 and on that occasion
Neil Anthony Parkin, my Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

    "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
    identified to PC 2632 Hayes of the South Yorkshire
    Police as that of Brian Christopher Matthews by
    Margaret Matthews, his wife.  He was 38 years of age
    having been born on 9th October 1950 at Liverpool.   He
    was a married man and he lived at
              near Liverpool.  He was an insurance salesman
    by occupation.  He died at Hillsborough Football Ground
    following an incident there on Saturday, 15th April
    1989. PC Hayes caused the body to be removed to the
    Medico Legal Centre and there he identified it to
    Detective Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently
    identified the same body to Prof. Usher and Dr. Clark.
    It is the family wish that the body should be buried."
                                                                        DR. JOHN CLARK



                          I know of at least one error in that because you told me
                          about it when I wrote to you and it isn’t insurance
                          salesman.  It should be financial consultant.  We are noting
                          that correction now.  Apart from that everything was correct
                          except that we had left the post code out which we did not
                          need.  We got your name wrong as well because we had missed
                          some of your Christian names out.

                               I have mentioned that the alcohol was given by Dr.
                    B     Forrest and he gave evidence regarding that on the first day
                          and the result in the case of Brian was negative.  Just bear
                          with me one moment.
                               I think there is another mistake which should be noted
                          which I didn't note but Mr. Jones did-      In fact, the point
                          is that I think Brian was identified by you and by his
                          friend, Mr- John Cottrell, and you were both there.      You
                          arrived later.  In fact, you did identify the body to the
                          Police Officer Mr. Hayes (indi cat in.g agreement-.)- I think
                          that is satisfactory.    It is just to make sure we have got^
                          the identification and names right.     Which is Hr. Cottrell
                          You also identified the body I believe to Mr. Hayes
                          (indicating agreement.) -

                                            DR. JOHN CLARK - Called
                    D
                                                   Ry THE CORONER:

                        Q. Dr. Clark. - A. Dr- John Clark, Forensic Pathologist at the
                           University of Glasgow.

                        Q. Dr. Clark, this is the case relating to Brian Matthews who
                    E      you also knew as Serial No. 22 I think? ~ A. That is right,
                           sir -
                        Q. Can you tell us what you found with regard to this
                           gentleman? - A. Yes, the cause of death was the inhalation
                           of stomach contents due to crush asphyxia.  That is based on
                           finding moderate signs of asphyxia on his face and
                           internally, that is, his face was congested and rather blue
                           in colour and there were a number of small petechial
                           haemorrhages, pinpoint haemorrhages, on the face add also in
                           the internal organs and that was indicative of his chest
                           having been crushed preventing him breathing.  The pressure
                           would have been for ten or fifteen seconds and then he would
                           have lost consciousness.  Thereafter, while unconscious, he
                           has inhaled some vomit in his lungs and that has hastened
                           his death and he probably would have died within a few
                           minutes, three or four minutes or so- i^o the crushing of
                           the chest, he has lost consciousness and then inhaled some
                           vomit and that was the sort of ultimate cause of death if
                           you 1ik e -
                                There were a number of injuries on his body, on his

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                         DR. JOHN CLARK



                          face, arms and legs in keeping with him having been forced
                          against some other solid surface or some other person or
                          persons.  He also had a number of fractured ribs on the left
                          side of the chest caused either by the crushing of the chest
                          or possibly also by some attempts at resuscitation
                          afterwards trying to do cardiac massage.  I suspect they
                          were probably caused by the crushing, the pressure on his
                          chest, earlier on.  Apart from that no other internal
                          injuries at all and he wasn't suffering from any natural
                    B     disease which could have played any part in his death.

                                He did have a bit of coronary artery disease, some
                           hardening of the arteries in the heart but not of any great
                           severity.  It would be a natural finding in somebody of his
                           age.

                        Q. So you say it is not unusual for somebody of his age?
                        A. It is not unusual, no.

                                         Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER:

                        Q. Two things, Dr. Clark. First of all, really for
                           Mrs. Matthews' reassurance can you help, we will hear
                           evidence a little later I think about an attempted
                    D      resuscitation of Brian on the pitch and the Officer who made
                           a statement seems to recall that Brian may have vomited a
                           little as he was attempting to resuscitate him.   In view of
                           the fact that Brian may have lost consciousness, or almost
                           certainly had lost consciousness, is it possible he could
                           produce vomit even though he was in fact unconscious:'
                        A. Oh yes, he has probably vomited because he was unconscious.

                    E   Q. He wouldn't be aware of that at all? - A. No, no.

                        Q. It would be an involuntary reaction of the body? - A. Yes,
                           because what happens is that the brain, as I say, being
                           deprived of oxygen goes through various stages from
                           irritation when people can have fits, it can trigger off
                           vomiting and can do all sorts of things before actually it
                           dies, the brain dies.

                        Q. Brian wouldn't actually have been aware that that was
                           happening to him? - A. No.

                        Q. I think it is right that once he lost consciousness after
                           this fifteen seconds you have been talking about he wouldn't
                           be aware of anything at all that was happening to him.-'
                        A. That is right.

                        Q. There would be signs of the vomiting that he may have been
                           alive or at least partly conscious of what was going on but
                           he himself would not have known anything? - A. That is
                           right.  I mean the degree of signs of asphyxia that I found
                           meant that he was dying anyway from that whether or not he
                           vomited.
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                          D.C.   PETER GADSBY




                        J.        THE CORONER:  I could not hear that? - A- The degree
                             of asphyxial signs in his face was such that there had
                             obviously been very severe pressure and he was dying from
                             crush asphyxia whether there was some vomiting or not- The
                             vomiting just hastened his death by a short while but he
                             was dying anyway.
                                  MR. FRASER:    I am grateful, Doctor.    Thank you, sir.
                    B   3.        THE CORONER:   Just while we are on the general point,
                             in fact, it is exceedingly common, isn't it, that vomiting
                             occurs as a terminal event in crush asphyxia and I think in
                             many other situations, isn't it? - A. That is right,
                             vomiting is brought about by a number of mechanisms.   One
                             is that it can be just simple pressure on the abdomen but
                             also it is irritation of the brain.   As I say, as it is
                    C        being deprived of blood and oxygen it goes through various
                             stages of irritation and one of these is that it can
                             precipitate vomiting.   It is a very common terminal event
                             in people.

                                  THE CORONER:    Anything else, Mr. Fraser?

                                  MR. FRASER:    No, sir, thank you.
                    D
                                  THE CORONER:   Dr. Clark    is in several cases today,
                             Mr. Fraser, and so he will be    here for a good deal of the
                             day.  If Mrs. Matthews wanted    to speak to him, to slot
                             him/her in to fit in with the    other Inquests, if it would be
                             of any help.

                                  MR. FRASER:    I think it may be.
                    E
                        Q.        THE CORONER:   Dr. Clark, you know what we have been
                             doing and so I take it you are willing to do it.  I have
                             assumed that? - A. Yes.

                                     DETECTIVE CONSTABLE PETER GADSBY - Called

                                                   By THE CORONER;
                    F
                        Q. Yes. - A. I am Detective Constable Gadsby of the West
                           Midlands Police, sir.

                                  At about 1200 hours on Saturday, 15th April 1989, Mr.
                             John Cottrell left Liverpool in a private car with Brian
                             Matthews, William Harvey and Pamela Wheeler.  In fact,
                    G        Pamela Wheeler hasn't made a statement.  She was badly
                             distressed by this incident and she has not been able to do
                             so. They were intending to watch the FA Cup Semi Final
                             football match at Hillsborough Stadium-  They joined a crowd
                             outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles at about 1420 hours.

                                  At about 1450 hours, Mr- Cottrell saw a gate to the

                H
                                                          4


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                    D-C. PETER GADSBY



                          right of the turnstiles open, Gate C, and they entered the
                          stadium.  They went down the tunnelling into Enclosure 3 of
                          the terracing where, due to the crowd, they were separated
                          from Brian.
                               Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
                          terracing, Constable 873 James Oakes recalls treating a man
                          now known to be Brian on the pitch at the Leppings Lane end
                    B     of the ground.   He had been passed from the terraces by
                          unknown persons.   The Officer has some recollection that at
                          that time Brian was vomiting while the Officer was trying
                          to treat him. The Officer was assisted by others, including
                          an ambu1ancewoman. However, this person has not been
                          identified.  Detective Constable Oakes became exhausted and
                          he desisted from the treatment and others took over-

                    C          Police Constable 1926 John McGuinness is known to have
                          helped to carry Brian across the pitch but the Officer did
                          not recall the incident.   Police Constable 662 Keith Thirman
                          recalls giving mouth to mouth resuscitation to a casualty
                          now known to be Brian on the pitch in the area of the goal
                          at the Leppings Lane end. He was eventually told by an
                          ambulance person, and again this person has not been
                          identified, t-hat the casualty was dead.  The Officer then
                    D     helped others to carry Brian across the pitch where he wa&
                          eventually placed near to the gymnasium.

                               Police Constable 2632 Anthony Hayes saw a man now known
                          to be Brian lying outside the gymnasium.  He was assisted to
                          carry him into the gymnasium where the temporary mortuary
                          had been set up.
                    E          At 1555 hours Dr. Brian Robert Timney examined Brian in
                          the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

                               At 0300 hours on Sunday, 16th April 1989, John Cottrell
                          identified the body of Brian Matthews to Police Constables
                          Hayes in the temporary mortuary.   At 0325 hours the same day
                          Mrs. Margaret Matthews confirmed the identification of her
                    F     husband to Police Constable Hayes.

                               Police Constable Hayes then escorted the body of Brian
                          to the Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the identification
                          to Detective Constable Simon Weigold.  On Monday, 17th April
                          1989, following identification by Detective Constable
                          Weigold, Dr. John Clark carried out an autopsy and submitted
                          a report giving cause of death-
                    G
                               Found in the personal effects of Brian was a full
                          ticket for the match which is consistent with the fact that
                          he entered via Gate C.

                        Q- Just a couple of little points if I may;  page two first of
                           all, this is a statement by John Cottrell? - A- Yes-

                H
                                                       5


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                          D .I . MICHAEL LAYTON



                             At the bottom of his statement he states that he also
                             identified Brian to PC Hayes, that is right, isn't it.-'
                             At three o'clock.

                             You can see that at        the bottom? - A. Yes.

                             That is correct,   is        it not? - A. Yes.

                    B      I do just want to deal with this point about Mr. Oakes, can
                           you turn to page 46 but 45 would actually be a better place
                           to start? We know this man had a nil or negative alcohol
                           reading because I have given the evidence about that          -


                        A. Yes, sir.
                        Q. This is the statement of James John Oakes who was one of the
                           people trying to resuscitate Mr. Matthews? - A. Yes.

                        Q. Is it right, he describes him vomiting, doesn't he?
                        A. He does, yes.

                        Q.   He thought he was vomiting      beer? - A- He mentions beer and
                             partly consumed food-

                        Q. Presumably that cannot be right in view of the finding but
                    D      he does say he was attempting resuscitation? - A. For some
                           fifteen to twenty minutes.

                        Q. Then if you turn over to page 46, you have already mentioned
                           it but just to make it quite clear, the only reason why he
                           stopped was because he became exhausted? - A. Yes, he says.

                    E             "Through exhaustion  I was unable to continue
                                  resuscitation and Iwas relieved   by somebody else who
                                  took over."

                        Q. So, in other words, whatever was happening he and the others
                           just pressed on? - A. Yes.

                        Q. As far as one can tell from the statement? - A. Yes.

                                  MR. FRASER:        No questions, sir.

                                  MR. CATCHPOLE:        No, thank you, sir.

                                  MR. LIMB:     No questions, sir-

                                   DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called_:

                                                       Bv THE CORONER:

                        Q. Inspector Layton. - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
                           Inspector of the West Midlands Police.

                                  Sir, an examination of video film and photographic
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                     D .I . MICHAEL LAYTON



                          evidence has been made and Brian has been identified in
                          Enclosure No. 3 and also, sir, later being treated on the
                          pitch and subsequently being carried on a hoarding.

                               Sir, there is an additional piece of visual evidence
                          which has not been referred to in the summary - Basically
                          that refers to an interview with Nr. Harvey who is also in
                          Court today.
                    B
                               THE CORONER:   Which is Mr. Harvey?     Hello.

                                THE WITNESS:  Mr. Harvey identified Pamela Wheeler,
                          who you have heard about already, on a BBC video tape, MAP
                          9, and that piece of film was taken between 1437 and 1450-
                          Although it doesn't show Mr. Matthews himself on film,
                          Mr. Harvey is happy they were there as a group, as it were,
                          and so whilst we can't see Mr. Matthews we are satisfied it
                          does give us some indication as to where he was between
                          those times and that tends to confirm the evidence already
                          gi ven•
                               Mrs. Margaret Matthews has identified her husband on a
                          photograph referenced PR1/9A which shows him in Enclosure
                    D     No. 3 and is timed at 1503.  Again it is difficult due to
                          the amount of detail on the photograph but my impression is
                          at that time Brian is still alive although I can't say what
                          stage of the process has been reached.  Mr. Harvey has also
                          confirmed that identification.

                               DC Oakes has also identified himself on a video, again
                          a BBC video, referenced MAP 7, timed at 1526:16:22 and at
                    E     this stage he is treating Brian on the pitch.

                                PC McGuinness has identified himself on a photograph
                          referenced PR7/12 and that photograph, sir, is timed at
                          1535.   Could you just give me a moment to double check that?

                        Q. Of course. - A- That is right, sir. At this stage he is
                           actually shown carrying Brian across the pitch.  You have
                           heard that the Officer didn't recall.  That hasn't been an
                           unusual feature of the Inquiry and in this case we actually
                           identified Brian first and then identified the Officer
                           afterwards so to speak.

                        Q. In other words, what is happening is that the Officer is
                           saying, "Yes, this is me and if you tell me it is Brian then
                           I accept it"? - A. Absolutely.

                        Q. "But I can't remember anything about it" in effect?
                        A - Yes.
                        Q. That is not surprising, of course, and PC McGuinness has
                           been identified in other cases, hasn't he? - A. He was, sir.

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                       D.I. MICHAEL LAYTON



                        Q. Yes. - A. Sir, PC Thirman has identified himself on a
                           photograph referenced PR7/12, again timed at 1535 and in
                           fact it is the same photograph and shows him assisting to
                           carry Brian across the pitch.

                        Q.   We only got the confirmation of this a few daysbefore    we
                             began? - A. That is right, sir.
                    B   Q.   The 11th April? - A. Yes. Can I refer you, first ofall, to
                             a plan which has been given the number NWJL162?

                        Q. Yes, that will be C180- - A. That is the plan relating to
                           outside the ground and a plan HWJL3Q...

                        Q. C 181 - - A. That is it, sir. Sir, in relation to Plan
                           NWJL162, that is the plan outside, the point at which we
                           believe that Brian is located, although as I have said he is
                           not actually shown on the video, is in the position here
                           (indicating)■ I am sorry, slightly further-     In any event,
                           very very close to Gate C- Sir, in relation to MWJL30, that
                           is the plan of the terraces, the enclosure that is referred
                           to is Enclosure No. 3, that is that one here (indicating)
                           and the point which we believe Brian is shown in the
                    D      photographs is at this point here (indicat- ing) in Enclosure 3

                                  THE CORONER:     Hr   Fraser.

                                  I'IR. FRASER:   No questions, sir, thank you.

                                  THE CORONER:   Hrs. Matthews, that is the evidence we
                             are taking at this stage.  I hope that things are clearer to
                    E        you and I know at least one aspect we have been talking
                             about had upset you before but I hope it has been clarified
                             so that you feel more comfortable yourself about that. The
                             other thing which concerned you which wasn't actually raised
                             was the timing of the death certification.   We take, if you
                             like, the time when we can actually nail a doctor whom we
                             know by name, so to speak, and says, "Yes, I know this
                             person is dead".  I don't think it applies in this case but
                             there are quite a lot of cases where people were certified
                             two, three or four times.  I don't think there were four but
                             there have been cases where there were certainly two, and
                             possibly three, but obviously the one we are interested is
                             the first one where we have a named doctor.   That does not
                             mean to say the person had died before that.   It is just
                             that we had not got the medical statement to that effect.

                                   I am pleased to see you have come with so many friends
                             and relations and people are here to support you and I have
                             no doubt to remember your husband-   As I say, I cannot
                             mention you all by name because I don't know you by name but
                             I am glad you felt you could give your time this morning for
                             this.

                H
                                                            8

J. L. Harpham Ltd
     I am very very sorry that you have lost your husband.
It is very sad and although there were many people who lost
their lives on that day, other people are other people and
we are just talking about the one man who matters to you.   I
am very sorry indeed that this should have happened to you,
your friends, and all your families.  Dr. Clark will t>tay to
give his evidence next and then he will be free to come out
and talk to you and help you with anything further that
worries you and he will be able to explain it to you
personally.
      Ladies and gentlemen, we rise just for a moment and as
soon as we are ready to proceed with the next case, we will
do s o .

     MR. FRASER:   I think Mrs. Matthews wants to offer a
vote of thanks but she wants to do it herself.  Will you
allow her?
     THE CORONER:   Well, I will allow you, yes, certainly.

     MRS. MATTHEWS:  I want to thank everybody involved that
day, helping the injured and the bereaved, including the
three Constables who tried to help Brian by giving him
resuscitation and those who carried him on the temporary
stretcher across the pitch to the morgue.  I want to thank
you for the way you have conducted this Inquest.

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. Matthews, thank you very very much
indeed.  Thank you for thanking me.  It is very kind of you.
Thank you particularly for thanking the people who tried to
help your husband because it means something to them as well
of course.  I know it was not successful but at least they
tried.  Thank you.

 (The Inquest- into the death of Brian Christopher Hurray
           was adjourned to a date to be fixed)
