    Transcript created by Merrill Legal Solutions




Owning Organisation:        South Yorkshire Coroner

Title Memo:                 Mini Inquest cassette - [Inquest preliminary remarks]

Description:


This transcript was produced in April 2011 by Merrill Legal Solutions from the digitised version
of the audio cassette copy of this recording, after enhancement by BR Consult to reduce noise
and improve audibility of the incoming radio transmissions.




 MERRILL
 LEGAL SOLUTIONS
    Digital transcript of Wordwave International, a Merrill Communications Company
                      101 Finsbury Pavement London EC2A 1ER
                   Tel No: 020 7422 6131 Fax No: 020 7422 6134
        Web: www.merrillcorp.com/mls        Email: ukclient@merrillcorp.com
0 0 :00:14


CORONER:              Before I start with the inquests proper so to speak, there are one or two
                      remarks which I feel I would like to make; these are general comments.
                      The first one is of course to say that in common with anybody else who
                      has been in any way associated with - indeed not associated with - this
                      incident, I very, very much regret the tragic loss of life which has
                      occurred, and I fully understand what a terrible - well I don’t fully
                      understand, but I try to understand - what a terrible shock and loss and
                      pain this must be for all the families involved. It isn’t, of course, helped
                      by the fact that in addition to losing loved ones, they have to have the
                      trauma, such as it is, of inquests and other investigations and inquiries,
                      and the inevitable delay which occurs in a major disaster situation such
                      as this.

                      I make no comment whatsoever about the incident itself, or what
                      happened before the match or around that time, because of course
                      those questions will be not only the subject of a judicial inquiry, which we
                      are all familiar with now, but may well also have to be investigated within
                      the scope of the Coroner’s inquisition. But I do want to say this: that,
                      after the event, I have nothing but praise for the way the temporary
                      mortuary was organised, the allocation of officers to help with the
                      identification and to deal with the very traumatic but essential work of
                      ensuring that one knew who one was talking about. It is really due to the
                      extraordinary good work which was done that it was possible to identify
                      people as fast as, in fact, it turned out to be possible, and I want it
                      understood that, speaking for myself as Coroner, I have had the utmost
                      help in trying to perform my job with these deaths, from all the police
                      officers, from the most senior ones right down to the most junior ones.
                      In particular I want to mention the junior officers because it was they who
                      had to be allocated to the body, it was they who had to accompany it, it
                      was they who had to do the identification. It was they, in fact, who had
                      to take a statement immediately after the body was identified. So in a
                      sense they were the first contact with the grieving relative who had just
                      found out about the death, and that is pretty hard, not only for the
                      relatives but also for the officers, and I think one must acknowledge that.

                      I think it’s only right as well for me to say that we couldn’t have
                      performed the organisational effort of moving the bodies from the
                      hospitals to the temporary mortuary and then all the bodies to the
                      Medico-Legal centre if the ambulance service hadn’t volunteered not
                      only crew and vehicles, but also organised themselves so that they dealt
                      with all the transportation with not a hitch; no problems, none at all, and I
                      am exceedingly grateful to them for their efforts in that respect.

                      As you will of course appreciate, this building, which is a purpose-built
                      building and which houses not only the Coroner’s Court, but houses
                      pathological departments but also the mortuary, has substantial
                      capacity, but we are not normally expecting to deal with numbers such
                      as we had on Saturday. But it is right, I think to say, that this building
                      was an expensive venture for Sheffield when it was built, but in a
                      situation such as this, I think it has been justified, because it is
                      exceedingly unlikely that we would have been able to deal with the
                      deaths in the manner in which we were and with the speed at which we


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                     2
                      were, because one of our prime objectives has been to minimise the
                      delay to relatives, so that they can proceed with their funerals. We
                      cannot undo the events, but having been faced with that situation I
                      wanted as far as possible to minimise unnecessary trauma to the
                      families. As I have just said, if we hadn’t had the facilities - and I think
                      the city councillors who took those decisions years ago, to put this
                      building up - they may now feel that they were in fact justified.

0 0 :06:41            But of course, while it is very satisfactory to have a building, you also
                      need the staff to actually carry out the post-mortems, and I have to thank
                      the teams of pathologists and technicians, and other members of staff,
                      who spent a great deal of time but who completed all the post-mortem
                      work in order to enable me to begin opening the inquests this afternoon.
                      I owe them a debt of gratitude and I think I want to publicly acknowledge
                      that.

                      There is another factor to this, and that is of course we people deal with
                      deaths all the time, as you can imagine. But when you have an influx of
                      numbers such as on Saturday, our capacity was exceeded in fact, and if
                      it hadn’t been for the fact that both the hospitals in Sheffield willingly
                      agreed to take what I will describe as the normal cases - not the disaster
                      cases - and dealt with them from a mortuary point of view - I’m not
                      talking about the work which they did in casualty where they’ve been
                      dealing with the living, which we all know about. But without their
                      cooperation and their help we wouldn’t have been able to do what has
                      been done, and I think I want again that to be understood and
                      acknowledged.

                      Whilst I’m on that I think it is only right to say that it is very easy to
                      overlook, when we have a major disaster of this nature, we are looking
                      at such a lot of numbers and two things happen: first of all, we forget that
                      other people who lose loved ones, some of them in tragic circumstances
                      as well, they don’t get reported because they’re one-offs; they don’t
                      make an impact in the media. But they cause exactly the same amount
                      of pain, loss and sorrow as losing a loved one at Hillsborough. The
                      corollary to this is that it is very easy to overlook the fact that, because
                      there are such a lot of numbers, we are so bemused by the
                      technicalities, by the enormity of the event that we forget the individuals.
                      Really, for each family, we are thinking of one, or two maybe as the case
                      may be, losses, and it’s they whom we should have in mind as well as
                      the overall problem.

                       Finally, as I am sure all of you know, there have been very, very many
                      individuals and associations who have spent an enormous amount of
                      time counselling, being with, sitting, helping the relatives in their distress.
                      Some of the people spent hours, and it is exceedingly draining to do
                      that, and although in a sense they were dealing with the living, and my
                      job as Coroner is to deal with the dead, I do want to acknowledge the
                      fact that people have been, I’m certain, a great support. I’m not
                       mentioning any names or even organisations, I am just saying it in
                      general terms. And of course I would also like to thank my own officers
                      who have put in a tremendous amount of work in relation to this matter.

                      Now in a moment we are going to start on the first inquest.

MALE SPEAKER:         Mr Coroner, I am grateful for your kind expressions of sympathy, and I

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                     3
                      will see that my clients and the other bereaved families are made fully
                      aware of your sensitive remarks. I would also like to add my thanks to
                      the officers who helped in the delicate task of the removal of the bodies
                      and the process of identification; all the staff who assisted in expediting
                      the necessary process which result in us being here at this moment and
                      point of time; and I would like to thank again on behalf of all my clients
                      and the bereaved families, all the people and organisations of Sheffield
                      who have assisted the bereaved families since this terrible tragedy
                      occurred.

0 0 : 11:42           Mr Coroner, Liverpool at the moment is a heartbroken city. The people
                      are upset, they’re disturbed, they’re sad and they’re also angry. They’re
                      angry not only that such a tragedy has occurred but also because of the
                      dreadful and totally insensitive remarks made yesterday by the President
                      of UEFA. The tragedy will never be forgotten or forgiven by the people
                      of Merseyside, nor will the remarks of Monsieur Georges, however many
                      times he may apologise.

                      Thank you Sir.

CORONER:              Now, we are going to commence the inquest in a moment and we are
                      aiming to open a lot of inquests today. In order to spare the relatives
                      and everybody else unnecessary journeys and traumas and
                      identifications, I have arranged as far as I have been able to do the
                      openings byway of documentary evidence, and the procedure will
                      basically be that my officer will hand me a file for each individual case,
                      and in that file, amongst other things, there is already a signed
                      statement by my officer. I will read that statement to the court for as
                      long as I am able, and having read the statement I will, in effect, tell you
                      that I am issuing a disposal order and that I will be adjourning each
                      individual inquest to a date to be determined.

                      So we will be going fairly quickly. I hope nobody will think that that’s
                      insensitive. We are going fast because we want people to be able to
                      have their loved ones back at home, or with the undertakers.

0 0 : 14:11

MALE SPEAKER:         Mr Coroner, you have a list of the deceased whom I am concerned with -




www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                 4
