HER MAJESTY *S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
              (WEST DISTRICT)
                                                30
     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

             STADIUM DISASTER

          ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                   Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                     At

               The Town Hall,
                 Sheffield.

                     On

             15th January, 1991




         TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




   From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, L t d .,
        Official Shorthand Writers,
    55, Queen street, Sheffield SI 2DX
\                     INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                                               Page

    R. MARSHALL Recalled
         Cross-Examined by Mr. King (Cont)       1
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Catchpole        18
         Cross-Examined by M r s . McBrien      24
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell          74
         Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne    82
         Further by The Coroner                 88
                                                         1




                 THIRTIETH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                  TUESDAY, 15th JANUARY, 1991


         THE CORONER:   Good morning.   Yes, Mr. King?

                    ROGER MARSHALL Recalled

            Cross-Examined by MR. KING (Continued):

Q. Mr. Marshall, just one or two small matters still on the
   contingency planning and then I want to move on to
   certain matters of your evidence of what actually
   happened on the day.   You told us very frankly yesterday
   there were no contingency plans that you were aware of in
   the Police planning to deal with the arrival of large
   crowds in the last half hour before kick-off? - A. Yes.

Q. You confirm that, and that would even be the case, there
   was no such contingency plan even though, for example,
   there are any number of reasons why people may turn up in
   the last half hour?   For example, you may have hold-ups
   on the motorway, all sorts of reasons. -A. Well, that was
   written into the Operational Order.

Q. What was written into the Operational Order? - A. In
   respect of the reasons why kick-off might be delayed
   insofar as if there had been an accident on the Pennines
   or there had been fog on the motorways.    Those sort of
   considerations were mentioned by Mr. Duckenfield as
   reasons why the kick-off would be delayed.

0. What would be the purpose of delaying the kick-off? - A.
   Because of the delayed arrived at the ground of large
   numbers of fans.
Q. What would the effect of that decision be in dealing with
   the large number of fans which you then anticipate would
   be arriving late at the ground? - A. Well, the effect
   would be that people would not get to the ground on time.

0. What would the effect be, therefore, of postponing the
   kick-off?   What would the purpose be? - A. Well, there
   would be a number of spin-offs from that and clearly if
   large numbers of people had been delayed then they would
   take their time in getting into the ground.

Q.   Yes, and what would the effect be in postponing the kick-
     off in dealing with the large number of people who would
     be arriving late at the ground in one large number? - A.
     Well, they might not necessarily in one large number.
     It would very much depend on the transport arrangements,
                                                R. MARSHALL


but there would d e a r l y be a large number of people
outside the ground attempting to get into the ground.

What would the virtue be of postponing the kick-off in
those circumstances? - A. It would enable the people to
get into the ground before the game started.

And would remove any pressure upon them, frustration upon
them, to get in quickly? - A. In a normal crowd, yes.

Apart from that, a contingency plan to postpone kick-off
in those circumstances, there were still no contingency
plans to deal with a large number of people converging
for whatever reason on the turnstile area and the
Leppings Lane end of the ground generally in the last
half hour? - A. That's right.
Another piece of help, please. We have he*rd evidence
from Inspector Hand-Davis whom you know and respect nis
experience? - A. Yes.
The gentleman in charge of the mounted police? - A. \es.

His judgement and experience was that unless you had the
majority of expected spectators at the ground, either in
or outside, by two o'clock at the Leppings Lane end,
those who were going to be at the Leppings Lane end,
there was going to be trouble and difficulty.   Did you
know of that judgment and experience of his in       - a.
No.
Do you agree with it? - A. Not necessarily.

Dealing now when we come to a bit more details about the
events in 1989, you told us that when you arrived at
about 2.15 your estimate was there was some 6,000 to
8,000 people in the turnstile area, outside the perimeter
gates and down Leppings Lane and up to Catch Bar Lane to
the other direction? - A. Yes.
You made a decision with Inspector Sykes to close the
Leppings Lane road? - A. Yes.
You tell us that was an unprecedented decision? - A.
Before a game, yes.
Clearly, therefore, the numbers at that stage to your
eyes were unprecedented, at that stage. - A. Yes.

 Did you at that stage, or was any message Passed to
 Ground Control informing them to the effe°t ■
 unprecedented numbers of people were already there in t e
 situation we have described at that time between 2.15 and
 2.30? - A. No.
                                                           3

                                                     R. MARSHALL

         'THE CORONER: , I just wanted to say something before
     you answered.   I think this is a question which I have
     to give the warning that it may tend to incriminate you.
     You are entitled to answer it if you wish but you don't
     have to.
          THE WITNESS:   No, I didn't pass a message to Ground
     Control, but perhaps if I explain that Ground Control had
     a system of video cameras which give a view of the
     Leppings Lane turnstile area and, indeed, the approaches
     to the ground from the area of Leppings Lane roundabout,
     and, to some extent, a view of the bridge itself, Ground
     Control were in a position to be constantly monitoring
     the arrival rate of fans in any case.

q   . could MR.equally
                  KING:    You would say that what
                                               you could see
                        be seen by Ground Control?
                                               - A. Yes, and I
      think it has to be said as well that Ground Control would
      also be looking at the arrival pattern of the Nottingham
      Forest spectators.   I think there is perhaps a tendency
      to view events at Leppings Lane in isolation.   There was
      a constant movement right the way round the perimeter of
      the ground.
Q. Then, again, we have heard evidence from Inspector Purdy
   that he at some stage withdrew his men from the turnstile
   area, his Officers, because they were being so crushed,
   inconvenienced, call it what you will, they weren t being
   effective because they were trapped in the crowd.   Were
   you aware of that at the time? - A. No.

Q. It follows from that you didn't yourself receive any
   information from Inspector Purdy to that effect? - A. Not
   at that stage, no.

Q. That of itself, if it be a correct piece of evidence,
   indicates at that stage the difficulties which were being
   experienced outside the turnstile area? - A. Yes.

           THE CORONER:   Mr. King, had you specified a time
      when this happened, or were you just working towards it?

           MR. KING:   I am loth to put...    I get into
      trouble, very properly, for assuming...

           THE CORONER:   I wasn't quite sure, because you said
      "at that stage" - it depends what "that stage" is.

           MR. KING:   Yes.    The evidence is it was sometime
      between 2.30 and 2.40, in that period of time. I think
      that is fair, sir.    I have checked that.
                                                               4

                                                         R. MARSHALL


              THE CORONER: . I think you will have to check...
         My recollection is that it was later, but I can’t quote
         that to you.   That is the reason why I asked you.

              MR. KING:   Sir, I am really interested in whether
         he heard the information.   I will move on.   I t i s just
         another piece of evidence which I am interested in.

Q. You sought reinforcements at 2.44, as I understand it? -
   A.' Yes.
Q.       You had not sought reinforcements prior to that time? -
         A. No.                       ^
Q. You hadn't, for example, sought reinforcements at the
   period, whenever it was exactly, at the time you decided
   to close Leppings Lane? - A. No.

Q. The timing of that, the decision to close Leppings Lane,
   you say was about 2.25? - A. Yes.

Q. You tell us that at the Taylor Inquiry the suggestion was
   2.17? - A. Yes.
Q. Am I right on saying that that was based o n t h e fact that
   there was apparently an entry in a log logging the
   receipt of the message? - A. Yes.

Q. At 2.55 when you sought reinforcements, you got no
   acknowledgement of that? - A. Yes.

Q. That is correct? - A. That's right.

Q. Dealing with manpower at that stage, you have told us
   that overall there were seventy-five less Officers who
   were deployed in the Operational Plan? - A. Yes.

q    .   For   the sector you were dealing with? - A. Yes.

Q. In 1989.   The reduction of seventy-five men, how does
   that relate to the fact that you needed reinforcements
   at, you say, 2.44?   In other words, was the reduction in
   manpower itself something which had increased the
   difficulties which you were in? - A. No, I don t think
   so, because the serials outside the turnstiles were
   maintained at one Sergeant and ten Constables.    The
   reduction in the level of manning of the serials was
   achieved towards the outer areas of the sector.




                     A. Again, at 2.44
                                                      5

                                                R. MARSHALL



Q. Again at 2.44 the message was simply, dealing now with
   reinforcements, "I want reinforcements"? - A. Yes, "I
   want some assistance".

Q. Was any explanation given in the message as to why
   assistance was required? - A. It was allied to the fact
   that the landrover was required with the public address
   system on it, and the tannoy message from the front of
   the turnstile area was also required, so it did not
   take a great deal of imagination to indicate that we
   had problems at Leppings Lane.

Q. When you say, "a great deal of imagination", do you
   mean a great deal of imagination in the ground control?
   - A. But the ground control did not get that message,
   that was one of the difficulties that made the
   situation all that much more problematical.

0. We will hear evidence on ground control, no doubt, but
   when you say it did not need a great deal of
   imagination I assume that you are referring to whoever
   received the message in ground control, if someone did?
   - A. Yes.
Q. Because again you would remind us no doubt thatground
   control had a video view of what you were seeing also?
   - A. Yes.
Q. You have already told us frankly yesterday that no
   positive steps were taken, and I am now going back from
   the time you decided to close Leppings Lane, no
   positive steps were taken in order to seek to control
   the numbers actually reaching outside the perimeter
   gates themselves, that is the people coming down
   Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.

Q.   That is correct? - A. Yes.

Q.   That is the case notwithstanding that you nave
     described already to us the unprecedented numbers who
     were present even as early as sometime between 2.15 and
     2.30? - A. Yes.

0. The tannoy message which you describe, first of all let
   me deal with it this way, you requested the following
   tannoy messages!  first of all a tannoy message from
   that tannoy which was actually on the front of the
   turnstiles? - A. Yes. There are loudspeakers mounted
   across the front of the turnstiles.

Q. You would agree with me that anybody who was in that
   turnstile crowd at the front being crushed was in a
   completely impossible position as regards themselves
   doing anything about it? - A. Yes.
                                                     6
                                               R. MARSHALL



Q. You agree with me that people who are themselves being
   pressurised from behind as more and more people join a
   throng are themselves in an impossible position? — A.
   They are in a difficult situation, yes.

Q. And that arises out of the sheer size of the numbers
   present? - A. Not just the numbers.  I spent sometime
   yesterday talking about the attitude of individuals in
   a crowd.  We seem to be going down the road of
   assuming, and I am sorry for repeating myself, that
   people are just like sheep and just pushed along
   without exercising any individual responsibility of
   their own. This is something which I find very
   difficult to accept.

Q. Hr. Marshall, I understand the point you are making.   I
   am now putting you and me for the purpose of this
   question in the position of somebody who is already in
   the crowd, who has'joined it and has been joined from
   behind by a throng whicn is coming along, people
   incessantly joining.  Once you are in a throng, once
   you are there, you personally even if you wanted to do
   something about it, if you are in the middle you can t
   do anything about it. That is right, isn t it? - A.
   Yes.
0. The position then of the tannoy at the front I have
   dealt with. The tannoy which was being broadcast by
   P.C. Buxton, you say that you, although you can t now
   say what the words were, are you saying that you
   actually heard at the time the content of the message
   from the tannoy? - A. No, I cannot remember what was
   being said.  I can remember seeing P.C. Buxton with the
   microphone in his hand, and then subsequently Inspector
   Ellis standing on the bonnet of the landrover, again
   using the microphone, but I cannot now remember what
   was said.
Q. I wonder if - I just want to allow you to refresh you
   memory if you can from the statement I understand you
   made on 2nd May 1989, which was not long after the
   incident.  I wonder if you could just be shown a copy
   at page 18? - A. I have my own copy, sir.

        THE CORONER:   Put the point to him, because if he
   has got his copy and if we are not disputing the text
   we do not need to find another version, I think you
   will agree with that, won't you?

        MR. KING:   Sir, I am looking at the statement of
   the West Midlands Police, yes:

Q. Just dealing with the top paragraph, Mr. Marshall,
   where you are dealing with P.C. Buxton s arrival and
                                                      7
                                                R. MARSHALL



   the tannoy message which you say you wanted him to put
   over. Just refresh your memory from that top
   paragraph. - A. Yes, sir.  I said I could not hear what
   he was saying due to the noise of the crowd.

Q. And that was a statement   made not long after the event?
   - A. Yes.
Q.'And that is likely therefore to be accurate? - A. Yes.

Q. And it is accurate? - A. Yes.

0. So the position is you yourself could not hear what
   P.C. Buxton was broadcasting because of the noise of
   the crowd? - A. Yes, but I think I also have to say
   that impinging on my mind at that stage were all sorts
   of other problems, of which, and I am sure you
   appreciate, this was only one.

Q. Mr. Marshall, it is not a question of criticism of you
   that you did not hear the message because of the noise
   of the crowd, because you were not responsible for the
   noise of the crowd, but the fact is it was so noisy you
   could not hear it - that is what you put in your
   statement? - A. Yes.
Q. You have also given evidence that you heard Inspector
   Ellis also broadcasting something? - A. Well, I gave
   evidence that Inspector Ellis - this was something
   which I learnt subsequently, it is not something which
   I could hear at the time.

Q. So you are not able to tell us what Inspector Ellis
   broadcast? - A. No.
Q. I say that because the inference of what you said
   yesterday was that had kick-off been postponed and the
   message passed to the crowd it would not have made any
   difference, and you relied on Inspector Ellis in that
   regard? - A. Yes.

Q. But you did not hear Inspector Ellis? - A. No.

0. Were you aware of Policewoman Wilson - do you know
   Policewoman Wilson? - A. No.

Q. I say that because we have heard evidence from her, and
   she was in tne vicinity of P.C. Buxton and therefore
   Inspector Ellis, that when she passed a message to the
   crowd around her that kick-off was going to be
   postponed - it was not true but she tnought it would be
   helpful, or she had heard a message to that effect and
   thought it would be helpful - that had an impact on
   those immediately around her.  It is a fact isn t it
                                            R. MARSHALL



that you have already given evidence that time, the
pressure of time, was having an effect on the crowd in
your judgment? - A. Yes.

It was making the crowd more frustrated and anxious to
get into the ground? - A. Well, it could have been one
of the reasons, yes.
It is therefore fairly obvious, isn't it, that if you
remove the need for that anxiety, in other words remove
the time pressure, that is going to remove that source
of anxiety in the crowd? That is obvious, isn t it? -
A. Yes.
Did you yourself on your radio or otherwise hear any
request being sent to ground control by anybody for
kick-off to be postponed? - A. No.

The opening of the gates - I am not myself at all
criticising your personal decision to request the gates
to be opened, in the light of the judgment you made of
the crushing of the people at the front, because there
were innocent people, on any view, at the front being
totally crushed, weren't there? - A. Yes.

At the turnstiles.   I got a bit confused reading my
evidence last night.   How many messages did you send to
ground control requesting the gates to be opened before
the 2.52 opening of gate C which was the major opening
when it stayed open for a long time? - A. Four.




             /Q. Three to ground control
                                  R. MARSHALL

Three to ground control directly and one via Hammerton
Road? - A. Yes. As I say, I told the Inquest
yesterday I wasn't sure whether I had changed once
again to channel 35 to get through to Hammerton Road.

Is it right that those four messages took place over
about 5 minutes? - A. No, the time interval would be
shorter, I think.  I think my first request would have
been round about 2.47.

I accept that for the moment, 2.47, Mr. Marshall. - A.
And the C Gate did not open until about 2.52.

Five minutes, yes.  So it is about 5 minutes, the
interval between the first message and Gate C being
opened at 2.52? - A. Yes, I accept that.

Did you yourself receive any acknowledgment of any of
those messages during that 5-minute period? - A. No.

Did you yourself receive from ground control any
communication about the need to open the gates in the
light of the message? - A. No.

Before Gate C was opened at 2.52 did you yourself
receive any notice from ground control that they were
going to open Gate C? - A. No.

You did not, for example, receive a message saying,
"Mr. Marshall, open the gates”, or anything like that?
- A . Well, I couldn't open the gates anyway.

So you did not receive any message? - A. No.

You yourself had been the ground Commander inside the
ground in 1988? - A. Yes.

You therefore can help me, I am sure, on these
matters.  It was obvious, was it not, that the people
who went through Gate C when it was opened at 2.52
were going to go into the ground? - A. Yes.

That would have been obvious to ground control, that
they were going to enter into the concourse area? - A.
Yes.

You yourself did not have the authority to order the
gates to be opened, did you? - A. No.

You very properly sought the direction of ground
control, you left it to ground control to make the
decision, the people in charge of the gate? - A. Yes.
                                    R. MARSHALL

It would   be obvious, would it not, to anybody in your
position   or, indeed, in ground control's position,
that the   people who were entering through Gate C were
going to   make their way onto the Leppings Lane
terraces   somewhere? - A. Yes.

It would be obvious, would it not, if you just look
with me, Mr. Marshall, at where Gate C is and the area
into which you enter in the concourse when Gate C is
opened, to anybody looking at that concourse that the
likeliest route for anybody entering the concourse at
that stage to get onto the Leppings Lane terraces
would be down the tunnel? - A. Yes.

That is obviously because of the layout of the tunnel,
the concourse and the words on it? - A. Yes.

If, as a ground Commander inside the ground, or
someone in ground control who is making the decision
to open the gates, you know or can see that the middle
pens to which the tunnel leads are already congested
and full, it would be obvious that you would not want
the great mass of people who entered through Gate C at
2.52 to enter onto those pens? That would be obvious,
would it not? - A. It would certainly be a
consideration, but there are other considerations to
be borne in mind in respect of this issue, and that is
the ground Commander could have expected two other
gates in the area of Leppings Lane also to be opened:
Gate B could have been opened or Gate A could have
been opened, in which case people would have made
their way in an unrestricted fashion into the ground.
So again it is perhaps one of the salient features of
this tragedy that Gate C opened first. Had Gate A
opened first, or had Gate B opened first, then you and
I might not have been here having this discussion.

Mr. Marshall, if you as a ground Commander, or someone
in the control box, could see that Pens 3 and A were
already congested and full, you would not want, would
you, a lot of people to enter further onto those pens,
that is right? - A. Yes.

You agree with me that anybody who finds themselves in
the concourse area, through either Gate C or
turnstiles A to G for that matter, the obvious route
onto the terraces was through the tunnel? - A. Yes.

You would want, would you not, as a ground control,
someone in charge of the crowd and safety, to divert
people from taking the likeliest route onto the
terrace if the pens were already full and congested,
to divert them, would you not? - A. Yes.
                                                          11


                                         R. MARSHALL

Q.   That is obvious, is it not? - A. It is obvious now
     with hindsight, yes.

Q.   It is obvious, with respect Mr. Marshall, from anybody
     looking at Pens 3 and A, seeing them congested, that
     they would say to themselves, "Anybody going down that
     likely route through the tunnel is adding to an
     already crowded pen". That is obvious, is it not? -
     A. That is obvious, yes.

Q.   A crowded pen carries with it, as more people add to
     it, the obvious danger of overcrowding and crushing to
     the people in it, does it not? - A. Yes.

Q.   That is obvious? - A. Yes.

Q.   Just taking for one moment your point that it was
     unfortunate, you say, no doubt on behalf of ground
     control for the moment, that only Gate C was opened
     when it was opened, the fact is that you left it to
     ground control to decide which gates and what gates
     would be opened? You left it to them, did you not? -
     A. Yes.

Q.   It was ground control who made the decision to open
     Gate C; it was not you, that is right, is it not? - A.
     Yes.

Q.   Gate B, which you have told us about, leads into a
     concourse area which is not the area through which
     somebody with a standing ticket would have expected to
     find himself in if he had entered with his ticket, do
     you agree with that? - A. Not necessarily.  He could
     have gone through the small gate in the dividing wall.

Q.   Let me take you through   it with respect.   If I had a
     standing ticket for the   Leppings Lane terrace and I
     was there on 15th April   1989 I was expected to use
     turnstiles A to G? - A.   Yes.

Q.   If I had been queueing up in the mass of people there
     outside turnstiles A to G, I would be expecting to go
     through those turnstiles into the area where Mr.
     Griffiths is pointing with his pointer? - A. Yes.




                                     /Q. I would not be
                                                         12


                                                  R. MARSHALL


Q. I would not be expecting to go into the area on the
   other side of the little gateway in the wall? - A. I
   think it would depend if you had been to the ground
   before.

Q. We have been through all that before? - A. Yes.

Q. As far as you are aware, what steps if any were taken
   to ensure that if Gate B were opened for the moment
   that the people who entered through Gate B into the
   concourse area which they were not expecting to be
   on, would stay in that area and go to the left and
   not go back through the little gateway to get to the
   tunnel which would be the area they were expecting to
   be in. Were any steps taken? - A. None that I am
   aware.

Q. Were you aware of any warning being given from what
   you could hear, on radio or otherwise, to anybody
   that any of the gates were about to be opened? - A.
   No.

Q. It follows from that, Mr. Marshall, that you did not
   hear any message being sent to the Club stewards, to
   the Club authorities or to any Police Officer.  That
   is correct, is it? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. You have already agreed with me that it would be
   obvious the need to divert people going through the
   tunnel from getting on to Pens 3 and 4 if Pens 3 and
   4 were already full and crowded. You have agreed
   with me? - A. Yes.

Q. To divert people from going....

     THE CORONER:   Excuse me, I do not think he quite
agreed with that. What you had put to him was that if it
had been noted the pens were full and overcrowded.

       MR. KING:      Oh yes, I agree entirely.

     THE CORONER:   So long as it was understood that that
was what you meant.

      MR. KING:       Absolutely, sir.

       THE CORONER:      Yes.

Q.       MR. KING:   Mr. Marshall, you were not inside the
     ground, were you? - A. No.

Q. You were not in ground control? - A. No.

Q. You had no responsibilities for judging whether or
   not it was safe or otherwise to allow a whole lot
   more people bn to Pens 3 and 4. You were not in that
                                                     R. MARSHALL


     position to make that judgment? - A. No, but I think
     it might help you if I tell you the feeling that I
     had at 2.44 and that was the sheer number of people
     outside Leppings Lane led me to suspect that the
     terraces inside must be virtually empty.

Q. Mr. Marshall, we will hear evidence I am sure from
   ground control and those inside the ground as to the
   state of the ground when Gate C was opened. We need
   not concern ourselves with you on that because we are
   going to hear evidence.  I am just asking you, from
   your experience and judgment of somebody who has been
   inside the ground, of what would be obvious because
   in 1989 you were not in a position to know this if
   one could see that Pens 3 and 4 were full and
   crowded. All right? - A. Yes.

Q. It is a fact, is it not, that you yourself - and I do
   not mean this as a criticism of you because you were
   not inside the ground - did not turn your mind to the
   consequences of the opening of the gates in the sense
   of where the people were going to go when they went
   inside? You left that to ground control, did you
   not? - A. Yes.

Q. You,   in fact, no doubt because of the predicament you
   were   in, just did not turn your mind to that at all,
   that   is right, is it not? - A. I still had my hands
   full   outside.

Q.    I think you were specifically asked, and so I am
     looking for the first time and hopefully for the last
     time, and you will be surprised given the length of
     it, at page 104 of the transcript of the Taylor
     Inquiry and it is evidence-in-chief.

       THE CORONER:      I have it.   I will find the page.

       MR. KING:      It is page 104, sir.

Q.      MR. KING:    I just want to put to you from letters
     D to F the questions and answers because they are not
     in fact contradictory to what you are saying but I
     want you to say whether it confirms what you are
     saying? - A. Yes.

Q. This is what you told the Taylor Inquiry? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   When you have put the question, can you
just pause before he answers so that I can consider whether
I need to give a warning?

      MR. KING:       Yes, sir.

Q. This is a question being put to you by Mr. Collins on
   behalf of the Inquiry when you were giving evidence
                                                         14


                                                 R. MARSHALL


     to the Inquiry, "You obviously from your previous
     experience as the Ground Controller were well aware
     of what would be the effect of opening in particular
     Gate C, is that right?".  That was the question? - A.
     Yes.

     THE CORONER:     I think... - A. I stand by what I said
there, sir.

     MR. KING:   I know, sir, at the end of the day it is a
matter for you but I do not regard these matters as
incriminating Mr. Marshall at all because I make no
criticism of him for leaving matters to Ground Control.

     THE CORONER:   In so far as questions are directed in
that plane I entirely agree with you. My concern is that
it is possible to construe them in a different way.   I do
not mind Mr. Marshall answering.   I just do not want him to
answer inadvertently, that is all.

Q.        MR. KING: The answer was, "Yes, although at the
     time I have to say it never crossed my mind what the
     consequences would b e " . That was your answer? - A.
     Yes.

Q. Then the question was, "I am not at all surprised but
   can I put it to you this way; you obviously asked
   ground control for permission or rather they should
   order that the gates be opened because this was not a
   decision which you could make.  It was a decision
   that Mr. Duckenfield would have to make, is that
   correct?" and you answered, "Yes, that's right"? - A.
   Yes.

Q. The question was then, "And did you leave it to Mr.
   Duckenfield who had an overall view of what was going
   on to deal with the effects of opening that gate or
   did you simply not think about that side of it at
   all?" and your answer was, "I just did not think
   about it at that time"? - A. Yes.

Q. I have been asking you questions about, from your
   judgment and experience, what would be obvious from
   somebody inside the ground in the position of ground
   control who could see and I do preface it with those
   words, if they could see, that Pens 3 and 4 were
   already packed.  I have prefaced it with that. You
   have agreed with me that it would be obvious - let me
   put it this way; do you agree with me it would be
   obvious the need to divert fans who would be making
   for the tunnel to enter those crowded pens, if they
   could see it, from entering? That would be obvious,
   would it not? - A. It should certainly have been a
   consideration, yes.
                                                          15


                                         *       R. MARSHALL


Q. It should be obvious, should it not? - A. It should
   be a consideration.

Q. Let me press you slightly, Mr. Marshall.  It is
   obvious because you have agreed with me that the
   likeliest route for people entering into that part of
   the concourse behind Turnstiles A to G on to the
   terraces is through the tunnel which is there to be
   seen? - A. Yes.

Q. That is obvious? -    A. Yes.

Q. It is obvious that   if Pens 3   and 4 are already
   crowded that for that number of people who enter the
   concourse to enter   on to the tunnel and enter on to
   the pens it is going to cause almighty crushing, that
   is obvious, is it not? - A. Yes.

Q. Crushing brings with it the danger to life and limb
   of all those on the terraces? - A. Yes.

Q. To divert fans from the tunnel there are steps which
   can be taken to seek to divert persons entering that
   tunnel, are there not? - A. Yes.

Q. Would you agree with me that the steps which could be
   taken are as follows - and if there are any others
   you can say so - you could actually close the tunnel
   gates themselves although I appreciate the argument
   that that of itself might be a risk to those trying
   to get out of the tunnel but that is a possibility,
   is it not? - A. Highly dangerous to do that.

Q. I am going to go through that in a moment? - A. Yes.

Q. I accept that for the moment because I know that is
   your view.

     MR. RUSSELL:   I am afraid I did not hear the last
answer given by the witness.

       THE CORONER:   "Highly dangerous” he said.

Q.   That is right, is it not? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.        MR. KING:   I mention it so that one can dispose
     of it because I am interested in your judgment. One
     could put a cordon of Police Officers, a serial of
     Police Officers, across the mouth of the tunnel to
     divert people to the sides, could one not? - A. Yes.

Q. Indeed one could also make use of any temporary
   barrier which may be available? - A. Yes.

Q. Indeed if one looks at C.263 photograph one can
   actually s e e rthere that there is something in the
                                                                16


                                                       R. MARSHALL


           nature of a temporary barrier when that photograph
           was taken of the tunnel? - A. Yes.

      Q. Can you confirm that ground control had radio
         communication with serials of Officers who were in
Q I      the ground or outside the ground? - A. Yes.

      Q. It would be open from your understanding of the
         planning for ground control to give orders for a
         serial to position itself in front of the tunnel to
         divert fans away? - A. It could have been done, yes.

      Q. That would not have been a difficult exercise, would
         it? - A. No.

           THE CORONER:   This is a reply to the communication or
      to the effectiveness of the matters?

             MR. KING:      The communication, sir.

             THE CORONER:      Thank you.

      Q.       MR. KING:   You may not know, but were you aware
           as regards Gate A being opened that a serial was sent
           on that occasion when Gate A was opened to divert
           fans? - A. Yes, Serial 20.

      Q. How did you know that? - A. I subsequently learned
         it, sir.  I did not see them arrive because they
         positioned themselves at the back of Gate A.

      Q. You yourself did not hear anything about that? - A.
         No.

      Q. I can perhaps ask you this; you knew Gate A was
         opening on to the route which takes us to the North
         Stand? - A. Yes.

      Q. What would you expect a serial sent to be in the
         position when Gate A was opened would be designed to
         do? What would you, in your judgment, expect that
         serial to be diverting fans to, which area? - A.
         There is only one area that you can get to basically
         from the entrance at A and that is into the North
         Stand.  I would have expected them to be slowing down
         the rush.

      Q. Into the North Stand? - A. Yes, trying to look at
         some tickets, trying to weed out some drunks.

      Q. Would you expect the serial to, in fact, divert
         anybody entering through Gate A away from the entry
         into the North Stand but back into the concourse
         area, if Mr. Griffiths can point to the concourse
         area, behind Turnstiles 1 to 16, that is, diverting
         them away from the passage which perhaps the pointer
                                                      17


                                               R. MARSHALL


  can first show to 'the North Stand seats into the
  concourse area outside Turnstiles 1 to 16? - A . I am
  not with you, Mr. King.

Q. Gate A when opened is going to allow people to influx
   into a passageway which leads to the seating area of
   the North Stand? - A* Yes.

Q. I am asking you, in your judgment, what you would
   expect any measures which were taken to divert or
   direct fans on that opening to achieve and you have
   told us what you expected. Would it come as a
   surprise to you if a measure were taken to divert
   people entering through Gate A back into the
   concourse area not outside the area leading to the
   North Stand but outside the standing terraces
   themselves? Could the pointer indicate the area I am
   talking about? - A. I would not have expected people
   coming through Gate A to actually get on to the
   concourse area because there is quite a big fence
   which separates the two.

Q. But if they are directed by a serial that way then,
   of course, they are directed by a serial that way? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Does it come as a surprise to you to learn that that
   is in fact what happened, we understand, that they
   were diverted away from the North Stand on to the
   concourse area to add to the people who were in the
   concourse area? - A. Yes, it does.

Q. Because, of course, doing that and if you leave the
   fans there then there is a great risk that they will
   make their way on to the terraces? - A. That is
   right.

Q. Which if, and I know it is an if, any particular part
   of the terrace is full you would not want them to add
   to that part of the terrace? - A. No.

Q. So can I summarise the position in this way, that you
   are not aware of any warnings or notice being given
   to anybody that Gate C was about to be opened? - A.
   Yes.




                    /Q. That is correct.
                                                        18

                                                 R. MARSHALL

Q. That is correct?   A. Yes.

Q. You are not aware of any steps or measures being taken to
   divert people who entered through Gate C away from the
   tunnel entrance? - A. I am not aware of anything that was
   done to achieve that.

Q. You agree with me that if, and I accept the point it is
   an if, if you are in the position of Ground Control and
   can see that pens 3 and 4, the middle pens to which the
   tunnel gains access are full and crowded already, that it
   is obvious if you are going to prevent further people
   entering on to those already crowded terraces and causing
   over-crowding and crushing, it is obvious that such steps
   should be taken to divert them? - A. Yes.

              Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

Q. You have been asked lots of questions by Mr. King about
   the Operational Order. Could I go right back to basics?
   We have heard a lot of evidence from Police Officers.
   Perhaps you could confirm this:  is it fair to say that
   the twin guiding principles of any Police Officer are the
   desire to ensure public order and public safety? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Every Police Officer who has been asked that question has
   answered in exactly the same way and it is fair to say
   that is hammered in to every Police Officer, that that is
   how they discharge their duty?   That that is how you
   would expect them to operate? - A. That is one of the
   fundamental tenets of the British Police Service.

Q. I am not making any criticism at all.   The Operational
   Order itself, as we know, is not a complete instruction
   to Officers to deal with every possibly contingency?    It
   couldn't possibly be that, could it? - A. No.

Q. Very many of the Officers who were policing the ground on
   the day of the 15th of April, 1989, were experienced
   Officers who were policing that on a week by week basis?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Just as with any other policing operation, those Officers
   draw on their experience as to what to do and how to
   react in certain situations? - A. Yes.

Q. You, as a Senior Officer, quite properly expect that your
   Officers right the way down the line are capable of
   reacting in that way and are capable of responding to
   situations? - A. Yes.

Q. No doubt it is fair to say that the Operational Order
   itself is drawn up on the basis of the collective
                                                             19

                                                       R. MARSHALL

     experience of the .problems that had been experienced in
     the past by Police Officers whilst policing that ground?
     - A. Yes.

Q. When we see an emphasis as Mr. King has put to you, on
   detecting and preventing trouble, or a breach of law and
   order, that is because in your experience and in the
   collective experience of the South Yorkshire Police those
   are the sort of problems that are likely to occur? - A.
   Yes.

0. The fact that the Operational Order doesn't refer to the
   need to form queues outside the turnstiles to prevent
   crushing at the turnstiles, to prevent crushing in pens,
   or to prevent over-crowding, it is fair to say that none
   of those events prior to this tragedy had actually
   occurred this end of the ground? -A. No.

Q. For that reason because the Operational Order is drafted
   on the basis of experience, they don't appear in that
   Operational Order? - A. That's right.

Q. That is not to say, and I am certainly not going to
   suggest it, that any Police Officer is indifferent to
   problems of safety?   If a Police Officer sees a problem
   which he believes may pose a threat to public safety, you
   would expect him to react to that and take such steps as
   he could? - A. Yes.

0. Can I just go to outside the ground and concentrate on
   that at the moment.   You have said in your evidence, and
   no doubt it is obvious, that turnstiles are designed to
   accept one person at one time? - A. Yes.

Q.   They react, or they are less efficient, if they     are under
     pressure? - A. So I understand.

Q. The phrase you used was that at some stage after 2.30 the
   turnstiles had got clogged up? - A. Yes.

Q.   Your words.    When we see in the Operational Order  the
     direction to the serial outside the ground to ensure
     orderly queuing, the aim of that is to achieve a free and
     easy unpressurised access into the turnstile gate itself?
     - A. Yes.

Q. It was put to you by     Mr. King that Inspector Sykes said
   it was impossible to     maintain queues outside Leppings
   Lane turnstiles.   I     am going to also put to you
   something I put to Mr.    Sykes.    I would like you look at
   C.305. - A. Yes.

Q. This is a photograph taken at 2.30.   We can see the
   gentleman in the red jacket behind the barrier to the
                                                        20

                                                R. MARSHALL

  front, standing there with space.   Do you see the people
  standing behind him?   Do you see the Police Officer
  going up and down on a horse just over by Gate B.    I
  asked him whether that was a queue and his reply was, "It
  is a queue at those turnstiles which is normal for a
  semi-final day."   I asked him, "Is it a large crowd
  queueing to get into those turnstiles?"   He answered,
  "Yes."   Now as far as you are concerned, is that the
  picture, whatever the word "queuing" means, of a large
  crowd waiting patiently to get into those turnstiles? -
  A. Yes.
Q. So from what we can tell and know at this stage, and is
   prior to, from your evidence and virtually everyone
   else's evidence, when the problems really arose, the
   Police operation, as far as we can tell from the
   photograph, is there marshalling and regulating people to
   ensure that there is enough space and no pressure pushing
   them forward on to those turnstiles, to permit easy
   access into the turnstiles by those at the front? - A.
   Yes.
Q. The whole tenor of your evidence and a lot of other
   evidence we have heard, has been that on the day the ^
   crowd that came after this photograph was taken weren t
   responding to the advice that was being given, or the
   instructions that were being given by the Police Officers
   attempting to marshal and regulate that crowd? - A.
   That's right.
Q. I think you used the word "unprecedented", in your
   experience? - A. In my experience, yes.

Q. Would it be fair to say in that case that you, as a
   Senior Officer, experienced in policing football matches
   and experienced at this end, had no reason to anticipate
   there would be any difficulty in forming the sort of
   queues - lines - that we see in that photograph? - A.
   None at all.
0. Can I go to inside the ground?   In 1988 was it your
   recollection that the terraces at the Leppings Lane end
   were full right the way across? - A. Yes.

Q. Perhaps I could show you a photograph, Mr. Marshall.
   This is a photograph - there is the electronic scoreboard
   just over where the Police control box would be.   You.
   can see it says 2.1.   I am not sure whether the time is
   on it, but on my photograph it says 16.20, twenty past
   four? - A. Yes.

Q. We can see from that that your recollection is in fact
   correct, that as far as we can tell there is an even
   distribution right from pens 1 and 2, right the way
                                                         21

                                                 R. MARSHALL

   through, and we can seek up to pen 6, in the right hand
   corner? - A. Yes.

Q. You were asked questions again by Mr. King on the basis
   of a hypothetical fan coining into the ground trying to
   find his way round.    A lot of hypothetical questions
   were put to you by my learned friend.     The fact is that
   in 1988, for whatever reasons, those terraces did fill
   evenly, as we can see from that photograph? - A. Yes.

Q. There were no reports to the Police, as far as you are
   aware, of any problems or injuries or crushing on those
   terraces? - A. No.

Q. For that reason it has been described as a policing
   success? - A. Yes.

Q. It was repeated the following year?   The system that was
   adopted on that day was repeated? - A. Yes.

Q. So far as Mr. King has been able to suggest to you, and
   invite you to speculate on the impossibility of fans
   finding their way around, the fact is that fans in 1988,
   for whatever reason, did find their way around? - A. It
   appears so.

Q. Can I just turn briefly to the system adopted by the
   Police of filling pens at league matches.    We have had
   evidence from a number of Senior Officers and Junior
   Officers about the system that was usually adopted and
   are you familiar with the way the pens were filled.
   There would be a sequential filling of pens;   the central
   pens filled first of all, then closed off.    People
   directed round into the pen under the Police Control Box
   until that one was full, and occasionally open up the
   North West Terrace.   Are you familiar with that system?
   - A. No.

Q. Is that because you wouldn't have been responsible? - A.
   Probably.

Q. Were you aware there was a system? - A. As far as I am
   aware the system has been the same as long as I have been
   associated with that in that the Police did not
   exercise...

Q. I am talking about league matches now, Superintendent. -
   A. Yes.

Q. So you expect a number of supporters coming through the
   gate... - A. The only evidence I can give you is that in
   my experience fans have been allowed to find their own
   level on that terrace.
                                              R. MARSHALL

What exactly is your experience?   How often have you
been in command of immediately behind the concourse? - A.
I have never been in command directly behind the
concourse, as a Superintendent, except on the 1989 - oh,
the 1988 semi-final, but as I said yesterday, I was not
in that area during 1988.

So you wouldn't be familiar, necessarily, with what
system was adopted? - A. No.

If it is right, and we have had evidence from Officers
who conducted this, including Chief Inspector Creaser,
who you know about. - A. Yes.

That pens at league matches were filled sequentially, so
they would fill the central pens first and then close
them off.   A decision would be made that the pens were
fulled and they would be closed off and people directed
round to the side.   Then that one, if it was full, that
would be closed off. -A. Yes.

That operation and that system, you would agree, requires
the exercise of a judgment as to when those pens are
full? - A. Yes.

No doubt would draw on Officers on the front of the
perimeter fence, in the Stands, and those in Ground
Control who had the view over? - A. Yes.

But a judgment is made? - A. Yes.

If that is right, that system, the evidence is it has
been operated, it has been operated year in year out
since those pens have been constructed without, as far as
you are aware, any report of any injuries or crushing on
those terraces?   You have not heard of any? - A. I have
not heard of any, no.

The whole point of this, to go back to your evidence, as
to you personally found it very difficult to tell when a
pen is full or over-crowded? - A. Yes.

If that system has been operated all the time it would
appear that judgments have been made on a week by week
basis as to when a pen is full, whatever that may mean,
in order to open up another pen? - A. Yes.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I don't think I have any further
questions.

     THE CORONER:   We will pause.   What number are we
going to give this photograph?
                                                    23

                                              R. MARSHALL

     MR. JONES:   ,C.351.   Have you got a reference for
it, Mr. Catchpole?    The source?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   The only reference I have is 863.A.
I have a recollection that it is either a club
photographer or the Sheffield Star photographer who
provided these.   It was certainly available at the
Inquiry.

                  (Short adjournment)
                                             R. MARSHALL



           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Superintendent, as an experienced Officer for 26 years,
you have naturally had a fair bit of experience of
football, as you have told us. At the 88 semi-final
match you were Ground Commander, and you were concerned
very much with public order.  You have told us that you
swapped places with Superintendent Greenwood that year.
Did you suggest that you go outside, or how did that
come about? - A. Mr. Mole, who was the Divisional
Commander, asked me which role I wanted to fulfil and I
said on this occasion, as I had worked inside in 1988,
I would work outside in 1989.

We know that in '88 that match was a very successful
match, and Superintendent Greenwood had done an
excellent job outside.  Naturally that made your job as
Ground Commander fairly easy that year, would you
agree? - A. I think it is fair to say that all policing
is teamwork and yes, it was a good team that operated
in 1988.

Do you agree with me that teamwork plays a very
important part in the operation? - A. Yes, it is
absolutely fundamental.

It was so successful in '88 that nothing was reported,
or had to be discussed at the '89 briefing, did it?
There was nothing serious? - A. There was nothing of a
serious nature reported in 1988 that caused any major
alterations to the 1988 Operational Order.

     THE CORONER:   1989. - A. '89, sorry.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   In '88 Chief Superintendent Mole
was the Ground Controller and it seems to me that you
had a great respect and admiration for him as someone
in charge of a football match, would you agree? - A.
Yes.
You were not involved in the planning side of the
operation in either 1988 or 1989? - A. I attended a
number of meetings, in fact, for both semi-finals, but
in terms of actually putting pen to paper and writing
the Operational Order that was a job undertaken by
Chief Inspector Beale and Inspector Sewell.

As Ground Commander, however,  you would have knowledge
of the layout of the ground, wouldn't you? - A. Yes.

You knew that there was a high perimeter fence in front
of the Leppings Lane terraces? - A. Yes.
                                                       25
                                                 R. MARSHALL



Q, Also that there were radial fences dividing the pens? -
   A. Yes.
Q. I wonder, did you know that the most popular part of
   the terrace for supporters was immediately behind the
   goal? - A. Yes.
0. Also, you thought that the Club's tried and tested
   method of "find your own level" in the pens was a
   satisfactory one? You were quite happy with that? - A.
   I did not exercise a conscious judgment about it.   It
   was a means of the terrace being filled, and it was not
   until after the disaster that attention focussed on
   that as a means of actually looking at the numbers of
   people who had found their way into pens, because a
   debate ensued about the role of Sheffield Wednesday
   Football Club, in terms of their employment of
   stewards.  Does that help to answer your question?

Q. Yes, I just wanted to know if you were quite happy with
   that system? Did you make any objections before
   policing the match in 1989? - A. No.

Q. Did you hear of any other Officers objecting to the
   Club's system? - A. No.

          MR. CATCHPOLE:   I hesitate to interrupt and I
     apologise.   There is actually no evidence that this is
     the Club's  system and there may well be evidence to the
     contrary at a later stage.   No one has actually
     determined whose system the "find your own level" is.
     I certainly would not like Mrs. McBrien to proceed on
     the basis that I accept that it was the Club's system,
     as she is putting to this Officer.

          THE CORONER:   Ask the question if he knows who
     had designed the system.  Shall I just ask that
     question:

0. The system, whichever it was and whatever it was
   called, doyou know who had designed it? - A. As    I
   understand   it the system evolved from the events of a
   semi-final which occurred in 1981, which resulted in
   the radial fences being placed on the Leppings Lane
   terrace.   These fences were equipped with the gates
   which were referred to in evidence yesterday, to allow
   people to move from pen to pen.

0.        MRS. McBRIEN:   From 1981 the system of the fans
     going in, once they had gone in through the turnstiles
     and they went into the concourse area and they looked
     out for the sign "standing" made their way to the
     terraces, they were just left to do that from 1981?
                                                     26
                                               R. MARSHALL



   That was a used system, wasn't? - A. As I understand
   it, yes.

Q. I am sorry if I thought it was the Club's system.   I
   have always thought it was actually.   So once through
   the turnstiles the fans just made their way to the
    terraces to stand and the most usual way you have just
    told me earlier was via the central tunnel? - A. Yes,
  ' that is one of the ways of getting onto the terrace.

Q. That was a major entrance? - A. Yes.

Q. Especially, I suppose, as it had a large notice above
   it actually directing the fans to that area.  It was a
   very conspicuous notice, wasn't it, over the tunnel? -
   A. Yes, it said, "Standing".

Q. So it would certainly encourage people to move in that
   direction.  Another thing was that once in the
   concourse they would also be able to see the pitch and
   the players before they entered the tunnel, there again
   encouraging them down that tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. So the usual way of filling the pens was probably for
   fans to go down the central tunnel and if they thought
   the area was full behind the goal they would presumably
   come back out of   the tunnel, if people were going in,
   in the usual way? If the tunnel was not congested
   there was nothing to stop fans going into the pens and
   then coming back out if they wished? - A. Yes, I think
   there is that sort of movement all the time of people
   going to the toilets or looking for the cafes and so
   forth.

Q. Yes, that is what I have always understood, and I was
   told by my son because he did attend quite a number of
   matches at Hillsborough, including the '88 semi-final
   and one early in   '89, and he usedto talk about
   football quite a   lot.  So in '88, when I know it has
   been suggested that tne tunnel was closed off,
   presumably it was because the Police Officers took the
   initiative to block it by manpower, because they saw a
   lot of people going down and coming back and saying it
   was full.  Would you agree with that? - A. I think that
   is a reasonable presumption, yes.

0. But they would not, you would expect, close the radial
   gates of the tunnel? You went over this yesterday and
   explained it very well, that that could be a very
   dangerous thing to do, closing the gates of the tunnel?
   - A. The tunnel gates in actual fact open against the
   walls of the tunnel itself and they have not a facility
   to open out onto the concourse, so if you can imagine
   people inside the tunnel wanting to get out onto the
                                              R. MARSHALL



concourse, and if those gates were closed, then people
would be trapped against the gates.

I believe that is written down in the Health and Safety
Certificate, because it is a very important safety
feature ....

     THE CORONER:   Shall we put it this way:

Do you know whether or not that is contained in the
Safety Certificate? - A. I don't, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I think you had better leave it
because he said that he does not know.   It is not to
say that it isn't, but he does not know.   Perhaps I
will ask another question on this point, just to assist
you:

But you would agree with Mrs. McBrien, and I think you
have already said it, in your view to close those gates
would actually be dangerous? - A. Yes.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   You said yesterday - I thought
this was very interesting too - that you would expect
all the Liverpool fans who attended the matches there
to have enough intelligence to be able to move
themselves either back out through the tunnel or into
another pen, if normal circumstances prevailed?  I
tnink I understood, I don't know if other people did. -
A. Yes.

You did.  In '88 do you remember a pitch invasion
taking place at the end of the game? - A. I think there
was, for want of a better word, a benign pitch invasion
because Liverpool had won.




              /0. Yes, it was not a serious
                                                         28


                                         R. MARSHALL

Q.   Yes,   it was not a serious matter,   it was just sheer
             - A. Exuberance?

Q.   Yes, it was, that is a good word.  Now that, I am
     sure, would have been reported in the briefing, is
     that right, was it mentioned? - A. I cannot remember
     whether it was or not.

          THE CORONER:  I think you actually mean the de­
     briefing, do you not, at the end?

            MRS. McBRIEN:   The de-briefing, yes.

          THE WITNESS:      Yes, I do think it was, yes, now
     you mention it.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:  So in 1989 the Ground Commander
     would be given instructions no doubt to ensure that
     the same thing did not happen again, that would be
     something to consider? - A. It would be one of the
     things that would be considered, yes.

Q.   Yesterday you said you could not remember anything
     about the 1988 briefing, but one thing I put down
     yesterday was at kick-off in 1988 you were standing by
     the players' tunnel? - A. Yes.

          MRS. McBRIEN:  I wonder could I see that, please,
     on a plan, if it is possible?

          THE CORONER: Can you put the plan up, Sergeant
     Griffiths, please, C27A I think it is.  I think it is
     actually marked, is it not, "Players' tunnel"?

            MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you.

Q.        THE CORONER:  Let me just ask, on that plan which
     you have got in front of you, on the South Stand side
     there is an entrance which has got the words "Players'
     tunnel" against it, can you see it? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   Is that where you were in 1988?     - A. Yes.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:  From that position you would, no
     doubt, see the Leppings Lane terraces, the pens? - A.
     Yes.

Q.   You said yesterday that at that     time those pens were
      full? - A. Yes.

Q.   But although the terraces looked full to you there was
     no cause for you to be alarmed, this is in 1988 now? -
     A. No.
                                                       29



                                      R. MARSHALL

Q.   Even when you saw people being pulled up into the
     stands behind you thought it wasn't unusual, that this
     did happen at football matches, people did move their
     positions? - A. Yes.

Q.   And some of them would go over the radial fences too?
      - A. Yes.

Q.   They would just move because probably they were
     uncomfortable where they were? - A. Possibly.

Q.   In fact, you said there is always some movement going
      on, it is a mass of heads and bodies so there is a
      general movement altogether? - A. Yes.

Q.   You said that it is difficult for you to know exactly
     what   is happening inside the pens unless you are in
     it.You would not know exactly what anybody     feels in
     a pen, would you, if you are right the way across the
     pitch? - A. That is true.

Q.   You would just see movement in other words? - A. Yes.

Q.   You said that Inspector Sewell would know if anything
     had been seriously wrong in 1988. There has been a
     suggestion that there was crushing taking place that
     year, but if there had been serious crushing this
     would surely be known to Inspector Sewell, would it
     not?   - A. I would assume that if someone had reported
     being crushed and Police had become involved in the
     removal of that person to the St. John's Ambulance
     First-Aid Room, then that would have found its way
     into someone's de-briefing sheet and would be part of
     the information generated at the end of the game, yes.
     But if that person had merely accepted that he was
     being crushed and had not sought any form of first-
     aid, or had not reported that to a Police Officer or a
     member of the ground stewarding staff, then it is
     perhaps unlikely that the information would have
     surfaced.

Q.   So it is mainly hearsay.  From the Police point of
     view it was not serious? - A. I had no knowledge of
     people being crushed in 1988.

Q.   We have heard time and time again that it was a very
     successful operation, so I would accept what you are
     saying definitely on that point, and no problems were
     discussed, as I asked you earlier.  There was a safe
     capacity for the terraces, were you aware of that? -
     A. Yes.
                                                      30


                                        R. MARSHALL

Q.   The numbers that should have been allowed on those
     terraces in 1989 anyway were over 24,000.  I have not
     got the actual figure.

          THE CORONER:  It is 10,100 on the whole of the
     terrace, from one end to the other, divided into two
     aliquots, or two bits.  That is the terrace, 24,000
     terrace plus stand, but we are not really interested
     in the stand at the moment.

           MRS. McBRIEN: Yes, thank you.
Q.   So there was a safe capacity and you knew about it.
      This capacity, this known number, would only be
      recorded at the turnstiles, would it not? - A. Yes,
      there was no means of actually counting spectators
      into the pens on the Leppings Lane terrace at all.

Q.   This information would be relayed to the Club
     management, would it not? - A. Yes, they have got an
     electronic system which, as I understand it, operates
     on the turn of the turnstile paddle wheel, and that
     registers an entry on a digital recording system in
     the Club's control room which is beneath the South
     Stand near the players' entrance.

Q.   So this would be very useful information for the Club
      to have that day, would it not? - A. Yes.

Q.   I believe within the system there is a bell that rings
     when the pens are getting to a certain capacity? - A.
     Yes.

          THE CORONER: I think, Mrs. McBrien, you have got
     to use the word "terrace", and not the word "pen",
     because the witness has just said you could not count
     the people into the pens.  I think you should use the
     word "terrace".  It is an important point actually.

          MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, it is.

          THE CORONER: So can you rephrase your question so
     that we get the answer right in relation to the
     correct question.  Shall I do it?

          MRS. McBRIEN:   Please.

          THE CORONER: If I have not got it right, you tell
     me.
Q.   Mrs. McBrien is asking you to say the information from
     the counters was important for the Club to know how
     many people were entering, or had entered, and you
     would agree with that? - A. Yes.
                                R. MARSHALL

And they would know at any particular point in time
when they chose to look at the counters how many
people had been clocked in for the terrace as a whole?
- A. Yes.

But they would not be able to tell from that how many
people were in any particular part of the terrace, as
far as you know? - A. That is right.

Except by visual estimations? - A. I would just add to
that that the turnstiles 11 to 16 were designated as
the West Stand turnstiles and it would have been
perfectly feasible for a spectator to enter through
those turnstiles, still end up on the concourse and
still make their way onto the terrace.  If for some
reason or other they decided not to occupy a seat in
the West Stand, they could still end up on the
terrace, and neither the Club nor the Police would be
aware of that.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  I believe you did some research
after the disaster into the rate of flow through the
turnstiles? - A. Yes.

You did not know before, you had no idea on the day,
how many could get through the turnstiles in a certain
time? - A. Yes.

You told us yesterday that you had discovered that on
a normal match day 750 get in per hour, and 1,000 per
hour at an all-ticket match.  It is a quicker process
when people have tickets than it is when money is
exchanged? - A. Yes.

Just for an example, let us say from 2.00 p.m. to 3.00
p.m. we had 23 turnstiles in Leppings Lane, we could,
therefore, get 23,000 people in during that hour,
could we not? - A. Obviously, yes.

At that rate of flow? - A. If they were all working in
the manner which was being anticipated.

Nothing was delaying them at all? - A. Yes.

We can add on to that an extra 1,000 - it was over
24,000 Liverpool fans.  The turnstiles were opened at
12 noon.  It could be possible that people would go in
before 2 o'clock, was it not? It was possible? - A.
Yes.

The turnstiles had been opened for them? - A. Yes.

So that number, 1,000, may have already made their way
into the ground.  So to me it did not look an
                                                      32



                                      R. MARSHALL

     impossibility from the figures I have worked on.   It
     looked as though the system could work, the
     turnstiles, if nobody caused any crushing there, could
     operate effectively that day? Do you agree? - A.
     Perhaps it needs some further amplification, but in
     principle if the arrival pattern of spectators had
     been in the same way as the 1988 semi-final, then
     problems would not have arisen.

Q.        MR. CORONER:  I think what Mrs. McBrien is
     putting to you is this.  She is saying on your
     assumption that a turnstile can cope with 1,000
     people, and on the assumption that there were 23
     turnstiles coping with the Liverpool fans, is it right
     that on those two assumptions you can get 23,000
     people through in one hour, on that assumption? That
     is what she is asking you, I think. That is right, is
     it not?

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:    If things are moving normally as
     they did in 1988.   With the rate of flow you told me
     yesterday, which I had discovered myself anyway, it
     does work? - A. The rate of flow in actual fact - and
     this is my arithmetic - there were 23 turnstiles at
     Leppings Lane.   Between 2.00 p.m. and 3.00 p.m. if
     those had been working at the rate of 750 persons,
     17,250 people could have got into the ground between
     2.00 p.m. and 3.00 p.m.

Q.   Yes, I agree, but it was not a paying match, was it,
     in 1989? - A. No, it was not, but Liverpool were
     allocated 24,270 tickets. Assume the turnstiles would
     have worked at 750 persons per hour, 32 turnstiles
     would have been required to process the entire
     Liverpool ticket allocation.




                               /Q. Yes, I agree.
                                           R. MARSHALL


Yes, I agree. - A7 They were supposed to work but at
the rate of a thousand persons per hour.

But in 1988 the numbers of tickets allocated to the
Liverpool fans was exactly the same as it was in 1989
and the turnstiles I believe were exactly the same? -
A. Yes.

It could be done, it had been done? - A. Yes.

It did not work in 1989 because obviously problems
occurred? - A. That is right.

I have mentioned capacity.  If the Club kept to the
right capacity and only allowed into the ground the
numbers that had been allocated tickets that day then
there would not be overcrowding, would there? - A.
That is what I said yesterday.

That had to be done somehow in 1989, to get the ones
with tickets into the ground and all should have been
well? - A. Yes.

Through the right means of entry, of course? - A.
Yes.

You have mentioned that the Police Officers did block
the tunnel off in 1988 by using barriers? - A. No, I
didn't say that.

You did not? - A. No, I said it emerged after the
disaster that that had happened.  That certainly was
not to my knowledge after the 1988 Semi Final.

I am sorry.  Of course, it was not included in the
debriefing, was it? - A. No, it wasn't.

I am going to turn now to the 1989 match.  It was the
same two teams, the same ends for Liverpool and
Nottingham Forest. The difference was that you had
changed places with Superintendent Greenwood, is that
right? - A. Yes.

You also knew that Chief Superintendent Hole was
leaving and that Mr. Duckenfield would be taking his
place? - A. Yes.

You knew that the same Operational Order as 1988 was
going to be used? - A. Yes.

But the number of Officers was to be reduced I think
you said by 70? - A. Yes.

I believe that was reduced because the fans had been
so well behaved in 1988.  I do not know if I am wrong
                                                            34


                                                 R. MARSHALL


     about that. Correct me if I am wrong? - A. That was
     certainly one of the considerations, yes.

Q. The number of Officers who were to remain at the
   turnstile area was roughly the same? - A. It wasn't
   roughly the same. It was the same.

Q. You were responsible for a very wide area, or quite a
   wide area, and you took responsibility for the
   Officers who were at the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q. Although they were in actual fact Superintendent
   Greenwood's Officers in the Operational Order? - A.
   Yes.

Q. However, you did not give them any instructions, did
   you? - A. No.

Q. You did not discuss anything with Superintendent
   Greenwood, did you, about what they should do? - A.
   No.

Q. Did you say there were 100 Officers at the
   turnstiles? Have I got the number correct? - A. No,
   what time of the day, Mrs. McBrien?

Q. That is the problem.     I have made a note but I have
   no time.

     THE CORONER:   What was the question?     I just did not
hear how many you said.

      MRS. McBRIEN:  I wrote down yesterday that there were
100 Officers at the turnstiles but as Superintendent
Marshall asked me what time of day was that, and I do not
know.

Q.           THE CORONER: I do not recollect you saying 100
     actually. Would you count them up again? That is
     the easiest way of doing it? - A. To concentrate on
     t h e ...

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN: They were the same number anyway?
     - A. To concentrate on the time of the difficulties,
     that was about 70.

Q.        THE CORONER:    How many? - A. About 70.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   The Police Officers at the
     turnstiles would move inside the ground in Phase 2,
     would they not, Superintendent Greenwood's
     Officers? - A. Yes, three of the serials were to go
     inside.

Q. In Leppings Lane altogether I believe that you had
   290 Officers? - A. Oh no, no.  290 Officers were for
                                                                  35


                                                       R. MARSHALL


            the entire sector and it extended about a mile and a
            quarter to the north west of Leppings Lane and about
            to the half a mile to three-quarters of a mile to the
            south as well.

    Qj   Q. With all these factors, the Operational Order should
            have worked in 1989 as it did do in 1988. There was
            nothing that anyone could see that was going to stop
            that? - A. Yes, that is right.

         Q. In the Operational Order it was emphasised that law
            and order was important? - A. Yes.

         Q. I believe you made your own set of notes? - A. Yes, I
            did.

         Q. You did mention I believe that safety did not feature
            in your notes and law and order seemed to be the
            point you were stressing? - A. Yes.

         Q. You also mentioned about the parking of coaches,
            searching the coaches and also the welfare of the
            local residents? - A. Yes.

         Q. So that they would not be inconvenienced that day
            more than was absolutely necessary? - A. That is
            right.

         Q. Can you tell me what kind of road Leppings Lane is
            please? - A. For a start it is a main thoroughfare in
            the city.   It takes traffic from the south and south
            west of the city through to the north west of the
            city.  It is bounded on one side by the A61 which is
            the Barnsley road and on the south by the A616 which
            is the one of the main Sheffield to Manchester roads.
            It goes through a residential area of terraced
            properties with one or two commercial enterprises, a
            big garage down at the bottom, two tyre wholesalers,
            a fish and chip shop, a car sales lot, two or three
            small shops, a gas showroom.   So it is a busy area.

         Q. It is a busy bus route as well, isn't it? - A. Yes,
            it is.  It is one of the main bus routes.

         Q. Naturally the local residents would not be very happy
            if they found that road closed quite a long time
            before a football match, would they? - A. They
            wouldn't .

         Q. They would be very angry I would think and it seems
            that you, from what I can gather, are quite concerned
            about the local residents. You do put their welfare
            quite high on their list of priorities? - A. I think
            it is important.




H
                                                           36


                                                 R. MARSHAL!.

Q. It would also invblve a big detour for people using
   that road as well, would it not, if the traffic was
   diverted if it is a main route? - A. Yes.

Q. They would have to go a much longer way round? - A.
   That is right.

Q. So it would be an option, if I can call it that, that
   you would not want to consider unless absolutely
   necessary? - A. Yes, if I can repeat what I said, it
   is done for about ten minutes at the end of every
   home game at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and
   it is in a sense the fact that people are used to it
   happening.   If you happen to be driving a car inthe
   vicinity of Sheffield Wednesday's football ground,
   shall we say at ten to five on a Saturday, then you
   know that for a short period of time Leppings Lane is
   going to be thronged with people and you are not
   going to be able to drive your car along it.

Q. I have actually watched that happening on the 17th
   November last year.  I came over specifically for
   that purpose to watch the fans arriving and going
   into the ground and I watched them leaving the ground
   for me to have some idea of the system that was being
   used.  I know it was not a Semi Final match.  It was
   just an ordinary match but it was very well policed
   and I did notice that at the end of the game just for
   ten minutes as you say the road was closed. People
   came out in thousands and thousands but in an
   organised way. They all came together quite quickly
   walking forward as a mass really in the middle of the
   road.

     THE CORONER:   Okay, Mrs. McBrien, ask the next
question.  You are really saying that you agree with him.

       MRS. McBRIEN:    I agree, yes.

Q. You also mentioned yesterday emergency measures.   You
   thought it was very important not to close the gates
   of the tunnel for reasons you explained yesterday and
   that was the evacuation of the ground in an emergency
   on the terrace.  If there was a fire or a bomb scare
   on the terrace the fans would need a very quick exit
   route from the terraces, would they not? - A. I do
   not think I spoke about the gates to the terrace
   yesterday.  I think that was today.

       THE CORONER:    It was today but it does not matter.

Q.       MRS. McBRIEN:  I am sorry. — A. Yes, you are
     right, fans would need a quick means of escape from
     the terraces.
                                                       37


                                              R. MARSHALL


Q. The tunnel Is regarded as a major exit route from the
   terraces? - A. Yes.

Q. As well as an entrance, of course? - A. Yes.

Q. This was actually stressed in the notes that you made
   so I have put down? - A. I think not.  If you are
   talking about the 1989 Semi Final my briefing
   concerned the performance of our duties outside the
   ground.  I made no mention at all of duties inside.

Q. If Officers heard that message and I believe there is
   a coded message? - A. Yes.

Q. When there is an emergency? - A. Yes.

Q. Which is what you would expect. At any time of
   emergency no matter where you are you usually get
   some form of communication, don't you? - A. The
   message is, there is a bong-bong sound like the Avon
   lady calling in the television advert. That is the
   sound on the public address system and then the coded
   message is given over the tannoy system that the
   attendance of Mr. Meadows is urgently required at the
   Police Room. The Club stewards and ground staff know
   that, all the Police Officers on duty within the
   ground know that and that alerts them to the fact
   that there is an emergency of some sort - it does not
   say what - has occurred within the ground and they
   should stand by for some further announcement which
   will alert them as to what they need to do. Certain
   Officers have specific duties to fulfil once that
   emergency signal is given and they go to certain
   locations and await the next message.

Q. It is vital that communication is given when there is
   an emergency then? - A. Yes.

Q. So that Officers are alerted, they know what they
   must do then? - A. Yes.

Q. If nobody tells them then how can they be expected to
   react, that is the truth of it, isn't it? If nobody
   gives an announcement then it is not surprising that
   Officers are caught unawares? - A. That is right,
   yes.

Q. Do you agree with me that all exit routes should be
   kept clear at all times during the football match? -
   A. What do you mean by "clear", Mrs. McBrien?

Q. Whenever you have an exit door, for instance in here,
   you do not expect it to be blocked. At any time an
   emergency could arise, even in here it could
   happen? - A. Yes.
                                                      38


                                              R. MARSHALL


Q. Emergency disasters happen so suddenly that it is
   always a good idea to know where the exit points are?
   - A. Yes.




                     /Q. So that you would know.
                                              R. MARSHALL

So that you would.know, "Right, we will make our way to
that spot."   Naturally, if you are in a cinema or
anywhere, they are kept clear.   They are not congested
areas, they are not blocked in any way? - A. No.

This applied not just to the inside of the ground, for
instance, the tunnel, but also the exit gates, the ones
that would be leading out? - A. They are all permanently
marked when there is a game taking place.

Yes, and you would not expect congestion outside those
exit gates, would you?   There shouldn't be congestion
because if there was an emergency inside you would need
to get those gates open very quickly to evacuate the
ground? - A. I think of the exit gates at Leppings Lane,
Gate B and Gate A, which wouldn't fulfil that particular
postulation.

That is an interesting point because that does throw
light on the club's layout, really, because generally
speaking the exit routes are quite clear.   This is for
safety measures, of course, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Now you received no message from Liverpool, from the
Intelligence Officers there, to say that anything unusual
was going to...   For you to expect anything unusual that
day? - A. No.

I think you have said it left something to be desired.
You felt you should have had a message? - A. Yes.
Clearly it would have been perhaps of great interest to
us if we had known in advance the number of non-ticket
holders who might choose to make the journey to
Sheffield.

Would they be aware of that sort of information, though,
because most Police Officers I have questioned have told
me that they don't even know just outside the main gate
who has got a ticket or not, so how would they get that
information at Liverpool? - A. The information would
perhaps have found its way to Liverpool from other
football league grounds where Liverpool had played. ^ The
system which since the disaster been revised, but which
applied before the disaster relied on Ground Commanders
throughout the country who were policing football grounds
at which Liverpool Football Club had attended, to supply
details on a form which would set out the behaviour of
the fans, the sort of policing problems which had
occurred.   Some of that information would concern the
numbers who had attended without tickets.

It was beyond our resources, I suppose, to actually
'phone up all the football clubs where Liverpool had been
in the twelve months prior to this fixture to ask for
                                                          40

                                                    R. MARSHALL

     that information. . That information should have found
     its way back to the Football Liaison Officer of the
     Merseyside Police and that information should then have
     been available to Detective Sergeant Charlesworth who was
     at the time our Football Intelligence Officer.

Q. It seems very difficult information to gather.   I find
   that difficult because people could come in their own
   cars without a ticket and nobody would know.    This is
   what I am trying to get at.

          THE CORONER:   What I think Mr. Marshall has said is
     that they didn't receive any intelligence:

Q.   You are not suggesting that there was intelligence and it
     wasn't passed down, or are you? - A. I am not in a
     position to make a judgment about that.   I sometimes
     wonder if we got what was available, but I wouldn't like
     to speculate beyond that.

Q. You don't know? - A. I don't know.   The fact is we
   didn't have information which could have helped us.

Q. You would agree with Mrs. McBrien that it may in fact be
   sometimes quite difficult to get information? - A. Yes.

Q.   Because after all not everybody who is - to take
     ticketless people, as an example - is going to run up to
     a Police Officer and say, "I am going to the match.   I
     haven't got a ticket."? - A. That's right.   The only
     time this becomes an easily observable fact is when you
     have an all-ticket game and people who have tickets end
     up in the stadium and people who haven't got tickets end
     up outside.   Then you are in a position to count the
     people who haven't got tickets, or who apparently haven't
     got tickets.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN:    I thought there would be a system to
     keep ticketless fans out of the ground.     A simple
     approach to it.     It would also be difficult, even if the
     Officers in Liverpool knew, for them to actually stop^
     them from travelling to Sheffield that day, wouldn't it,
     and obtaining tickets from a ticket tout or somebody
     else?    How would it be achieved?    Is it possible to
     achieve it? - A. Unless there is some sort of system of
     actually checking every motor vehicle that arrives into
     an area where a match is taking place and questioning the
     individuals in that motor vehicle, and assuming powers,
     incidentally, which are totally outside those vested in
     the Police by the Police and Criminal Evidence Act, then
     that is the only way that I know of where you could
     actually find out who had got tickets and who hadn't.
                                              R. MARSHALL

Would you agree that this most simple way of dealing with
the matter is either at the perimeter gates at the
Hillsborough Stadium or at the turnstiles, or both?
That is the place, the only place? - A. I tried to say
yesterday that   it is - if you have a concept of a line of
people who are   queuing patiently to show a Police Officer
a ticket, then   that is something that simply does not
occur and is not a practical proposition.    You just
would not have sufficient Police Officers to actually do
that.   If you can cast your mind back to the time when
you saw the video of the scenes outside Leppings Lane at
twenty to three on the 15th of April, are you seriously
suggesting that Police Officers could stop and ask every
person in that crowd whether he or she was a ticket
holder, and inspect that ticket?

I realise... - A. I do suggest to you, with respect, that
that cannot be achieved.

I realise that in 1989 it would have been an
impossibility, I suppose - well, virtually an
impossibility - but it certainly was done in 1988 because
one witness here told us that he came through Gate C and
he could not even get rid of tickets.    There was nobody
there to pass them on to.    The people without tickets
hadn't been allowed to get that close to the ground that
day.   They had been kept away. - A. I cannot give you
evidence about that but I can refer you to the video
which shows the arrival pattern which occurred in 1988.
I suggest that was a very different pattern indeed to
that which occurred in 1989.

Yes.   I have studied the video and I have got
photographs here showing the difference between the
movement of people in 1988 and 1989.   I believe in 1988
there was only one perimeter gate opened and so it would
be quite easy, I would think, to check people going
through a narrow entrance.   If you have got a very wide
entrance it is very difficult to check people.    The in­
rush is too great, but if you have a narrow entrance
where there is a strong enough body of Officers there,
then it is possible, it can be achieved, because it has
been achieved and it is achieved, I'm sure, throughout
the country in all the other matches we have.    Do you
agree? - A. I am afraid I cannot agree with that
postulation.

You cannot stop people... - A. I think you can try to
screen out non-ticket holders by taking fairly aggressive
Police action.   You can certainly carry out random
checks on people whom you suspect may be coming without
tickets, but as I said yesterday people do not readily
say, "I haven't got a ticket."   They may say words to
the effect, "I am waiting for my mate who is coming
                                              R. MARSHALL

behind me on the njotorway and he is bringing my ticket."
Or, "I am waiting for my brother. He is bringing the
tickets."   Or, We have ordered the tickets from the box
office and somebody has gone to collect them."

Yes, but at what point would they be saying this?    Would
they be saying that right outside the turnstiles or would
it be on the bridge or somewhere in Leppings Lane? - A.
They could be saying it anywhere in the vicinity, if
asked for a ticket.

That would delay things at the turnstiles?   There
wouldn't be a smooth movement into the ground if every
other person, let's say, didn't have a ticket.   There
would be commotion, there would be pandemonium at the
turnstiles?   There would be absolute chaos, I would
think, unless some system was used so that not all
responsibility was left to the Police Officers at the
turnstiles and to the turnstile operators themselves who
would have an enormous task? - A. Well, as I say, I
cannot agree with the totality of your suggestion. ^ It
simply wouldn't occur and I would find it very difficult
to actually suggest that it should occur.

I am just wondering how it was achieved in 1988. “ A. I
don't accept it was achieved in 1988.   I don't think
there was any filtering system in 1988.   I have no^
knowledge of any filtering system which took place in
1988.   The arrangements in 1989 were precisely the same
as those in 1988.

Would you say that about the same number would turn up in
1988 to a semi-final as they would in 1989?   Ticketless
fans I am talking about.   Round about the same number? -
A. You are perhaps aware that yesterday I found it very
difficult to put an estimate on the numbers of people who
attended the game without tickets.   I feel there was a
substantial number of people.   I won't put it any higher
than that.   If it is of relevance there is a body of
evidence which I now know of which describes the
attendance at both league and cup games, both before and
after the disaster, where substantial numbers of people
tried to gain entrance into football grounds without
tickets.   I was not aware of that at the time.
                                                      43
                                               R. MARSHALL



Q. Are you aware that quite a lot of ticketless fans did
    turn up in 1988? - A. There are always ticketless fans
    turn up at a semi-final because the system which we
    mentioned briefly yesterday in respect of touts, touts
    operate in the vicinity of football grounds.  People,
    despite Police advice not to come without a ticket, do
    attend without tickets.  Indeed, I understand that some
    people have actually come before this Inquest and
  ■'spoken of attending and actually gaining entrance to
    the ground without tickets, so people do come without
    tickets thinking that they may possibly buy a ticket
    from a ticket tout.

0. I believe in 1989 there was a contingency plan to, if I
   can use the word, herd the ticketless fans to the area
   on the bridge? - A. I would not quarrel with that.
   That is the plan that I made ....

Q. That you made? - A. Yes, with Inspector Sykes.

Q. There was one in 1988 as well, wasn't there? - A. If
   there was - I would assume that there would be a plan
   made because it is necessary always to deal with a
   percentage of people who attend without tickets.   In
   1989 I had a discussion with Inspector Sykes, quite
   early in the afternoon at Leppings Lane, as to what we
   would do with the non-ticket holders, and as I
   mentioned yesterday, I said we would try to herd them
   on the bridge, if you like.   I prefer the word contain
   them on the bridge, and someone usually has a radio
   set, they turn the radio on, listen to the game on the
   radio and absorb the atmosphere from inside the ground
   - you can hear the shouting, cheering and so forth - or
   the bridge.

Q. I just felt myself that it had been a very good
   contingency plan because these problems are to be
   expected and it was very considerate of the Police to
   make provisions for these people, who obviously had
   caused no trouble because no trouble was reported and
   discussed in the Operational Order.  I know it was an
   extra duty for the Police and ....

        THE CORONER:   Move on to the next question, Mrs.
   McBrien.  You are agreeing with him. You are saying,
   "Yes, I think that is a jolly good idea", aren t you?

        MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, and I would have wished that
   it would have happened again in 1989 because if I may
   just say this ....
        THE WITNESS:   This was 1989, Mrs. McBrien.
                                                           44
                                                      R. MARSHALL



Q.        MRS. McBRIENs   This did happen to them in '88, I
     do know that, and I believe that they were congregating
     in the area of the bridge because that is what they had
     done in 1988. They were already finding their
     position. They did not expect, I am sure, to be going
     into the ground that day if they did not get a ticket.
     They were probably quite happy to listen to a radio and
     hear the cheers from the ground.  I think they would
     have accepted that - disappointed because of the poor
     allocation no doubt, but nevertheless I don't think
     they - in fact, some of the witnesses have said then
     when I have asked them, and I have asked quite a
     number.  I asked them, "Were you surprised to be
     allowed into the ground that day", and they all said
     that they were surprised.  I think they came hoping
     they would get a ticket because lots of us live in .nope


          THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I am trying to be
     patient.  I have been patient witn everybody because I
     realise this is a very important witness, but you are
     discussing the attitudes of people whom you don|t Kn o w ,
     whom he does not know.  I want you to ask questions.
     You can ask as many questions as you like so lone as
     they are relevant, but not long speeches please.

          MRS. McBRIEN:    All right, I am sorry.      I will go
     on to the next one.

          THE CORONER:    CanI just ask two questions
     arising out of that?

0. Mrs. McBrien I think is putting this to you: do you
   know from your knowledge whether or not ticketless fans
   were congregated on the bridge in 1988? - A. No, sir.

Q. You don't know.  Do you have any knowledge whether or
   not ticketless fans in 1989 had on their own initiative
   congregated on the bridge because that is where they
   were expecting you to hold them, or contain then? - A.
   No, sir.

0. You did not know that.  Mrs. McBrien has also as.<e: vou
   whether or not in your judgment a ticketless fan :.i^nt
   be surprised if, in fact, he found a mode of gettin,
   into the ground which he had not anticipated being
   there? - A. Yes, he probably would be surprised.

          THE CORONER:     Have   I got that right?

          MRS. McBRIEN:   I think one of the questions I an
     not too happy with.   I think it was the first one.
     Would you repeat that, please, the first question you
     put to the Officer?
                                                       45
                                                 R. MARSHALL



Q.        THE CORONER:   Did you know from your knowledge
     whether or not in 1988 ticketless fans had been held,
     contained, herded, whichever word you wish, on the
     bridge? - A. No.
          THE CORONER:  That was the first question.  He
     doesn't know. Forgive me, I must not point at you.
     That was rude.

               MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you, sir:

Q. I will go to the point where you started your duties on
   that day, if I may. On 15th April, 1989, you started
   your duties at 10.45, I believe? - A. Yes - well, I
   started at the ground.  I was on duty much earlier than
   that.
Q. So it was going to be a long day for you all together.
   - A. Yes.
Q. You patrolled a wide area, visiting public houses,
   shopping areas ....
          THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, we have covered this
     ground.  I covered it, Mr. Payne covered it, Mr. King
     • • • •



          MRS. McBRIEN:   It is quite an important point
     though, that I was coming to.

          THE CORONER:   I want you to make the point.   Get
     to your point and then if necessary come back, which is
     what Mr. King, if I may use him as an example, does
     occasionally.  He makes a point and if the witness is
     not able to answer the question he then retraces^his
     steps in order to build a structure, but you don t have
     to build the structure necessarily every time. Just
     ask the question that you want because you want to get
     to the heart of the matter, don't you?

          MRS. McBRIEN:    I would like to do it the other
     way but in my position I am finding it extremely
     difficult, and this, unfortunately, is the only way - I
     nave written it down.   I would like to do it the other
     way.
          THE CORONER:   Go on. Your colleagues are
     encouraging me to let you go on. I will give in, Mrs.
     McBrien.
          MRS. McBRIEN:   I am sorry if I am not doing it as
     well but I am doing my best.

               THE CORONER:    Start again.
                                                         46
                                                    R. MARSHALL



Q. You started your duty at 10.45 at the ground, I think?
   - A. Yes.

       MRS. McBRIEN:   I am sorry if it is long-winded,
  what I am doing, but I have not got an awful lot more.
  It is very important actually to me that I ask many
  questions of this witness.

        THE CORONER:   I know, I do understand that and
   that is why I have tried not to stop you.

        MRS. McBRIEN:      I may be able to cut downwhen I
   come to other witnesses to make up for it, if I am
   taking too long. As far as everybody is concerned I do
   apologise for all this.

        THE CORONER:   All right, Mrs. McBrien.       Perhaps I
   was wrong to stop you.

        MRS. McBRIEN:      I am just trying to paint a
   picture really.

          THE CORONER:    Yes, I understand that.    Do it your
   way.

          MRS. McBRIEN:    It takes a long time, I know.

        THE CORONER:    I know thatthis is a    very
   important witness for you.

        MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, it is.   I like to do things
   thoroughly and well.  That is always my way and I am
   sorry if it is not other people's:

Q. So you visited the public houses and the shopping areas
   and you found the whole morning there were no real
   problems, is that true? - A. Yes.

Q. All you discovered on your patrol were people happy,
   being sociable, just having a drink? - A. Yes.

Q. Nothing wrong.with that at all.  It was not causing
   problems - despite the drinking, no problems? - A. No.

Q. Other Officers did not report any problems to you
   either? - A. Well, when I say problems, there were
   complaints of people urinating in gardens and so forth,
   and crowds of fans obstructing footways and that sort
   of thing, but these are the sort of problems which one
   would expect, I think, at a semi-final.  Again, it
   depends what your definition of a problem is.
                                                        47
                                                   R. MARSHALL



Q. I would accept there are the problems you have
   mentioned but nothing serious? - A. No, nobody stabbed,
   no fights.
Q. Nothing to do with safety problems at all? - A. No.

Q. It was just numbers, particularly at the Fox Inn.
   There were about 200*300 people in the car—park there?
   - A. I did not visit it personally.  I organised other
   Police Officers to visit it.

Q. But they were not doing anything, they were just
   enjoying a nice spring day and having a drink? - A. I
   don't know that.
Q. Then you saw other groups of people. There was another
   place where you saw 100-250 people, and there was
   another group of 30, and you did make provisions. You
   sent a dog van to one area, I believe? - A. Yes.

Q. Which was a very sensible move, I suppose.  I was
   wondering, did you put a dog van at the turnstile area
   because that, in the Operational Orders, is written
   down, that there should be one there? - A. I did not
   deploy a dog van at the turnstiles. There may have
   been one there.  I don't recollect seeing a dog
   handler.
Q. Nobody seems to recollect seeing a dog van there.         I
   have asked this question to witnesses, and I would        have
   expected it to be there because dogs are very good        in
   crowd control? - A. Dogs are also indiscriminate.         They
   bit Policemen as well as members of the public.

0. Yes, but they could have been useful in crowd control?
   - A. Well, they are very high on the level of
   escalation in terms of their use. As I say, I would
   hesitate to use a dog for crowd control purposes at a
   football match.
0.    So why has it been put   in the Operational Order? Wny
     wasn't it disagreed? -    A. Because a dog van with a
     large, fierce Alsatian    in the back, making a lot of
     noise ••••
Q. Would keep any crowd back - I am sorry to interrupt. -
   A. ... has a deterrent effect.

Q. Yes, I would agree. - A. On bad behaviour.

Q. In fact, it would discourage people from pushing
   forward, wouldn't it? - A. Well I don't know.
                                            R. MARSHALL



As you said, it has a deterrent effect. - A. It may not
actually discourage people from pushing.  It may
discourage other sorts of poor behaviour.

But they may have moved back to the road somehow,
rather than be crushed at the turnstiles with a dog van
there. That is only a feeling I have.

With all these people arriving in Sheffield and
visiting the pubs, would you agree that it was very
good for business in Sheffield, that there are more
advantages in lots of people using the facilities than
there are disadvantages? The advantages of it do
outweigh the disadvantages really? - A. I am honestly
not in a position to make a comment about that.

I just thought it was like a tourist town on the day
really.
     THE CORONER:   I don't think that is going to help
us really.
     MRS. McBRIEN:   So when you walked around you saw
nothing to alarm you, you said, and then you made your
way back to Leppings Lane at 2.15? - A. About that
time, yes.
When you got there you say that nothing alarmed you
then. The numbers that you saw there at the time were
about right, and they were split between, you mentioned
6,000 to 8,000 fans in the whole area? - A. Yes.

Up and down the lane, the turnstile area, the lot, and
you said that was about the right number, the number
you would expect at that time of the day, 2.15? - A.
Yes.

It was a peak time to arrive? - A. Yes.

Nothing alarming at all.   So the numbers were right and
you also observed the behaviour of the fans at that
time.  At 2.15 there was nothing in the fans' behaviour
that worried you? - A. No.

They seemed a normal crowd? - A. Yes.

Nothing they were doing to worry you.

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, I think we will stop
for lunch because we are at 2.15, which is a convenient
point.  After lunch you can start again from this
point, so remember where you are.  Perhaps whoever took
the last note could type out the last half page.  It
may help Mrs. McBrien.
                                                    49
                                               R. MARSHALL



    MRS. McBRIEN:      I am sorry I am taking so long.

      THE CORONER:  Mrs. McBrien, we have all taken so
long, so in that sense you are no different to anybody
else.
     MR. RUSSELL:   I wonder if you would be good
enough to indicate, should Superintendent Marshall
complete his evidence today, which witnesses you intend
to call after him this afternoon?

     THE CORONER:   If Mr. Marshall finishes today,
which I had hoped, then I think it is Sergeant Swift.

     MR. JONES:   Sergeant Swift, Constable Sosnowski
and Constable Houson.
     THE CORONER:   The middle Constable was known by a
different name, I think, at the time.

     MR. JONES:     Mr. Akred.

     THE CORONER:    If he does not finish or if he
finishes so late that I decide not to call another
witness then we will not start with those people
tomorrow. We are starting hopefully tomorrow with a
group of supporters.
     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, that is understood.     I just
wished to be able to prepare the ground.

     THE CORONER:   It depends - as I think I have
explained to you, because supporters are coming from a
distance we may find that we have gaps at the end of
days and so on, and we will use local people, and of
course most of the local people are Police Officers, so
they will tend to come out of sequence.  Otherwise we
would be wasting time and it is taking us long enough
as it is.  Is that clear? We rise for^lunch, ladies
and gentlemen, and we come back at 2 o'clock.  Mrs.
McBrien, if I appear to be rushing you I am not meaning
to.  I want you to have as much time as you need.
Perhaps I was wrong to try and hurry you along with the
questions, but I want you to feel at the end of the
session, because I know how important this witness is
to you, that you have had an opportunity to ask the
questions, so long as they are questions or as near
questions as possible.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, I think as we did not watch
the video we have got that little time extra, haven t
we?   Thank you.
                  (Luncheon Adjournment)
                                 R. MARSHALL

     MRS. McBRIEN: Superintendent, I had asked you
this morning about the state of affairs at 2.15 and
you told me that at that time when you arrived at
Leppings Lane there were about 6,000 to 8,000 people
there, that that was about the right number, the
number you would expect at that time of the day, and
the behaviour of the fans was nothing to cause you any
alarm. Now almost as soon as you got there you
discussed with Inspector Sykes the possibility of
closing Leppings Lane, is that right? - A. Yes, that
was about 2.25.

To take a major decision like that, you would need to
get in touch with Ground Control, would you not? - A.
Yes.

Did you do that? - A. Yes, I think I said that
yesterday.

Yes, that is right.  I believe you did not get an
answer to your request immediately, there was a
hesitation? - A. I got an answer, but the road closure
was not immediately effective.

You did not get in touch with the transport men? - A.
No, what happened was I got an acknowledgment from
Ground Control that they would institute radio
messages that would in effect close Leppings Lane at
the roundabout and at the junction with Catch Bar
Lane, but despite Ground Control saying they would do
that, nevertheless traffic continued to flow along
Leppings Lane.

For a while is that? Is that up to 2.30 it carried
on, did it not? - A. I do not think it was as long as
that, but I saw a young Constable holding up three
double-decker buses in Catch Bar Lane at the junction
with Leppings Lane, and so because traffic was still
moving freely I went and spoke to the Constable and he
asked what he was to do with the buses and I said he
was to let the buses go through and then I passed
another radio message to Ground Control saying, in
effect, that the closure was not being made effective
and to reinforce the instructions which I had asked to
be carried out, but also to tell Mr. Middleton, who
was the Traffic Manager of South Yorkshire Transport,
that future buses would need to seek a detour from the
area.

This morning you told me that it was something that
you personally would hesitate at doing; you would not
want to close Leppings Lane off to traffic half-an-
hour before the kick-off, that it was not done, it was
done at the end of the match normally? - A. Yes.
                                                      51



                                       R. MARSHALL

Q.    So here you have a situation at 2.15 which is one of
      complete normality which would resemble the 1988 crowd
      very much at that time.  Because things were normal
      why would you want to make that request? - A. Because
      people were spilling off the pavements into the road
      and I thought that someone would be injured in a road
      accident.

Q.'   But in your notes you told me that safety did not
      feature at all, that you were concerned with public
      order? - A. I do not think that has ever been my
      suggestion, that safety was not a concern of mine.
      Clearly one cannot ignore people spilling off the
      pavements into the roadway.

Q.    I appreciate that it can be dangerous, but out of the
      two things I would have said it would form an
      effective barrier.  Moving traffic, people driving
      their cars or their buses and they saw a football
      crowd would probably go very slowly, they would take
      great care but it would be still moving and it would
      be a barrier? - A. I agree that a line of stationary
      vehicles --
Q.    Not stationary, moving. - A. Nose-to-tail or moving
      very, very slowly do form an effective barrier to
      pedestrian movement, but I would submit that you would
      still have people who would try to nip in front of
      moving cars and the sheer volume of people on the
      footpaths, in my view, was potentially dangerous, and
      so that was the reason that the road was closed to
      traffic, so that the people approaching the turnstile
      area would have a much freer area in which to move and
      circulate.

Q.    I appreciate it was a consideration and I do see your
      point there, but the road was not closed in 1988; it
      was left open then, was it not? We see on the video
      traffic moving throughout the time that the fans
      arrive at the ground? - A. Yes.

Q.    Nobody was injured, nobody spilled onto the road that
      year.  They could look after themselves.  They were
      not small children.  These people were adults and if
      they saw a bus coming or a car they would have kept to
      the pavements normally, would they not, without
      somebody else having to do it for them, put them back
      on the pavement? - A. I was not there in 1988 and I
      can only give evidence of the situation as I saw it in
      1989 and the action which myself and Inspector Sykes
      caused to be taken.

Q.    I would like you to imagine people who were coming
      down.  If the entrance is narrow, let us say the
      pavement, they are coming down there, there are only a
                                                        52


                                          R. MARSHALL

     certain number going to reach the main gates at that
     time.  If you open out the whole of the road, you are
     not only going to have that crocodile of people the
     width of the pavement; you are going to have a very
     great width, are you not? - A. Yes.

Q.   So numbers are going to increase? - A. The numbers
      remain constant;  it is the area in which they are
      free to circulate which increases.

Q.   That is true, yes, the numbers do remain constant, but
      the way they arrive at the gates is different, the
      manner in which they arrive there, the numbers? - A. I
      am sorry, the numbers remain the same.

Q.   They overwhelmed you, I believe, did they not? The
     numbers overwhelmed you and they overwhelmed all the
     other Police Officers who were policing that area that
     day? - A. Yes, they did.

Q.    You were   completely overwhelmed? - A. Yes.

Q.   Yet, as you have just said to me, the numbers remained
     constant, and I agreed? - A. That is right, yes.

Q.   So it was theway they moved from A to B really that
     was changed? - A. Yes, that is partly true, yes.
     There is another element which I mentioned yesterday,
     and that was the actual behaviour of the crowd itself.

Q.   Yes.  I think, though, that you did agree with me that
     it was a normal crowd at 2.15.  The photographs that
     we have looked at show it was still a very normal
     crowd at 2.30.  They were the same people that you had
     seen at 2.15, the numbers? - A. Yes.

Q.   They had just   moved further down the road. It was not
     the people who changed;   it was their mood, you could
     say. Do you think it was because people from behind
     them up the road may have come down the middle of the
     road faster than they had and caused them to be angry,
     or anxious, or something like that? - A. I cannot
     really answer that question, Mrs. McBrien.   There were
     substantial numbers of people moving in both
     directions in Leppings Lane converging on the
     turnstile area.   I cannot say whether one group was
     moving quicker than another group. My impression was
     of a mass of people approaching the turnstiles.

Q.   What I am saying is let us take the people who came
     off the train at 2 o'clock and they were escorted down
     at 20-past 2 by Officers in a crocodile? - A. Yes.

Q.   In a   very orderly way? - A. Yes.
                                                      53



                                      R. MARSHALL

Q.   This was the general way that people were moving down
     that road at that time.  I am saying that once the
     road was closed the whole system changed because
     people, instead of keeping to the crocodile, were able
     to now come down the road in masses, in large crowds.
     The people at the back had access. There would have
     been a bus or a car in their way before moving down
     the road, but they had the right of way then, did they
     not, down the centre? - A. I do follow your reasoning,
     but I do not think that had an enormous effect on the
     actual speed of movement of people down Leppings Lane.

Q.   You do not think they moved faster? - A. No, I do not
     think so.

Q.   That is a credit to them, I suppose.   In my experience
      I have found that if you allow people to just go down
      the road and wait at a gate, it is much more difficult
      to get them through an entrance if there is a large
      mass of them than if they continue in a steady stream,
      in a queue.  It is difficult, but nobody knows who is
      to go first and you will get pushing occurring.  This
      is with a small crowd, say, of about 30. - A. Are you
      asking me a question, Mrs. McBrien?

Q.   I am lost now as to how I put it. Would you agree
      with me that it is far easier to go through the funnel
      that was at the turnstiles? We will take the funnel
      part.  It is a narrow entrance and it is better to
      feed that in with a narrow column of people, rather
      than people coming from all directions into it, is it
      not? There would be crushing if they came all
      together towards that point? - A. That is true to a
      certain extent, but really one is controlled by the
      actual layout of the area. That is a physical feature
      of the area and, as I said yesterday, there were
      Police Officers in the area doing their very best to
      stop people being crushed in the turnstile area, in
      the immediate vicinity of the turnstiles.




                                     /Q. I just thought
                                                       54


                                               R. MARSHALL


Q. I just thought that with the numbers that overwhelmed
   everybody had all come together but I will leave it
   on that point. - A. You will have seen the video of
   the circumstances which obtained at Leppings Lane
   from about 2.30 onwards which was filmed by the BBC
   TV cameraman and then subsequently on the video
   system which was installed in the Police control post
   and indeed in the Sheffield Wednesday Control Room
   and I think the video corroborates what I have said
   in that enormous numbers of people converged on the
   area from about 2.35 to 2.40 onwards.

Q. Yes, I have seen the video and I have noticed the
   difference between the people who were getting into
   the area of the turnstiles in 1988 and in 1989.   It
   is not the people who are different.  It is the way
   they are coming to the turnstiles that is
   different? - A. It is the approach to the turnstiles
   and the numbers involved.

Q. It is the number arriving all at once? - A. Yes.

Q. When you asked, the request to close the road, did
   you take any other steps to control the crowd or did
   you just do nothing once you had taken that decision?
   - A. I did not sort of stand back, if that is what
   you mean, did I do nothing? I was busy myself
   directing people and speaking to people all the time
   but I didn't introduce any other sort of means of
   control.

Q. Did you get in touch with the other Officers in that
   area to tell them what was happening, that you had
   made that request? - A. No, because the supervisory
   Officers would be clearly aware I think with the
   radio messages being passed to and fro with what was
   happening if they were listening to the radios.

Q. So you assumed they would know? - A. Yes.

Q. This request that you made, it was not in the
   Operational Order, was it? - A. No.

Q. It was not in the contingency plans? - A. No.

Q. But I suppose Mr. Duckenfield thought if you made
   that request then he would think, "Yes, all right we
   will do it".  Is that correct? - A. I can't answer
   for Mr. Duckenfield.  I made a request and eventually
   that request was fulfilled.

Q. I believe Superintendent Greenwood had not made that
   request in 1988? - A. I do not know.
                                                         55


                                               R. MARSHALL


Q. You do not think the closing of the road had a
   crucial effect on things then that day? You did not
   think it made any difference? - A. No, not at all.

Q. But you had made a request which was not in the
   Operational Order and was not a contingency plan. It
   was something that was different to 1988. The plan
   was being altered? - A. That is right.  I view it as
   part of my job to make decisions on the spot which
   may well affect the progress of whatever function I
   am involved in.

Q. Do you think in hindsight it might have been better
   to keep to the Operational Order that had been used
   in 1988 to the letter? - A. No.

Q. You don't? - A. No.

Q. Would you still think it is a good idea to close
   Leppings Lane off half an hour before kick-off for a
   Semi Final? - A. If necessary, yes.

     THE CORONER:   You cannot ask that question, I am
sorry. What you can ask him is, and then I think you must
move on to your next point because we have gone over it
about four times, in hindsight does he still think he took
the right decision in the 1989 Semi Final to close Leppings
Lane? What the Officer is saying is that 1988 and 1989 are
not the same.

Q. Can you answer the question which I will now put? In
   hindsight do you still feel that the closure of
   Leppings Lane, your request to close Leppings Lane at
   whatever time it w a s , 14.25 or thereabouts according
   to your reckoning, was the correct decision in the
   circumstances which prevailed at that time and as you
   saw them? - A. Yes.

Q.        MRS. McBRIENs You did say though that it was a
     very normal situation but you still do believe you
     made the right decision? - A. Yes.

Q. Somewhere you have said the crocodile method of
   moving a group of people to another area is a slow
   method? - A. Yes.

Q. You do not really think highly of that system? - A.
   It is a system which has been forced on the British
   Police Service because of the sporadic attacks which
   are made on fans visiting an area from away.   It is
   to frustrate violence against those people. It is
   something which I feel is absolutely unedifying to
   see a file of people shepherded down a street in an
   English city surrounded by a phalanx of Police
   Officers but that is the state unfortunately of
                                                         56


                                              R. MARSHALL


   footballing in Britain.  It is something that seems
   to have evolved, something which has to happen.

Q. Probably they are doing that for safety reasons,
   would you agree? - A. Yes.

Q. At 2.15 the situation was normal but at 2.40 there
   was serious congestion? - A. Yes.

Q. I believe it was about that time that you took up
   your position on the bridge or was it earlier? - A.
   Yes, around that time.

Q. You had noticed earlier a considerable number of
   people without tickets in the area? - A. Yes, there
   were people toing and froing asking for spares.

Q. I believe there was even an incident on the bridge
   involving yourself? - A. Yes.

Q. Will you tell us about that please? - A. Yes, I was
   standing on the bridge and a youth came passed me and
   gave me ankles a sharp push. I thought he was going
   to push me into the river.

Q. Do you know what time that was? - A. About 2.40,
   2.44, round about that time.

Q. From 2.40 the situation at the turnstiles you could
   see from where you were standing on the bridge? - A.
   Yes.

Q. You noticed it was deteriorating by the minute? - A.
   Yes.

Q. You tried to put over a radio message but your radio
   was dead at that time? - A. Yes.




                         /Q. At 2.47 you made a request.
                                                          57



                                                    R. MARSHALL


Q. At 2.47 you made a request that the exit gates should be
   opened to allow the fans into the stadium? - A. Yes.

Q. And you had no acknowledgement from Ground Control to
   that request? - A. No.
Q. Would you say at that time that the Police had completely
   lost control of the situation outside? - A. Yes.

Q. So you had outside a public order situation? - A. Yes.

Q. Now you told us yesterday there were about 3,000 Officers
   in South Yorkshire? - A. Yes.

Q. You have said the situation you had was a public order
   situation? - A. Yes.

Q. Could you have called on the reserves of South Yorkshire
   Police to come to your aid at that time? - A.
   Practically, no.

Q. You could not have held them in any way, the people
   outside those gates? - A. No.    If it helps you,
   Mrs. McBrien, the Police Officers are distributed all
   over South Yorkshire.    There were two reserve serials in
   the ground, one of which was in the gymnasium, the other
   I think was located in the vicinity of the Police control
   post.    When I originally asked for assistance,
   Serial 20, which had been in the gymnasium, came up
   through the concourse under the North Stand to Gate A and
   positioned themselves there.    Some mounted Officers came
   up the side of the South Stand and assisted with crowd
   control.    However, in terms of reserves these were the
   only reserves which were immediately available.     Clearly
   it would have taken a considerable time to secure extra
   Police Officers from elsewhere in Sheffield.     They could
   not possibly have got there to assist with that
   situation.

Q. I appreciate that certain Officers did try to do their
   best.   In fact quite a lot of Officers, I feel, did try
   and I don't know if you know the name of the mounted
   Officer who closed Gate C after it was opened at 2.48?
   You wouldn't know the name of that Officer? - A. I don t
   know his name.   I suspect it could have been either
   Sergeant Smith or Police Constable Grunnill, from
   Liverpool.
          THE CORONER:   I think you may be thinking of the
     perimeter gate.   I think Mrs. McBrien is thinking about
     Gate C.

Q.          MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes. - A. I am sorry I can't help
     you.
                                                  R. MARSHALL

         THE CORONER:   You were thinking of Gate C?

      MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, I was, because I do know a
mounted Officer did close that gate after a very short
time.    He probably took the initiative himself and he
was trying.

     THE CORONER:   You don't know the name of that
Officer? - A. I don't know.   I am sorry.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I also think the Crime and Vandal

     .
Squad, I think it was Serial 23 or Serial 24? - A. Serial
20
I think they too acted as promptly as they could as far
as Gate A went?   They closed Gate A quite promptly too,
didn't they? - A. Yes.

It seemed to me that certain Officers were trying to pain
control of a bad situation? - A. Yes.

You tell me there was no way you could have held them
back?   There was no way of holding those fans, that the
only thing to do was to open the gates? - A. No, 1 think
the situation was that all the Police Officers who were
there were doing their very best to prevent the situation
which ultimately arose, insofar as lives were threatened
in front of the turnstiles themselves.   I took the view
based on the evidence of my own eyes and what was said to
me by Inspector Purdy that unless the gates were opened
people would be killed outside.

But you were more senior to Inspector Purdy? - A. That's
right.

Although it was only a suggestion, you could have had a
different opinion, you might have thought something
totally different? - A. No, I didn't think anything
different.   It confirmed my own perception of the
situation.

As I see it the Police had lost control outside and by
opening the gate that was not a way of regaining control?
It would only be after opening the gates and closing the
gates again that you may have been able to regain control
at the turnstiles? - A. At the end of the day that is
precisely what happened insofar as large numbers of
people went into the ground.   The gates were closed and
control was re-established in front of the turnstiles.
The crowd did not just stop coming at three o'clock.
Substantial numbers of people continued to come into the
area, as the video shows, well after the gates had been
opened and closed.
                                                          59



                                                    R. MARSHALL

Q. Did you request the gates to be closed once you had
   requested that they should be opened? - A. No.

Q. Whilst the gates were open the Police were out of
   control?   Is that right.

        THE CORONER:    No, I don't think it is right.

        MRS. McBRIEN:    The situation was out of control,
   that is what I meant.

        THE CORONER:    No, I don't think that is what the
   Officer said:

Q. You requested the gates to be opened because the
   situation was out of control, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. And also because you felt lives were at stake at the
   turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q. You felt that the only way to remedy this was to get the
   gates opened? - A. Yes.

Q. Right or wrong.   Once the gates had been opened for a
   time, whatever that might have been, a number of people -
   in fact a lot - went through, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. That improved the situation outside? - A. Yes.

Q. You were then able - when I say "you", the people outside
   were able to gain control? - A. Yes.

Q. So what you are trying to tell Mrs. McBrien as I
   understand it is that the openings of the gate was for
   safety reasons to reduce the number of people and the
   effect was to regain control outside? - A. Yes.

        THE CORONER:    Have you understood that,
   Mrs. McBrien?

        MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes.

        THE CORONER:   It is wrong to say control was only
   lost whilst the gate was open.   If you wish to ask him
   was the entry into the ground through the gate
   uncontrolled, then that is a legitimate question:

Q. In fact you might answer that, as I have asked it. - A. I
   think in the early stages there was some attempt made to
   control the entry by Police Officers.   You referred to
   the mounted Officer being there.   He was trying to
   establish some control.
                                              R. MARSHALL

     MRS. McBRIEN:   You are referring to the first
opening? - A. Yes.   I could not see into the ground from
where I was, but having looked at the evidence of
Officers who were there, my feeling was there were Police
Officers and stewards trying to effect some control over
people actually coming through the gates.




         Q. The reason I asked you
                                            R. MARSHALL



The reason I asked you if you requested the gates to be
closed, once this pressure had been released and people
had gone into the ground, why were the gates left open?
- A. The gates were not left open, the gates were
closed by Police Officers.

Without opening the gates, you had outside a public
order situation, and the people at no time, well they
don't usually lose in that sort of situation, do they?
They usually, through one means or another, bring
things under control? - A. This goes to the very heart
of the issue because there is a term used, and it is a
fairly hackneyed phrase, but it is called policing by
consent. -The Police in my experience in the UK police
the public by consent.   In other words, the public
allow Police Officers to tell them what to do, to
respond to reasonable requests, to exercise some degree
of self-control, to exercise a degree of feeling and
compassion towards other human beings, and that is the
way that policing succeeds in this country, witnout
recourse all the time to riot shields and to water
cannon, and to live ammunition and that sort of thing.
These things are an anathema to the British Police
Service.   Eventually, when a situation does arise of
the sort which I felt arose from about 2.40 onwards on
15th April, the forces of law and order eventually
become overwhelmed. There were about 70 Police
Officers, 6,000 or 7,000 people, some of whom were
determined to get into the ground come what may, no
thought for other fans, no thought for Police, no
thought for anything except themselves, and that really
is the total nub of this issue, that if people consent
to be policed and people consent to follow the
reasonable directions of Police Officers, d o n t shove
and push, then we would not be in this situation.

This surely was not a riot situation at all, it was
just a lot of people crowded together anxious to get in
by kick-off? That wasn't a riot situation and yet the
Police in this country are able to deal withriots,
miners' strikes, that was dealt with successfully.   Wny
is it they could not deal with that situation? - A.
Mrs. McBrien, we were trying to police a pleasant
afternoon of sport.  It was not supposed to be a riot
situation it was supposed to be a pleasant afternoon
where people would come, watch a game of football, get
excited, enjoy themselves, and having watched the game
of football go away.

Really I have tried to paint the picture yesterday and
I have tried to paint the picture to you now. The
video which you have probably seen shows the situation
quite clearly:  enormous crowds flooding into the area;
the presence of Police Officers not dissimilar to that
                                                       62
                                                 R. MARSHALL



  which existed in 1988; properly briefed Police
  Officers; properly led Police Officers with men of
  substantial experience - Sykes, for instance, had ten
  years' experience policing those turnstiles - policed
  by mounted Officers, and if I tell you that mounted
  Officers are usually the last resort, far more
  effective than foot Officers in that type of situation.
  All those Officers did their best. All those Officers
  were significantly affected, I think, by events on that
  day.  I really cannot take you much further down that
  road.

Q. If it could not be dealt with as a public order
   situation, could there have been other options open to
   you? - A. What sort of options have you got in mind?

Q. First of all the delaying of the kick-off. A. Yes.

Q. I think at 2.17 when you made your request - it was a
   little later wasn't it - to close the road, you did not
   think then it was necessary to delay the kick-off? - A.
   No.
Q. Because you thought the numbers you saw would be able
   to get in by 3 p.m? - A. Yes.

Q. But the option for delaying the kick-off could nave
   been taken later when the request to open the gate was
   not acknowledged, when you had a four minute interval
   of uncertainty could a decision h a v e been made then in
   the other direction: delay the kick-off_instead of
   opening the gates? - A. Yes, but as I said yesterday,
   with the benefit of hindsight I do not think a delayed
   kick-off would have made much difference to the
   situation which we faced in Leppings Lane.

Q. This morning Mr. King mentioned a woman Police Officer,
   Wilson.  I remember her giving evidence and telling us
   that she was telling the crowd, "Don't worry, the game
   is being delayed".  We know it wasn't the truth but it
   had an effect on the crowd. Time crowd near her did
   respond very positively to that.  Because they thought
   they were going to be given more time, they weren t as
   anxious.  It was having an effect on the mood of the
   people but it wasn't true, this was the only problem.
   The game was not going to be delayed, but surely it
   could have been delayed? There could have been a
   request made and announced over the tannoy system, not
   just by WPC Wilson to those immediately by her, but
   over the tannoy system.  That could nave been done,
   couldn't it?

        THE CORONER:   It is so warm in here, I think we
   will have to pause for a minute because we are all
                                                         63
                                                   R. MARSHALL



     going to nod off.    You can ask this question when you
     come back.

                      (Short Adjournment)

          THE CORONER:   I think the substance of your
     question was, could he have ordered the kick-off to be
     postponed, and P.C. Wilson had said when she spoke to
     people around it seemed to have an effect, so why say
     it was not having an effect.  Is that what you were
     asking?

          MRS. McBRIEN:     Yes.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Can you answer that question? - A.
     I am sorry, would you say that again.

Q. What I think Mrs. McBrien's question was, was an option
   would have been to postpone the kick-off? - A. Yes.

Q. She is putting to you that we had a witness, a Police
   lady, a mounted lady, who said that when she told the
   crowd around her the kick-off was postponed it appeared
   to calm them.  If it had been officially announced via
   the tannoy why do you say it would not have had an
   effect, and didn't you have four minutes while you were
   waiting for responses to change your mind or to think
   about that? - A. The answer is that I did not make a
   request for the kick-off to be postponed, and as I said
   yesterday that is one of the questions that I have
   agonised over since this event.   My perception is that
   I don't think it would have made much difference.   I
   think the crowd were not taking any notice of the
   tannoy messages which were coming from the loudspeakers
   by the turnstiles, and they certainly were not taking
   any notice of the Land Rover public address system,
   which was in use constantly from about quarter-to-3
   onwards.

0.         MRS. McBRIEN:  But these people, if they were not
     taking any notice of any instructions that were given
     to them, were they the type to let into the ground? -
     A. I am sorry?

0.    They wanted to push forward, didn't they, so would it
     be right to let them into the ground, or would it be
     best to restrain those people, the more eager ones?    It
     would have a slowing down effect on them definitely,
     wouldn't it? - A. The postponement of kick-off?

Q.    Yes. - A. I can't say what effect it would have.    I
     have told you what was my feeling, that it would    not
     have made any difference at all.
                                                          64
                                                  R. MARSHALL



Q, Another option that could have been open to you is the
    movement of people along into the sterile area.   Have
    you considered that at all? - A. That was put to me at
    the Public Inquiry and I did not think that was an
    option at all because first of all there is a
    restraining barrier which runs from the wall just to
    the left of gate C and extends back towards the
   perimeter gates.   The crowd was jammed into that area.
  ' Inspector Purdy will have told the Inquest that he had
    to physically pull people, drag people from their
   positions in that crush and thrust them through gate C,
   and I personally don't think that people would have
   responded to a request to move into the South Stand
   road, because by so doing they would have surrendered
    their place in the queue which was formed.

Q. My son was at the turnstiles at 2.45 in the serious
   crushing, and he did move out and went to the sterile
   area and stood in front of gate C at that time, and I
   believe there were other people doing the same thing.
   The mounted Officers were not stopping them doing it,
   they were just allowing them to remain there because it
   was safer ....

          THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, please ask a
     question.  You are saying that your son moved, and
     indeed other people moved?

          MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes.

          THE CORONER:    Now, what is the question?

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Do you think it was safer for
     these people to go and stand in that sterile area than
     it was to remain at the turnstiles at that time? - A.
     In fact, I think some people did do that*  People
     obviously used their intelligence and did that but I
     cannot contemplate a situation where everyone would
     have moved into that area willingly.

0. I can understand that very well because I have heard
   witnesses in this Court give evidence and say that they
   remained in that area, even though they were tightly
   packed in it. Ratner than move away they had got to
   tnat position, they were so close to getting into the
   ground, and so that type of crushing  for them was not
   so serious that they had to run for safety.  Some had
   that choice.  Now outside, this is why I would like to
   point out or ask you in a question form if I could, do
   you think there was a difference between the crushing
   that occurred at the turnstiles to the crushing that
   developed in pens 3 and 4? - A. I really can't answer
   that question because I was not in pens 3 and 4, I was
   outside of the ground.
                                                     65

                                               R. MARSHALL



Q. I have heard a lot of evidence from people who were
   inside those pens and they did not care if four
   football teams were playing on the pitch that day ....

         THE CORONER:   No, he wasn't there. We have heard
    the other witnesses, the Jury have heard the other
   witnesses and they will form an opinion.   I don't think
   you can ask Mr. Marshall what the other people were
  ' thinking in a pen which he did not even see.




                   /MRS. McBRIEN:   No
                                                       66


                                       R. MARSHALL

          MRS. McBRIEN:  No.
Q.   So you do not feel that people could have even by
     force been moved to the sterile area and organisation
     and control regained in that area? - A. No.

Q.   There was no possibility of it? - A. No possibility at
     all.

Q.   There was plenty of space, you will agree with that,
     though, was there not? - A. Yes.

Q.   But the organisation, that was impossible? - A.
     Impossible.

Q.   When Gate C was opened at 2.48, that was not in
     response to the request you had made.  It opened
     because a fan was being ejected at the time, was he
     not? - A. I do not think Gate C was opened at 2.48.     I
     think it was later than that - 2.52 I think was the
     first opening.

Q.   Yes, I think this is the point.  The request you made
     and when it was acknowledged eventually, the opening
     in response to that request was at 2.52, yes, you are
     quite right, but the gate itself did open at 2.48, did
     it not?

Q.        THE CORONER:  Can I remind Mr. Marshall, I think
     you did actually say there was an opening for a short
     period of time, can you remember that? - A. Yes.

Q.   I think you initially in your evidence to me thought
     that that was in response to your request, but
     subsequently you said on viewing the video you
     realised that it was an ejection of a fan, and I
     actually went over this with you. - A. Yes.

Q.   So that is the one that Mrs. McBrien is talking about.
     - A. Yes.

Q.   That was at 14.48, I can tell you that, Mr. Marshall.
     - A. Yes.

          MRS. McBRIEN:  I wonder could I refer to the
     Taylor Inquiry, page 106, to deal with that matter,
     the transcript of your evidence at the Taylor Inquiry.

          THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I thought I had dealt
     with this for you in examination-in-chief.

          MRS. McBRIEN:   I would like to hear Mr. Marshall.

          THE CORONER: That is what he did.   He answered my
     questions.
                                                       67



                                       R. MARSHALL

          MRS. McBRIEN:   I am sorry, but I have not made a
     note of this.

          THE CORONER: Page 106, is it?

          MR. KING:   Sir, I think it is 106F.

           THE CORONER: I have got it marked. Can we give
      Mr. Marshall a copy of page 106.  (Handed). Can you
      just read from letter F down to H, please.  I will
      deal with it, Mrs. McBrien, because we have dealt with
      it and I will deal with it quickly because I know I
      asked him all these questions yesterday.
Q.   Have you read it? - A. Yes.

Q.   Are you happy with that? - A. Yes.

Q.   Do you stand by it? - A. Yes.

Q.   Would you like to read it out from F down   to the end
      of H? - A. Yes.

                "MR. COLLINS: You have told us that you
          hoped all three would be opened but you were
          aware very shortly after your request, in fact
          one minute because we know it was 2.48, of Gate C
          opening.  You say you then believed, did you,
          that that opening was as a result of your
          request? - A. I did.

     Q.   You now know, of course, that it was not. It was
          as a result of a rather foolish attempt by an
          Officer to eject a fan? - A. Well, I question the
          use of the word "foolish" but --

     Q.   All right. - A. The Officer was doing what he
          thought best. It was outside the instructions but
          it was expedient.

     Q.   In any event, the result of that was that there
          was a clear in-rush of a number of fans? - A.
          Yes.

     Q.   Did that relieve the pressure momentarily? - A.
          Yes, there was a temporary release of the
          pressure and I saw Inspector Purdy actually
          physically pulling people out from under the
          barrier and thrusting them through the gate."

          THE CORONER: It is actually dealt with in exactly
     those terms on page 33 of the transcript yesterday, so
     let us move on. Actually before we move on, have you
     got a burning question that you want to ask arising
                                 R. MARSHALL

out of that? If you have not got a burning question,
if you have got a question arising out of that?

     MRS. McBRIEN:  I just wondered why it was a
foolish attempt by an Officer to eject a fan, what
that means? - A. I did not use the word "foolish".   I
said it was outside his instructions but it was
nevertheless expedient.  The instructions said that
ejection should be through the Police Room, that
people should be taken to the Police Room and formally
ejected, having had their names and addresses taken,
but at that stage it was totally inexpedient to comply
with those instructions.

To make the request for the opening of the gates,
would you agree that it is completely contrary to
normal Police procedure? - A. Yes.

What would that entail, the opening of exit gates and
admitting fans into the stadium, what could it entail?
- A. Again I think I covered this yesterday.

I have not got the transcripts, but might that allow
into the ground ticketless fans? - A. Yes.

And people who had been drinking, so it was not part
of the Operational Order? - A. Certainly not.

It was certainly not part of the Contingency Plan
even? - A. No.

The only time that exit gates are opened normally, so
we have been told by the gatemen, is at the end of a
match? - A. Yes, they are usually opened about 10
minutes before the end of the game.

As they are wide gates people are able to come through
in large numbers, are they not? - A. Yes.

But it is not a thing you would see people doing as
going into the ground, is it? - A. No.

I just want to come back to 1988. Do you remember any
fans with Kop tickets that year? - A. With what?

Did you come across any Liverpool fans who had tickets
for the Kop end of the ground? - A. Yes.

Where did they go that year? - A. Perhaps if I could
indicate on the model, that might be the best way of
showing you.

     THE CORONER: On the map, do you mean? - A. On the
map or the model.
                                                       69


                                      R. MARSHALL

          THE CORONER: Put up the map, it is easier, C274.
     Do you see it on there or do you     need the model?~ A.
     If you want to look   at the Spion   Kop, an area tothe
     left of the lighting tower and the top north side of
     the Spion Kop, that   is an area that was cordoned off
     initially with tape   in 1988, and   again in 1989, as a
     sterile area.  I am sorry, it was not a sterile area,
     but an area for segregating Liverpool fans who had
     managed to obtain tickets to get on the Kop.   In 1988
     it was necessary to put a cordon of Police Officers
     between the Liverpool fans and the Nottingham fans to
     maintain order, stop them fighting each other.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN: In 1988 were there many people in
     that area? - A. Yes, there were, a lot of people in
     that area*

Q.   Can you give an estimate of the numbers? - A. Probably
     about 500 or 600.

Q.   Did they cause any problem that end? - A. Yes, there
     were lots of, shall we say, verbal exchanges between
     them and Nottingham Forest fans, a bit of skirmishing
     but no really serious disturbance because it was
     prevented by a strong presence of Police Officers.

Q.   So they were quite safe that end, there were no
     injuries to them? - A. No.

Q.   In 1989 we have heard here that people with tickets
     for the Kop end were allowed through the Leppings Lane
     turnstiles and allowed to go on the terraces that end.
     The turnstile operators say they were actually told by
     a Police Officer that they were to do this. Do you
     know anything about it? - A. I have no knowledge of
     that.

Q.   Would you say that at a semi-final there should be
     more security measures in place than on a normal match
     day? - A. What do you mean by "security measures"?

Q.   Making sure numbers who should not get into the
     ground, as I have just pointed out the Kop
     ticketholders, if they get into the wrong area then
     the numbers are going to be exceeded in that
     particular area, are they not? So it is important
     that security measures are taken, or safety measures?
     - A. I agree, yes.

Q.   This could also apply to ticketless fans, people who
     were without tickets at all.  If they somehow got into
     the ground the numbers again would be exceeded because
     there was only room for the people with tickets, was
     there not? - A. That is right, yes.
                                                      70


                                        R. MARSHALL

Q.   So if you exceed the numbers it can be a very
     dangerous situation? - A. Yes.

Q.   I believe since the tragedy the gates at Hillsborough,
     the main perimeter gates, are now used as a means of
     filtering, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q.   So they could have been done----

          THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, the fact is you learn
     from experience.




                              /MRS. McBRIEN:
                                                R. MARSHALL


   MRS. MCBRIEN: • Yes.

You were not aware of how many people went in through
Gate C, were you? - A. No.

No idea of the numbers but you did mention if only
one gate had been opened it would be dangerous? - A.
I am sorry, I am not with you.

  THE CORONER:    I do not remember that.

  MRS. McBRIEN:    It may have been in the Taylor Report.

The perimeter gates were I believe closed, the main
perimeter gate was closed round about 2.52 when Gate
C was opened? - A. Yes.

Some mounted Officers tried to secure that
position? - A. And foot Offices as well, yes.

Those people at the gate would undoubtedly see the
opening of the gate and the people in front of them
going through, wouldn't they, and so possibly this is
why the gate gave way at the time? - A. It can only
be a matter of conjecture on my part. I cannot put
myself into the minds of what those people thought.
I can tell you what they did but I cannot tell you
what they were thinking.

In hindsight do you think that things could have been
done differently in 1989?

     THE CORONER:   Just a minute. I think it is a
potentially incriminating question but if you wish to
answer you may do so. It is entirely up to you. - A.
It is an enormously difficult question that, Mrs.
McBrien, and clearly if we had known what we know now
then first of all the game might never ever have been
played at Hillsborough because for a start the split
in the ticket allocation which placed Liverpool once
again in an unfavourable situation compared to the
level of support which they attracted at League
games. From that point of view Hillsborough denied
Liverpool standing tickets and indeed made their
allocation more expensive. Even if the game had gone
ahead at Hillsborough then if I had known the sort of
problems which presented themselves on the day then
clearly it would have been better to have a kick-off
at 12 noon on Sunday, the 16th, which would have
removed the enormous consumption of alcohol which
took place. That would have been a significant
factor which I feel affected the behaviour. One
could make all sorts of comments about what might
have been and with hindsight things would clearly
have been different but having said that every human
decision, every human activity, can be improved with
                                                           72


                                                      R. MARSHALL


     the benefit of hindsight and I do not think I can
     really say any more about that situation.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Did you ever ask what the
     numbers were inside the ground? - A. No.

Q. At no time at all? - A. No.

       THE CORONER:   I missed what the question was.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I asked, sir, if Superintendent
Marshall knew what the numbers were inside the ground.

     THE CORONER:     He has already said no.   He has told us
that before.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:  You did say that when you asked
     for the gates to be opened you thought the ground
     would be empty. This is what you have said? - A.
     Yes.

Q. But you had seen 6,000 to 8,000 people at 2.15 and
   the turnstiles were operating properly at 2.15,
   weren't they, until about 2.35 I suppose? - A. Yes.

Q. So a number of those would have gone in? - A. I did
   not mean that there was absolutely no people present
   on the terrace. I have merely used that phrase as an
   expression of my feelings that the numbers outside
   from about 2.45 onwards were so great that there
   would be an enormous amount of space within the
   ground for the Liverpool fans.

Q. You do accept that quite a number, a few thousand,
   had gone on to the terraces? - A. Yes.

Q. You would not know where they would be on the
   terraces? - A. No.

Q. You told me earlier this morning that the most
   popular place was the centre. So the ones who went
   in earlier would probably find the premier spot
   there, wouldn't they?

     THE CORONER:   That is a conclusion. He has told you
where he thought was most popular.  He has told you that he
does not know where they were and I do not think you can
take it any further on that.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   On the day did you know which
     was Gate C, which was Gate A and which was Gate B? -
     A. No.

Q. Did you know that Gate C was situated in such a spot
   that it led directly to the tunnel? - A. Yes.
                                                        73


                                                 R. MARSHALL


Q. You did know that'. Would you know when you saw that
   gate opening, although you did not know the lettering
   of the gate and you did not know the name of it and I
   think you have just told me that, that the tunnel was
   directly in front of it? - A. Yes. As I am sure you
   are aware, there is now a big area of concrete behind
   the gate itself, the concourse area.

Q. Yes. Once you saw the crowd going in were you still
   on the bridge at that time? - A. Yes.

Q. You had no more thoughts in your mind about the
   crowd?

     THE CORONER:   I am sorry what was the question?     I
did not hear.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I am asking if the Officer had any
other thoughts in his mind about the crowd once the gates
had been opened? - A. Yes, I was preoccupied with the crowd
the whole of the time.

Q. The ones going in? - A. The ones going in, I still
   had a residual crowd outside and the situation in
   front of A Gate was unresolved when C Gate opened.

Q. So you did not concern yourself about where they
   would go? - A . No.

Q. There were somebody else's responsibility? - A. Yes.

Q. You have told me earlier you    did not    think of asking
   for the gates to be closed, for instance, to prevent
   ticketless fans going in. You only asked for them to
   be opened? - A. Yes.

Q. You assumed there would be room for all of them, all
   the people you could see would get in? - A. I had to
   balance the risk of X number of non-ticket holders
   going into the ground with the people who genuinely
   had tickets against the possibility of people being
   killed in the area of the turnstiles.

Q. So it was a risk? - A. It was a risk, yes.

Q. Do you know there is a photograph which shows Pens 3
   and 4? I am not sure of the time of this photograph
   though where the numbers are 643 and     678
   respectively.

     THE CORONER:   What is it you are wanting to ask, Mrs.
McBrien?

     MRS. McBRIEN: I am wondering what the references are
for the photograph.
                                                           74


                                                     R. MARSHALL


        THE CORONER:   But what is the point of the question?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   At three minutes past three that day
there were in those pens, in Pen 3, 1,500.

     THE CORONER:   No, it is not appropriate to ask this
Officer that question.

Q.    You were not in the pens, were you? - A. No, sir.

Q.    You did not seethem? - A.   I did go into the pens
     later on, but no.

Q. You had no idea how many people were in there? - A.
   No, sir.

        THE CORONER:   I do not think this is the man to ask
that.      He is outside most of the time.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I thinkI have covered      it all now.
Thank you very much, Superintendent.
     THE CORONER:   I have got a nasty feeling we are not
going to finish today with Mr. Marshall. On the other
hand, we have got to make progress.  If we rise for ten
minutes and then went on until about twenty past or half
past four will that be all right? Then I will decide what
time we start in the morning because we must get on. You
know how long we have taken already and if we do not make
some effort we shall be here next January. We rise for ten
minutes. This is a ten minute break and we will carry on.

                       (Short Adjournment )

                  Cross-Examined bv MR. RUSSELL:

Q. Superintendent, can I return to clear up the question
   of allocation of responsibility and duty between the
   Commander of Sector 1 and the Commander of Sector 2
   in the turnstiles? Did you hear that? - A. Yes.

Q. In 1988 you were the Commander of Sector 1? - A. Yes.

Q. In 1989 you were the Commander of Sector 2? - A. Yes.

Q. In formal terms, as Commander of Sector 1, your
   kingdom extended to the perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

Q. In real terms they extended to the groundside of the
   turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q. That was the position equally at the Leppings Lane as
   it was at the Penistone Road end? - A. Yes.

Q. You effectively swapped roles with Superintendent
   Greenwood in'1989 so that he having been outside the
                                                         75


                                                    R. MARSHALL


     turnstiies in command of Sector 2 in 1988 went inside
     the command of Sector 1 in 1989? - A. Yes.

Q. Some serials which according to the Operational Order
   were under the leadership of Sector 1 were during
   Phase 1 under your control in your province? - A.
   Yes.

Q. You had under you as Commander of Sector 2, two Chief
   Inspectors, Mr. Waring and Mr. Purdy? - A. Yes.

Q. Superintendent Greenwood had under him two Chief
   Inspectors, Chief Inspector Beale and Chief Inspector
   Creaser? - A. Yes.

       THE CORONER:   May I just stop you one minute?

Q. There was another chap called Purdy who is an
   Inspector, is he not? - A. Yes, they are not related.
   One is Inspector Bob Purdy who was the gentleman who
   I referred to as standing on the barrier beside A to
   G balanced like a tight rope walker. He is the chap
   who was pulling people out of the press and pushing
   them through the gate. The other chap is Chief
   Inspector Roger Purdy who was in charge of the north
   west area, I think it is Sector 2B.

      MR. RUSSELL:    I apologise if I have confused anyone.

     THE CORONER:   It is all right. It is just that
someone was confused initially and it ought to be just
worth pointing out that there are two people of the same
name. Forgive me for interrupting you.

Q.       MR. RUSSELL: Prior to the kick-off, during Phase
     1, one of Superintendent Greenwood's Chief
     Inspectors, Chief Inspector Creaser, spent a
     considerable amount of time outside the turnstiles? -
     A. Yes.

Q. He told us when he gave evidence that when he was
   outside the turnstiles, notwithstanding his position
   in the command structure according to the Operational
   Order, he considered himself answerable to you? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Would that perception of his position be in
   accordance with your understanding? - A. Yes.

Q. Of the relationship between you and him whilst he was
   outside the turnstiles notwithstanding how he is
   named in the Operational Order? - A. Yes.

Q. You and others have used the term Ground Commander
   and I hope the Jury are not confused as to the way in
   which it is used. Can I please establish what you
                                                          76


                                                    R. MARSHALL


     understand by the' title and the job of Ground
     Commander because there is a distinction, is there
     not, between the Ground Commander and Ground Command?
     - A. Yes.

Q. Can I summarise it in this way and you tell me if it
   is wrong; that the Ground Commander is the person
   named in the Operational Order as the person in
   charge of Sector 1? - A. Yes.

Q. That is in 1988 yourself? - A. Yes.

Q.   As such, you are the Officer in command inside the
     turnstiles subject to Ground Control in the Police
     Control Box? - A. Yes.

Q. Would that be a fair summary of the role of the
   Ground Commander? - A. Yes.

Q. As Ground Commander with that limit to your role you
   are dependent upon the eyes and ears that the Police
   Control Box that you, just as a person on his feet
   with a radio, does not have? - A. Yes.

Q.    I think during the course of your cross-examination
     by my learned friend, Mr. King, you gave one answer
     referring to a Ground Commander and I believe you
     meant Ground Control or the Control Box. Can I just
     please check it with you? You gave an answer to this
     effect, "The Ground Commander could have expected
     other gates to be opened in which case people could
     have made their way to other parts of the ground" and
     then you said, "If either Gates A or B had been
     opened first we would not be here". Do you remember
     that piece of your evidence? - A. Yes.




                          /Q.   From what you tell me about...
                                                            77



                                                   R. MARSHALL

Q. From what you tell me about the role of the Ground
   Commander and the way it is to be distinguished from
   Ground Control, by "Ground Commander" you were there
   meaning those people who knew that the gates were to be
   opened? - A. Yes, I should have made that clear.    I was
   speaking about Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
   Superintendent Murray in the Control Box.

Q. So your use of the expression "Ground Commander", you
   weren't meaning to refer to the Commander of Sector 1? -
   A. No.

Q. When discussing your role in 1988 with the Coroner you
   described yourself as a reference point.    Do you
   remember using that phrase? - A. Yes, I do.

Q.   As a    person to whom problems would be reported, ifthere
     were problems to be reported? - A. Yes.

Q. It was not a correct function of your role to spend your
   time radioing the Inspectors in the various locations in
   and around the ground to obtain progress reports? - A.
   No.
Q. If there were problems you expected to be told about
   them? - A. Yes.   I could have responded to a problem if
   I saw it myself.   I would not expect somebody else to
   respond to that.   I would do it myself.

Q. Can I take one example that Mrs. McBrien referred to that
   happened in 1988 when you were inside the ground, and
   that is the position on the Spion Kop. - A. Yes.

Q.   As Iunderstand it some Liverpool supporters hadobtained
     tickets for the Spion Kop and it was necessary to
     segregate them? - A. Yes.

Q. That was a source of tension and a potential flashpoint?
   - A. Yes.

Q.   Do you remember this that in fact specials had to be
     used? - A. I'm sorry...?

Q.   Truncheons had to be used? -A. I can't remember
     truncheons being used.

0. Was that an incident which was brought to your attention
   by an Inspector on the spot, or something you had noticed
   in the course of your moving around the ground? - A. My
   recollection may be faulty but it seemed to me that the
   trouble flared in that area shortly after kick-off.
   This is in 1988.   It was necessary to send a serial of
   Officers, in fact it might have been two serials of
                                                          78



                                                    R. MARSHALL

     Officers, to segregate the two opposing factions in that
     area.

          THE CORONER:   In 1989 the possibility of there
     being a flashpoint caused by the same factors, namely,
     Liverpool supporters with Kop tickets in the Kop, was a
     concern that the Police had? - A. Yes.

Q. Although in 1989 it was Superintendent Greenwood's
   concern rather than yours? - A. Yes.

Q. You told us that just before the kick-off, or at the
   kick-off, your location that you took up was by the
   players' tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. You describe that location as being purely a matter of
   coincidence? - A. Yes.

Q. Would a position by the players' tunnel give you a good
   or a bad vantage point for the majority of the ground
   with which you were concerned? - A. Yes.

Q. A good vantage point or a bad vantage point? - A. It
   would enable you to see directly on to the whole of the
   Kop, the whole of the North Stand, the whole of the West
   Stand and the whole of the Leppings Lane terraces and the
   north-west pen.

Q. Would it be fair to say that it would be difficult to
   find a spot which could give you a better vantage point,
   assuming you stayed on the ground? - A. Yes.

Q. You described it as being at about the half-way line.
   In fact, as we can see on the plan, it is rather towards
   the Spion Kop end of the playing area? - A* Yes.

Q. It is not at the half-way line itself but just towards
   the Spion Kop end? - A. Yes.

Q. I think if you turn round you can confirm that as we can
   see it from the layout of the... - A. Yes.

0.    Can I ask you about 1989.  Do you remember in 1989 when
     this fixture was played the manager of Nottingham Forest,
     Mr. Brian Clough, was serving a touch-line suspension for
     some matter that had happened in the preceding weeks, as
     a result of which he wasn't allowed to sit in the normal
     place on the managers' bench? - A. I understand so, sir.

Q,    You remember that? - A. You have reminded me ofit and I
     have remembered it, yes.

Q. Do you remember, or would you expect, that as a result of
   that there was considerable media interest in
                                              R. MARSHALL

Brian Clough? - A. I didn't see it myself but I
understand there was, yes.

Can you remember - you were asked what your position was
shortly before kick-off - but can you remember - I am
sorry, I am going back to 1988, I apologise for jumping
about - how you occupied your time before kick-off in
1988 before you took up your position by the players'
tunnel at kick-off? - A. Yes.    I patrolled around the
inside of the ground.  I went into the South Stand and I
spent some time in Penis tone Road alongside the entrances
to the Spion Kop.

Would it be fair to say that you toured your kingdom
without paying any particular regard to any particular
location? - A. Yes.

You told us that you had great difficulty in telling
whether or not a pen or enclosure on the terrace is over­
crowded.   I would like you to consider for a moment what
outwards signs might have been outwards signs of
normality or whether you thought that such outward signs
would indicate a normal situation or an abnormal one.
You have been asked already, and I won't go back over it,
about climbing up into the stands, which you did not
regard as abnormal. - A. Yes.

If you saw in a terrace a beach ball or beach balls being
popped around in the are by people in a terrace, would
you consider that to be an outward sign of a normal or
abnormal terrace? - A. A normal terrace.

We have heard from a number of football supporters that
it is customary when the teams are announced prior to the
kick-off for the football supporters to cheer each member
of the team as the name is read out and also to punch the
air by way of a salute.   Have you seen that happen? - A.
Yes.

Would you regard that as an outward sign of a normal
terrace or an abnormal terrace? - A. Normal.

Three more matters.   You have described the briefincs
which you attended on the 15th of April and told us that
following Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's briefing
there was a briefing given by Superintendent Murray? - A.
Yes.

Now there were four Superintendents under Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield.    There was Superintendent
Murray, Superintendent Greenwood, yourself and
Superintendent Chapman, who was doing the same job as
yourself but at the Penis tone Road end? - A. Yes.
                                                      80



                                                R. MARSHALL

Q. Why did Superintendent Murray give a supplementary
   briefing after Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and not
   any of the other Superintendents, of which you were one?
   - A. Well, there are two questions there.
   Mr. Duckenfield's approach was, shall we say, the broad
   brush approach, the overall strategy, how it was to be
   accomplished in broad brush terms.    Mr. Murray's
   briefing dealt with the nitty-gritty of how that was
   going to be achieved.   Now I can't speak for
   Superintendent Greenwood or Superintendent Chapman, but I
   prepared very detailed notes to brief the people who were
   working for me which were complementary to the
   information which had already been imparted by
   Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent
   Murray.   I carried out a briefing of two Chief
   Inspectors and about nine Inspectors.    That took place
   on the Friday before the event on the Saturday.

Q. The briefing that you have described Superintendent
   Murray giving took place on the Saturday.   Was that to
   everybody who had listened to Chief Superintendent
   Duckenfield's briefing or only to particular Sector
   Inspectors? - A. No, that was to everyone, to 800
   Officers.

Q. The briefing that you gave was more limited and more
   local to your own Chief Inspectors and Inspectors? - A.
   Yes.
Q. The second last matter I want to consider is the question
   of off-licences.   On your tour that you made up until
   2.15 you told us that you made inspection of areas which
   included some off-licences? - A. Yes.




                    Q. It is right that there
                                                                81
                                                        R. MARSHALL



        Q. It is right, isn't it, that there is an enormous
           supermarket, a Gateway supermarket, in Penis tone Road
           North, towards Halifax Road? - A. Yes, in Kilner Way.

    B   Q. It is adjacent to either Penistone Road or Halifax
           Road? - A. Yes.

        Q. And that has a large off-licence department? - A. Yes.

        Q. Do you remember whether that large supermarket, do you
           remember anything about that, what sort of trade it was
           doing on that day? - A. It was doing a roaring trade.

        Q. Because it was Saturday or because there was a football
           match down the road, as far as you knew? - A. Because
           there was a football match on that day.

        0. Finally I want to turn to your perception of what P.C.
           Buxton was announcing from the Land Rover., When you
           saw the Land Rover you, as I understand it, were on the
           bridge? - A. Yes.

        0. You have told my learned friend Mr. King quite frankly
           that you can't remember the precise words that P.C.
           Buxton was using.

                MR. KING:   I am sorry to interrupt, but he told
           me he could not hear the words.  He agreed that what he
           said in the transcript I put to him was correct.

                MR. RUSSELL:   If I said something different from
           that I apologise:

        Q. You could not hear tne precise words used by P.C.
           Buxton? - A. No, I could not hear the precise words
           that he was using.

        0. When you were giving your evidence in chief to the
           Coroner, you said that P.C. Buxton was imploring
           people, and you used that verb. Why did you use that
           verb? Why did you think that P.C. Buxton was imploring
           people?  Is that something that you gathered from the
           tone of what he was saying, notwithstanding you could
           not hear the words, or what? - A. I think it was his
           facial expressions.

        0. So you used the word imploring from the demeanour of
           P.C. Buxton? - A. Yes.

                MR. PAYNE:   When Mr. King asked questions he did
           open up two topics, sir, which are of general
           application to the Police.




H
Is

                                                                   82
                                                              R. MARSHALL



                     THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, you know it is my usual
                practice - I have not forgotten you, Mr. Hale.

                        Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE
         B   0. The first topic, Superintendent Marshall, was that you
                were asked questions about what would be obvious to
                Ground Control and I would just like to follow that up,
                please, in the context of what occurred.  First of all,
                can you just deal with these broad questions.  In the
                whole of your career in which you have been concerned
                with policing football crowds, have you ever before had
                to cope with crowd behaviour as occurred here? - A. Not
                on the outside of a football ground.  I have certainly
                had my moments with crowds on terraces.

             Q. Yes, but with regard to the behaviour of the crowd
                outside the turnstiles, have you ever had to cope with
                crowd behaviour of that sort before? - A. No.

             Q. Can you say how many times in your career you have had
                to request the opening of gates to let in a crowd to
                avoid the risk of injury outside the ground, as
                happened here? - A. Never before.

             Q. Of course, everyone knows now what happened when the
                gates were, in fact, opened, and in the light of that
                knowledge you have been asked about the case for, you
                have given evidence now for two days, and I want to ask
                you about the four requests which you made to open the
                gates, which you made in the five minute interval
                between 2.47 and 2.52.  From the point of view of
                Ground Control when you made those requests, following
                up Mr. King's words, would it have been obvious that
                these requests were being made in circumstances where
                the planning for the event had been overwhelmed? - A.
                Yes.

             0. And would you say that it would be fair to say that
                those requests when they were received and the
                circumstances were that there was an unprecedented
                pressure of events? - A. I am sure you appreciate that
                it is very difficult for me to anticipate what my
                colleagues were thinking at the time in ttie Control Box
                Perhaps that is a matter which you would wish to
                address to them individually.

             Q. Well they will be asked about that, but you have been
                asked a lot of questions about Ground Control which is
                why I am following this up with you now.  Perhaps I can
                take it from your point of view.  Is it fair to say
                that this decision and your request to open the gates
                was made in a situation of unprecedented pressure of
                events? - A. Yes.




     H
                                                       83
                                                 R. MARSHALL



Q. Is it obvious that the reason for the opening of the
   gates, as you have said, was to save the lives of
   people outside? - A. Yes.

Q. You have been asked questions and the effect of the
   questions you were asked was to the effect that if pens
   3 and 4 were full would it be obvious that you would
   want to divert the crowd from going down the tunnel.
   When you were first asked that you said yes, with
   hindsight, and then you were asked some other questions
   about it, and I want to ask you some questions about
   the context in which that occurred by reference to the
   plans and photographs that we have, so can you take the
   folder and find the plan C274? - A. Yes.

0. I want you to remind yourself please and help the Jury,
   just to remind us of the whereabouts of the gates to
   bring this point into context.  Your request was that
   the order should be given to open the gates? - A. Yes.

Q. Starting from the bottom we can see where gate C is, we
   know that? - A. Yes.

0. We can see where gate B is between the two sets of
   turnstiles? - A. Yes.

0. And up to the top end of the long range of turnstiles
   we can see gate A? - A. Yes.

Q. Just to remind ourselves, can you look at the
   photograph of gate B which is at 259? - A. Yes.

Q.    This is a substantial gate and the view that you had at
     the time at which you were making the requests for the
     gates to be opened was from the area of the bridge,
     wasn't it? - A. Yes, the bridge parapet.

Q. So of course the foreground of this photograph ws
   absolutely jam packed with people? - A. Yes.

Q.    Over their heads you would be able to see, roughly
     speaking, that view of gate B, would you? - A. Not a
     good view of gate B, because of the position in which I
     found myself.

Q. You have told the Court that you knew where the three
   gates were, of course, although you did not know their
   actual letters? - A. Yes.

Q. Bearing that diagram and that photograph in mind I want
   you now please to look at a photograph which is a still
   from the video which was being taken from the corner of
   the Stand.  Unfortunately this is one of the
   photographs which we have discovered does not go very
Ur
                                                                          84
                                                                    R. MARSHALL



                   well on the acetate, but the Jury have got these
                   copies.  It is C333.  It is the one at 2.50 on 15.4.89.
                   It is not numbered. The timing on it for reference is
                   at 14.50.16 and the date is 15.4.89. Just to see where
         UI        that is taken from - sorry to jump about - I ought to
                   have drawn attention to this, I wonder if Sergeant
                   Griffiths would put up C274 on the screen?   If you just
                   look at the screen for the moment, and look at the
                   bottom left-hand corner of the West Stand as we look at
                   it, you can see CCTV, a little black blob? - A. Yes.

              Q. That is the camera from which this photograph is taken,
                 so that is the view which was shown on the video at
                 14.50 in the Control Box inside the ground, you see
                 that? This is just about half-way through the time
                 when you, as we now know, are making your request for
                 the gates to be opened? - A. Yes.

              0.   You started at .47 and finished at .52?   - A.     Yes.

              0.   And here we are at .50? - A. Yes.

              Q. Looking at this video extract, which is what they would
                 see inside the ground on their screens, do you see the
                 throng outside the turnstiles? - A. Yes.

              Q. Outside turnstiles A-G, yes? - A. Yes.

              0. Then over to the right one can see just beyond the
                 bigger bank of turnstiles part of the crowd there? - A.
                 Yes.

              Q. Extending up Leppings Lane? - A. Yes.

              Q. Just to find out where these gates are, gate C although
                 you can't see it, but it is in the foreground and we
                 can see exactly where it is, it looks as if there may
                 be people going through it in this photograph, it is
                 not quite clear? - A. Yes.

              Q. Gate B we can't actually see but we know where it is,
                 concealed behind turnstiles A-G? - A. Yes.

              0. You see that? - A. Yes.

              Q. We can't see gate A because it is off the screen to the
                 right? - A. Yes.

              0. So this is what they can see inside the ground.  Now,
                 if the order to open the gates was given inside the
                 ground, where would you expect the crowd to enter the
                 ground - sorry, if the order was complied with where
                 would you expect the crowd to enter? - A. The logical




     H
                                                      85
                                               R. MARSHALL



  place would have been gate B because that is hard
  against the actual crush of people.

Q. Can you see just to the right of where we know gate B
   is there is a white rectangle? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. Do you actually know what that was? - A. Yes, I think
   that was the little Portacabin for storing property
   which had been confiscated from fans, such as flagpoles
   and big banners and that sort of stuff.

Q. So the view of the people inside the ground if they
   looked at this screen, they can't see gate B but if
   people come in they come in and then go past that
   Portacabin? - A. Yes.

0. Now, just bearing those points in mind, Mrs. McBrien
   asked you about, I think the expression was "normal
   fans" or words to that effect, who might go into the
   tunnel but then come back out of the tunnel if they
   found that the pens were full.   Do you remember being
   asked about that? - A. Yes.

Q. We all know, of course, exactly what happened now, but
   going back to the period and the state of knowledge as
   it was at the time of this match, before this match
   would you have said that it was obvious to you that
   part of a crowd would push down the tunnel into a full
   pen, so as to cause such a dreadful crush? - A. No.




              MRS. McBRIEN:   Excuse me a minute ....
                                                    86



                                      R. MARSHALL

         MRS. McBRIEN:  Excuse me a minute, please, Mr.
    Payne. Mr. Payne said "normal fans". What I said was
    in a normal situation fans would go down the tunnel
    and then come back, in a normal situation.  I did not
B   say "normal fans".

         MR. PAYNE:   Thank you very much.

         MRS. McBRIEN:   I am sorry to interrupt.

         MR. PAYNE:   Not at all.

         THE CORONER:  I think Mrs. McBrien is actually
    right.  I had overlooked it, but I think she is right.

         MR. PAYNE: Thank you very much, Mrs. McBrien.
    Whatever was or was not obvious, Mr. Marshall, what
    period of time are we talking about in which these
    things were or were not obvious? - A. The timescale, I
    suppose, would be   about 3 to 4 minutes.

    Right.  Can you turn from those photographs, because
    that is all I am going to ask you about on the topic
    ofobvious.  The   other topic that Mr. King asked you
    about was the planning and procedure, and I will be
    corrected if I am   wrong but I think it is fair to say
    that he asked you   about this under three heads and
    without going through the whole cross-examination, the
    heads can be collected in criticisms under these heads
    - criticisms based on radial fences, criticisms based
    on the system of crowd control and criticisms based on
    the system of distribution of the crowd.    Broadly,
    without going through the cross-examination, can you
    remember being asked questions about that for a good
    length of time yesterday? - A. Yes.

    I want to ask you about that matter, please, and put
    it in context.  Before this disaster, are you aware of
    any of those criticisms ever having been made by
    anyone connected with the Sheffield Wednesday Football
    Club, broadly I am talking about? - A. No.

    You understand the point.  I do not want to take up
    time by going through everything, but he is
    complaining about the system of radial fences, the
    systems of crowd control and the systems of
    distribution, do you understand? - A. Yes.  If I could
    elaborate on the radial fences, there again this is
    not within first-hand knowledge, these are matters
    which I have since researched.

    I do not want to stray into something out of order.
    The question I am asking you is quite precise and it
                                                     R7



                                      R. MARSHALL

     is were you aware of any such criticism being made
     before this disaster? - A. No.

Q.   Were you aware that an engineer was appointed to issue
     Certificates of Ground Safety, as required by the
     Local Authority Safety Certificate? Did you know that
     there was such a person? - A. The system, as I
     understand it, is that Sheffield Wednesday have
     consultant structural engineers which are Dr.
     Eastwood's company.

Q.   That is all I want to know, that will do. Were you
     aware of any of the criticisms made by Mr. King having
     been made before the disaster by the engineer? - A.
     No.

Q.   You know this ground was chosen in 1987, 1988 and 1989
     to host the semi-final by the Football Association? -
     A. Yes.

Q.   Were you aware of any of these criticisms having been
     made by the Football Association? - A. No.

Q.   Do you know that the City Council had issued a Safety
     Certificate which had been in force for many years? -
     A. Yes.

Q.   Are you aware of any of these criticisms having been
     made by anyone from the City Council before the
     disaster? - A. No.

Q.   You know that the previous match, 1988, was identical,
     of course, that is well-known? - A. Yes.

Q.   Are you aware of any of these criticisms being made
     before the disaster by anyone connected with Liverpool
     Football Club? - A. No.

Q.   Do you know that there was a system of inspection of
     the ground attended by interested parties, including
     the Fire Service, which took place from time to time?
     - A. Yes.

Q.   Are you aware of any of these criticisms before the
     disaster ever having been made by the Fire Service? -
     A. No.

          MR. PAYNE:   Thank you.

          THE CORONER: I am not happy about continuing now.
     Mr. Marshall has been a long time today and there is
     you, Mr. Isaacs, and maybe Mr. Manning, and I expect
     Mr. King may want to say one or two things and there
     is Mr. Hale.  I just want to ask a couple of questions
                                                      88


                                        R. MARSHALL

     which the Jury have raised with me so that I do not
     forget them, and then we will adjourn.

          MR. ISAACS:    Very well, I am obliged.

          THE CORONER:   We will decide on the time in a
     moment.

                   Further by THE CORONER:

Q.   Can I just ask you these two questions, Mr. Marshall,
     which the Jury have asked me to ask and then I know I
     have asked them. You mentioned the message about Mr.
     Meadows, do you recollect that? - A. Yes.

Q.   In an emergency? - A. Yes.

Q.   The question is if such an emergency were to arise, or
      had arisen, who would have broadcast that message, or
      where would it have emanated from? - A. It would have
      emanated from the Police Control Room where there is a
      facility to override the normal disc jockey's music
      system which pipes music into all areas of the ground.

Q.   The second question is related to it but it affects
     you.  The question is when you realised what the
     situation was like outside the turnstiles, did you
     consider relaying a message which would lead to the
     above message, i.e. Mr. Meadow's required being read
     out? Did you consider that? - A. No sir.

Q.   Forgive me, there are four questions.   You told us
      that your radio was out of order for a period? - A.
      Yes.

Q.   At least it appeared to you to be out of order. With
     it not working, did you consider either going yourself
     or sending somebody to Ground Control to appraise them
     of the situation outside between 2.15 and 2.45? - A.
     No.  In hindsight it might not have been a bad idea,
     but I did not think of it at the time.

Q.   Would it have been possible for you to get in touch
     with your Serial Sergeants and Inspectors on your
     radio to call them in for assistance? I think they
     mean the people further out, further afield? - A. Yes.
     It would have been possible to get hold of the
     Sergeants, but none of the Constables had radios.   So
     to get the Constables there they would have had to
     have been informed by word of mouth, which all takes
     time, of course.  The Sergeants could have drummed up
     their serials, distributed maybe over an area of 200
     or 300 yards, got them into a body of Police Officers
     and then come but, of course, that takes time.
                                                       89



                                        R. MARSHALL

Q.   Can you remember that when Gate C was actually opened,
     was your radio operational or non-operational at that
     point? - A. I can't really remember.  I think it was
     working again. The hiatus with the communications had
     been resolved at that stage.

Q.   But you cannot really remember at this stage? - A. I
     can't remember.

Q.   There is just one minor point. Mr. Payne put it to
     you that the City Council had issued the Safety
     Certificate 11 years ago.  Strictly speaking I think
     it was South Yorkshire County Council, and the City
     Council took it over. You would accept that, would
     you not? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   Nothing turns on it, it is simply to get it right. -
     A. Yes.

          THE CORONER:    Ladies and gentlemen, if we started
     at quarter-to 10 tomorrow, would everybody fall over
     backwards and say, "That'sdreadful"? I do not think
     it will worry you too much, but what about the
     representatives? Would that be very inconvenient, or
     would you rather I stayed at 10 o'clock? Mr. Manning
     would rather stay at 10 o'clock. You do not have to
     plead.   I do not want to inconvenience you more than I
     have to.    We will start at 10 o'clock, but be
     prepared, if need be, to go on until about this time
     again tomorrow.    It depends on how we do, but we must
     make a bit of progress for everybody's sake.

          Mr. Marshall, I am exceedingly sorry that we have
     not  finished today. Would you mind being     back
     tomorrow on the usual terms and conditions about
     discussing this.

           Can we estimate how long we think we are going to
     be?   Anybody got any ideas?

          MR. ISAACS:  I would not have thought any more
     than half-an-hour at the very most.  Certainly I shall
     be a lot less than that, and I cannot anticipate that
     very many people will have very much to say.

          THE CORONER: In that case, we should be all right
     tomorrow.

          MR. KING:  Can you help on which would be the
     witnesses we are hearing tomorrow following Mr.
     Marshall?

          THE   CORONER: Yes. Tomorrow then the plan is to
     have Mr.   Hicks, Mr. Fortune, Mr. Rex, Mr. Tudor, Mr.
                                                90



                                 R. MARSHALL

Hand, Mr. Taylor and P.C. McGuinness and, of course,
Mr. Marshall at the beginning.  It looks a long list
but I think we will manage it - at least I hope so.
Just so that you know, these are all people, apart
from Mr. Hicks, of course, who was not in Pen 3 and
Mr. McGuinness was not in Pen 3, who were in Pen 3 and
they all have got some connection in some respect with
your daughters in some ways, Mr. Hicks.  That is not
the only reason why I am calling them, but it is
convenient to do so. Ladies and gentlemen, 10 o'clock
then.

     (The Inquests were adjourned until 10 o'clock
              the following morning)
