                                                                                              M I R . 15


                                                                                                                    &    %             •

    OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                             Date and tim e raised   ^   *   c?         O     •     Number



, :J Xitlr \      \                    P"T~      XJJ-         ^                               f v~~Z-,,5.i<^aM-                            ^
$ f'J&pclude source and any document number i f relevant)

         /
    Receiver*1? instructions — urgent action — Yes/No   ___
                                                                                                                        Receiver




                                                                                                                        Indexer
    D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

    No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                    Statement Reader
    Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                        Indexer
    Indexed as indicated

    No(s) o f actions raised

    Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                   SIO




    Further action No(s)                                                                                                Indexer


    When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
      HE R M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH Y O RKSH IRE
                           (WEST D I S T R I C T )



              INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

        VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                     STADIUM DISASTER

                 ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



                 INQU ES T INTO THE DEATH OF


                VINCENT MICHAEL FITZSIMMONS




                            Before

DR.    S.L.   POPPER,   LL.B,    B.MED.Sci,   B M , B S , MRCGP

                  (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                                At

                 The Medico- Le ga l Centre,
                      Watery Street,
                        Sheffield.

                                On

                     26th April,     1990




                 TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




         Fro m the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
               Offi c i a l Shorthand Writers,
          55, Quee n Street, She ffi eld SI 2DX
                                                                                       i:\0sx




                        O P EU IU G          STATgHi^r              BY     T H E ' COftOKErf



                        D ll.      L.     i 'l *   Di'Zi'i.iAivrC C a l l e d

                                .By     The        C oron er
                    B
                        G.      E.      E V A i'l S     C a lle d

                                • /     The        C oron er



                        PICT.          IN S P .       :i.   L A Y T O il   C a lle d
                    C
                                i 2/    The        C o ro n e r




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        2 :>tn A ;>r i 1,   19 ^ 0


                        Ii-iXJhlSr INTO IT!£ DEATH Or VIRCEUT dICH*r;L r I IZSL-h-iOPS


                               t i:’RAS ERs     Sir, the next evidence you will hear
                        relates   to 7incent Fitzsimmons       ‘
                                                               / incant's co;nnson lav/
                         ;ifa, sir    is present in Court with a social worker.         I
                        a,; >ear through'   the  usual agency arrange>-.ients, as
                    B   ine/nher ot the Steering Co:Jtinittee, cor her solicitors,
                        who are a oaaber of our group.

                               THE COROMER:            Is that Marjorie i/ilde?

                               r!R l’RASER:          It is, yes.

                               TtlE CORONER:           Is it you?

                                 iRS. >i. A. dlLDE:             Yes.

                               UR FRASER:   Sir, Urs. wil.de regards nerself vary
                        ■iiuch as Vincent1s wife in every acceptable sense of tiie
                        word but for the record, strictly speaking sne cannot,
                        of course, be described as that, but the relationship
                    D   was a lon.^-standing and very solid one.

                              niE CORONER:     ue nave got the facts right, but I
                        know that, and that is why I wanted to address you
                        correctly by naaa.     tfhat we are going to do in a moment
                        or two is I aiii going, to read out to you what happened
                        when I opened the Inquest on 19th April, and when I
                        have done that, I will just confirm the facts, then I
                    E   awt going to tell you what the alcohol levels were that
                        Dr. Forrest told us on the first day when we opened
                        last week.    Then Dr. Denmark, who is a pathologist, is
                        going to co.ae and he is going to tell .-sie and everybody
                        else wnat the pathological findings are, and then we
                        are going to have the Police Officer who is going to
                        present a suo»«iary to tne, and Inspector Layton, who is
                        going to deal with the visual evidence.      when that is
                        done we are going to conclude at this stage and tnat
                        will be the end of the Inquest as far as we can take it
                        today.   I ai3 telling you this so taat you can
                        understand the procedure and so that you know what is
                        coding, and so that you are not surprised.

                             The only other two things I want to say is,
                        firstly, all the people have already been sworn so they
                    G   won't be taking the oath again; and secondly, sorae of
                        the evidence, we refer to plans with lots of reference
                        numbers.  Try not to allow that to distract you.

                                This is a resumed Xnc-uest, opened on l‘>th April.,
                        Iv*; ,j, and osi tnat occasion   iil Anthony Parkin.
                        Coroner's officer, said:
                H

                                                        -   1   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
    "The body which is the subject of tais Inquest has
    been identified to DC 2752 Crowther of the Soutn
    Yorkshire Police as that of Vincent i-iicnaal
    Fitzsimmons by rlarjorie i/ilde, lis girlfriend.   He
    v/as 34 years of age, having been born on 30th
    January 1955 at Liverpool.    He was a divorced m an
    and he lived at
                 wigan.  lie was a moulding technician
    oy occupation.

    i£e died at Hillsborough Football Ground following
    an incident there on Saturday 15th April, 1019.
    DC 2502 Kilby caused the body to be removed to the
    medico-Le:>al Centre and there ne identified it to
    Selective Constable Simon ’Jeigold, who
    subsequently identified tire same body to Or.
    Denmark.   It is the family wish tnat the body
    should be buried'*.

and, this is another case where the identification
evidence in the initial Inquest was wrong.   Simon
i/eigold did not identify this body to mr. Denmark.

     I wrote to you, do you remember, in April last
year, and I asked you to confirm tnat we had all the
names right?  I sent you a form, and you signed it and
in fact we had got it rignt, all tne details, and what
I nave cead out is correct, isn't it?

     fh?S. il. tJILDH:          Yes.

     THE COfJOiSEil: I have already indicated that Or.
Forrest did all tne blood alcohols, and in fact in tne
case of Vincent tne result -was negative.

            i)a. LLOYD iifilL DEHIiArt* Called:

                         !>■/   I11IK   C O ftO K E ,*:

Dr. Denmark, just give us your names for the benefit of
the snortnand writer, please? - A. Lloyd ;Iei 1. Denmark.

And you are based at Leeds, aren't you, in tne
Department of Forensic medicine? - A. Yes.

How you carried out a post mortem on this young man,
michael Vincent Fitzsimmons, is that right? - A. That
is correct.

Can you just remind me how you satisfied yourself with
regard to his identity? - A. The body had the name
written on the leg.  I was given a form with various
details on it, including a number which was also
written on the body, and I matched up the number and
                                                iM .   L.   OEtJHAitiC


the body, and we then took a photo as well to cover
ourselves.

0. Yes, and just one uiinor point, but you agree that tnere
   is a typographical error on the form? - A. Yes.

0. Tne date of death snould be 15tn April, snouldn't it? -
   A . I es .

(). If you would be kind enough - I thinic tne body number
    was 21, wasn't it? - A. 21, yes.

(). Dr. Denmark, would you be kind enough to give me your
    cause of deata and also the basis on whicn you arrived
    at it please? - A. Tne cause of death given was
    traumatic aspayxia.

0. Yes, and on what did you base that? - A. This was based
   on the findings of multiple petechial haemorrhages into
   tne conjunctiva and the face, and tne presence of
   purplish congestion above the level of the neck.

0. Did you find any serious injuries?  There were a few
   superficial injuries .... - A. A few superficial
   scratches and bruises but nothing of any note.

0. And none of those injuries in themselves would nave
   ...? - A. Contributed, no.

0. And Dr. Denmark, could you ....

          fi!E C0!t0i'l£rt:   You weren't here on tne opening
     day, were you?

           H:IS. ii. A. WILDK:     Ho.

0.        THE COiKMER:   l-Jould I be right in thinking that
     in a case of traumatic asphyxia death supervenes in
     maybe four to five minutes, but the loss of
     consciousness may be a little bit sooner than that?
     Can you just elaborate? - A. Yes.    I don't think anyone
     is certain now long really death takes in some of these
     cases.  I think it depends on various factors.

0. Yes. - A. But certainly unconsciousness can supervene
   relatively early in the process.

0. iJhat would you estimate?   Ue have had various estimates
   from your colleagues, including Dr. Siva - A. U'ell,
   what did Dr. Siva say?    I would put it 10, 15 seconds.

0. You are spot on with all your colleagues.  In other
   words, once it happens the person loses consciousness
   and of course he then does not realise what is going on
   any more? - A. That is right.  The early phase, in
   fact, would be a fainting-like procedure when the
congestion first ;nounts.      He would be unaware tro;,i tnen
onwards.

Yes.  I assii.ua, as ;.iost of your colleagues nave done,
that if iiarjorie Wilde wanted to talk to you
afterwards, you would be willing to give ner a few
minutes of your tine? - A. Certainly.      illa only other
point I would cuake is that there was no significant
natural disease contributing to the death.

That is vary kind.       Thank you very much indeed.

     iiR FRASER:       i-Jo questions, sir, thank you.

     TH£ C0R0i3F.fi:     Any questions froa any of you?    (no
response)

           GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVAdS Called

                       ay THE CORONER:

     TtlE wITuESS:   I asa Geraldine Elizabeth Evans of
the West iiidlands Police.   At about 1120 nours on
Saturday 15th April 1939 Hs. iiarjorie Uilde saw ner
boyfriend Vincent Fitzsieauions leave their noiae i*ith tne
intention of travelling to Sheffield.

Can I just stop you?     I think it is Vincent Michael
PitzsLmaons.     I think it is an error in the su:mnary.
Put his full naoie in just that once.    It is not your
fault, I didn't see it either.     Then you can refer to
hi.'ii any way, whichever way you are couifortable.  Just
start the sentence again. - A. At about 112*3 hours on
Saturday 1 5 tn April 19H9, Us. Marjorie iJilde saw ner
boyfriend, Vincent Michael FitzsL^aons, leave their
hOtsie with the intention of travelling to Sheffield.     He
was icnown to have a ticket fro,,i the Cup Seal binal at
Hillsborough Stadiuui.

       A John Steven Richardson and Graham Richardson and
Uilliaiii i-Joods travelled on a coach with Vincent,
arriving in Sheffield near to the Hillsborough Stadium
at about 1445 hours.      All four men joined the large
crowd outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles and entered
the stadium via a large gate which was opened to the
rigiit of the turnstiles, which is referred to as Gate
C . J They entered enclosure 3 and John Richardson last
saw Vincent further down tne terracing in front of a La.

     Following the severe crushing in tne West Stand
terracing, Chief Superintendent John Hesbit and
Sergeant Eddison were at the perimeter gate in
enclosure 3, assisting to remove casualties.   They
helped to remove a saan, now known to be Hr.
Fitzsimmons, fro;ti the enclosure.
                                                    G. C. EVAnS
                                                      M. LAY i'Ovi


      PC Snir.iv/e11 assisted to carry Vincent onto the
pitch.   The Officer attempted resuscitation, assisted
b y a St. John's Ambulance Officer, wno has not been
identified, but without success.      PC Shi iwell covered
Vincent wita his Police anorak and left ni.r; to try and
assist other casualties.

        Stephen John riitton was a spectator at the snatch
and want onto the pitch to assist.      He helped to carry
a number of injured and deceased parsons including
Vincent frora the Leppings Lane and of the pitch to the
gy.'.jnasiUiTj

     PC Kilby aas directed to the gy-.anasiuia_vmere a
temporary mortuary nad been set up.   The Officer was
given responsibility for Vincent who at that ti>:ie was
lying in the gymnasium.  The Officer checked hina for
signs of life but could not fine any.

     At 1503 hours Dr. Colin David Walsh examined lie .
PitzsiiMons in tne temporary mortuary and certified
life extinct.

      PC Kilby later escorted the body of        Vincent to the
:ledico-Lega1 Centre and at 1130 hours on        Sunday 16th
April 1989 iiarjorie Uilde identified tne        body of
Vincent Michael Fitzsimmons to Detective         Constable
Crowther at tne Medico-Legal Centre.

     On 16th April, 1989, Dr. Lloyd Denmark carried out
an autopsy and submitted a report giving the cause of
death .
      found in the personal effects of Vincent was a
full ticket for the raatcn.  It has been established
that he entered the stadiuni via Gate C.  i'nis concludes
my suai.nary, sir.

     iiijl FRASER:    iIo questions from the family, sir,
thank you.

      THE CORQilER:     Thank you very rauch indeed.

              PET.    IdSP. 11. LAYTON Called:

                       By THE CORONERr

     THE WITUESS:    Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
Inspector, ’Jest Midlands Police.  Sir, an examination
nas been .nade of the visual evidence in respect of
Vincent and he has been identified alive outside the
ground, also being removed from enclosure nu.nber 3, and
also being carried across the pitch.

     Sir, Marjorie dilde has assisted in an effort to
identify Vincent's locations and she nas, in fact,
                                                       LA YT Oi t



   identified hi*» on a photograph wnica nas been given the
   reference number iiwL!0/37A, and sir, tnat photograph is
   ti.vjed at 1457, and shows a crowd scene outside the
   Leppings Lane turnstiles, and in fact quite near to
   Cate C, as has been referred to.

        Sir, Sergeant Eddison and Chief Superintendent
   Uesbit of the South Yorkshire Police have identified
   themselves on a video, and that is a 3JC video tape,
   sir, which has been given the reference number iiAi? 7,
   and that is timed at 1521:35:21, and at this stage tney
   are shown assisting to remove Vincent from enclosure
   number 3.  Sir, I think in fact it is actually through
   Gate number 3 at that stage.

        PC Snimweil has identified himself on a 33C video,
   again tSAP 7, timed at 1521:43:04, and at this stage he
   is attempting to carry Vincent onto the pitch.

        Stephen John Miitton has identified himself
   carrying, together with other supporters, a hoarding
   across the pitch and that is shown, sir, specifically
 . on a photograph reference T0D1/8.   He did not know,
   sir, the identity of that person but I am satisfied
   that it is in fact Vincent.

        Can I refer you, sir, to a plan, if'u'JLlSi), which is
   a plan which refers to the photographic identification
   outside tne ground?

0. Clio. - A. And two further plans, sir, ihJJL28, which is
   a plan of the terraces.

Q. Cl 17. - A.   And, sir, a plan iivJJL29, which is a plan of
   the pitch.

Q. That will be C118.

      (The witness referred to the large scale plan)

- A. Sir, in respect of the identification outside, this
is in relation to plan iUiJL150, the point at wnich Vincent
is shown on the photograph is approximately here.

0. That is very close to Gate C isn't it? - A. Yes.   It
   shows a crowd movement in the direction of Gate C.    And
   then, sir, in respect of iiwJL28, that refers to the
   identification on video, iiAP 7. Tnis is enclosure
   number 3 and tne point at which we have referred to is
   actually in tne gateway of number 3 enclosure.

Q. That is Chief Superintendent rlesbit and others? - A.
   Yes, sir.  Sir, HUJL29 actually has two photographic
   identifications on it.  This relates to Vincent being
   carried across the pitch.  One of those is located on
   the plan at tnat point there, and the other one is at
   this point here, at the Spion ilop end of the pitch.
        Xi lti   CO.lOiJEH:     Mr. Fraser, anything arising out of
tnat?

        iiiJ FRASER:          uTo, thank you, sir.

     THE COROilER:              Anything fro.n any of you?   (iJo
response)

     That is all the evidence we are going to listen to
today.  I believe that you have got soisa children,
naven't you, as well in the family unit, is tnat rignt?

        MRS. il. A. iJILDE:            Vincent has one.

       THE COROMER:   Yes, but you were all living
together     Can I just say to you, and of course also to
tae children - and I know they aren't here today and
that is quite right really - but I a<n sure you must
miss ilia a lot because you had been together for quite
so.aa tiaie, and I aa sure that the children urnst iaiss
ni.ii too, and we would like you to know tnat although we
nave to deal with the technicalities when wa meet in a
situation such as this, I quite understand that it nas
been, and no doubt still will ba quite hard for you to
nave lost siiia in this tragic situation.  Thank you for
coding.    Thank you, ilr. Fraser.

     We are going to rise for a wo.aent, briefly, and
then we will, proceed with the next Inquest.  Thank you.


   (The Inquest into the death of VI^CEilT MICHAEL
  FITZSIiiliOiiS was adjourned to a data to be fixed)




                                   7
