    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE             No: CO-1009-92
    QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
    (DIVISIONAL COURT)

                                      Royal Courts of Justice
                                      Strand
                                      London WC2

                                      Friday, 5th November 1993

B
                                B e f o r e   :

                           LORD JUSTICE MCCOWAN

                                    and

                            MR JUSTICE TURNER




         REGINA v HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                      EX PARTE STRINGER AND OTHERS

D


    MR A JONES QC and MR E FITZGERALD (instructed by Malcolm J
    Gregg & Co., Century Buildings, 31 North Street, Liverpool
    L2 6RG) appeared on behalf of the Applicants.

    MR T COGHLAN QC and MR P PREECE (instructed by Mark Webster.
    City Solicitor and Head of Administration, Sheffield City
    Council, Town Hall, Sheffield, SI 2HH) appeared on behalf of
    the Respondent.

    MR M KALLIPETIS QC (instructed by Dibb Lupton Broomhead,
    Fountain Precinct, Balm Green, Sheffield SI 1RZ) appeared on
    behalf of the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service.


          (Computer Aided Transcript of the Stenograph Notes of
         John Larking, Chancery House, Chancery Lane, London WC2
                       Telephone No: 071 404 7464
                 Official Shorthand Writers to the Court)


                             J U D G M E N T
                        (As approved by the Court)



                            1
H
J




    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE               No: CO-1009-92
    QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION                           ------------- -
    (DIVISIONAL COURT)

                                     Royal Courts of Justice
                                     Strand
                                     London WC2

                                     Friday, 5th November 1993

B
                               B e f o r e   :

                           LORD JUSTICE MCCOWAN

                                   and

                            MR JUSTICE TURNER




         REGINA v HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                      EX PARTE STRINGER AND OTHERS
D


    MR A JONES PC and MR E FITZGERALD (instructed by Malcolm J
    Gregg & Co., Century Buildings, 31 North Street, Liverpool
    L2 6RG) appeared on behalf of the Applicants.

    MR T COGHLAN QC and MR P PREECE (instructed by Mark Webster.
    City Solicitor and Head of Administration, Sheffield City
    Council, Town Hall, Sheffield, SI 2HH) appeared on behalf of
    the Respondent.

    MR M KALLIPETIS QC (instructed by Dibb Lupton Broomhead,
    Fountain Precinct, Balm Green, Sheffield SI 1RZ) appeared on
    behalf of the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service.


         (Computer Aided Transcript of the Stenograph Notes of
        John Larking, Chancery House, Chancery Lane, London WC2
                      Telephone No: 071 404 7464
                Official Shorthand Writers to the Court)


                             J U D G M E N T
                        (As approved by the Court)




H
                                       Friday, 5th November 1993

                           J U D G M E N T

LORD JUSTICE MCCOWAN:   This is an application of 5th May 1992

    for judicial review in respect of various decisions of Her

   Majesty's Coroner for South Yorkshire in the course of the

    inquest held by him between 18th April 1989 and 28th March

    1991 into the deaths of six named persons, plus 89 others,

   at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15th April 1989; and also in

   respect of the verdict recorded by the Coroner's jury at the

   end of the inquest that all 95 were cases of accidental
   death.

        The applicants are relatives of the six named deceased

   persons.   The relief sought is an Order of Certiorari to

   quash the jury's verdicts and also perhaps, but not

   necessarily, to order fresh inquests.

        On 15th April 1992, that is to say prior to making the

   application for judicial review, solicitors acting for the

   applicants sent to the Attorney General a memorial on behalf

   of the applicants requesting him to grant them leave under

   section 13(1)(b) of the Coroners Act 1988 to apply to the

   High Court for the inquest verdicts to be quashed and a

   fresh series of inquests held.     The applicants' legal

   advisers then decided to go for judicial review as well on

   the basis that under it the Court would have the alternative

   option of striking down the verdict without necessarily

   having to order a fresh inquest.    There followed the present

   application.   In the event, the Attorney General refused the


                            2
fiat on 18th August 1992 on the ground that he had concluded

that there was nothing which would justify authorising an

application to the High Court for a new inquest, as the

application would have no reasonable prospect of

establishing that it was necessary or desirable in the

interests of justice for a fresh inquest to be held.

Meanwhile, the application for leave to bring the present

proceedings had been adjourned to await the outcome of the

application for the fiat.        It came before Macpherson J on

6th April 1993 and he granted leave.

     The applicants and their deceased relatives are all

from Liverpool.   On 15th April 1989 the deceased relatives

had come to Sheffield to watch Liverpool play Sheffield

Wednesday in the semi-final of the Football Association Cup

at the latter's ground, Hillsborough Stadium.         The kick-off

of the match was scheduled for 3 pm.        Prior to kick-off

there was a great build up of supporters outside the

Leppings Lane entrance to the ground which caused pressure

and discomfort to those trying to get into the ground

through the turnstiles.        At 2.52 pm the Chief

Superintendent, who was the police officer in charge of

crowd control at the match, decided in order to relieve the

pressure at the turnstiles to let the gates at the Leppings

Lane entrance be opened.       The opening of one of the gates,

gate C, resulted in a sudden influx of about two thousand

supporters through gate C, the great majority of whom went

on through a tunnel and into spectator pens 3 and 4.        These


                           3
pens were capable of holding just over a thousand persons

each, but they were already full.       The result was the

building up of an intolerable pressure on the supporters at

the front of the pens.

     This was so when the match started at 2.59 pm.          It

intensified at 3.04 pm, when there was a further surge

caused by spectators1 responses to a near miss at goal by a

Liverpool player.     Many supporters were crushed against the

wall at the front and by then, if not before, many had

suffered severe crush injuries from which they died.         The

match was stopped at 3.05 pm and only then was the gravity

of the situation appreciated.       In the result, 95 people were

killed and some 400 physically injured.       The great majority

of those who had been killed had been in pen 3, but at least

five were in pen 4.

     On 17th April 1989 Taylor LJ, as he then was, was

appointed to conduct an inquiry into the disaster.       On 18th

April 1989 the Coroner formally opened and adjourned the

inquest.   From then and from time to time until 28th March

1991, he conducted the inquests into the deaths of the 95

individuals, sitting a total of 96 days.       His inquiry was

assisted by an independent police force, namely the West

Midlands Constabulary, who investigated the incident and

gathered evidence.    The Coroner faced the complications of

the sheer number of deaths, plus the fact that the Taylor

Inquiry was proceeding.       From the latter emerged an interim

report in August 1989.    But then the Coroner was told that


                          4
the Director of Public Prosecutions was being asked to

consider bringing criminal charges arising out of the

incident.   Eventually he was told that while the DPP made

his mind up, he could resume the inquest on a limited

basis.   This was that he could consider three of the

questions necessary under the Coroners Act, namely who the

deceased was and when and where he met his death, but must

not deal with how, for fear of prejudicing any criminal

proceedings that the DPP might decide to bring.

     What the Coroner, therefore, decided upon was that who,

when and where should be determined at a preliminary part of

the inquests for each of the 95 individuals, with the issue

of how being held over until a decision on criminal

proceedings was reached.       He also decided that the best way

to avoid the pitfalls of prejudice to the criminal

investigation was that the factual evidence for the first

part of the inquiry should be put in the form of summaries

by the West Midlands officers.      All this he explained to the

solicitor, Mr Fraser, who was representing the relatives,

and he agreed with the course proposed.       Indeed, the idea

was positively supported by the families, who were

distressed at having to wait what must have seemed an

eternity for the hearing of the investigation into the

individual deaths.   There followed a serious of mini

inquests, lasting from 18th April to 4th May 1990, with

Mr Fraser representing the vast majority of the relatives.

Then there was a pause while the DPP's decision was arrived


                           5
at.   Eventually, in September 1990, the Coroner was told

that the Director had decided not to prosecute anyone in

respect of the disaster.

      The main inquest began on 19th November 1990.   The

Coroner had made a provisional decision that he would impose

a cut-off time for the evidence he would hear of 3.15 pm on

the day of the disaster, being the time of the arrival of

the first ambulance, because he took the view that on the

overwhelming pathological evidence available to him

permanent irrecoverable damage had by then been suffered by

all the deceased.   In the absence of the jury, Mr Timothy

King of counsel, appearing for 43 of the families, including

five of those making the present application, argued against

that cut-off primarily on the ground that there was material

to support the proposition that not all the victims were

necessarily dead by 3.15 pm.   The Coroner., however, having

listened to those submissions, was not persuaded from his

preliminary view, and the inquest proceeded with the jury

present on that basis.

      The application for judicial review in respect of which

leave was given contained seven grounds.   Before this Court,

however, Mr Alun Jones for the applicants sought leave to

add two more, and I have regard first to those matters.     The

first of these supplementary grounds was that the Coroner

should have disqualified himself from hearing the inquests

and invited an outside Coroner to do so on the ground that

he was closely associated with Sheffield Gity Council, who
were an interested party appearing by counsel before the

Coroner and jury.     The nature of the association was that

the Coroner was appointed and his salary paid by that

Council.   Mr Jones made clear to us that he was not

suggesting actual, but only apparent bias.     He submitted,

however, on the authority of R v Gough [19931 2 WLR 883 that

there was here a real danger of bias.     For the Coroner,

Mr Coghlan pointed out that, once appointed, the Coroner is

wholly independent, and that under section 3(4) of the

Coroners Act 1988 his tenure is determinable only by the

Lord Chancellor, who could remove him for "inability or

misbehaviour in the discharge of his duty".

     The real problem facing Mr Jones is that he has to

accept that from the start of the inquest it was known to

the applicants' legal advisers that the Coroner had been

appointed and his salary was paid by an interested party,

and yet at no time was any application made to him to

disqualify himself.    That is immaterial, submits Mr Jones.

It is, he says, open to a relative to stand by, with the

necessary knowledge of the facts amounting to apparent bias,

for 96 days of an inquest, and indeed until after verdict,

and then seek judicial review to quash the verdict and have

a fresh inquest on the ground of apparent bias.

     The delay does not of course end there.    The inquest

ended on 28th March 1991, and it was not until the end of

October 1993 that the suggestion of bias was ever advanced

on behalf of the applicants.    It was the view of this Court
that that suggestion came far too late and had no merit.

Accordingly, we refused the application to add that ground.

        The second new ground which Mr Jones sought to add was

that the Coroner's direction upon the elements of the

offence of manslaughter was wrong in law.     What the Coroner

did was to direct them in terms of recklessness, in so

doing, faithfully following the judgment of Watkins LJ in R

y West London Coroner ex parte Gray and others [1987] 2 WLR

1020.     He did so with the full agreement of Mr King

representing the relatives.     Mr Jones now says that this was

a misdirection because by the unreported cases of R v

Holloway and others decided in the Court of Appeal (Criminal

Division) on 20th May 1993, the offence of involuntary

manslaughter is established if there is proof of a grossly

negligent act or omission causing death.

        Assuming, without deciding, that there was a

misdirection, no blame can attach to the Coroner since he

summed up as he was told to do by the Divisional Court and

with the approval of counsel for the relatives.     That

Mr Jones accepts.    What exactly is it that Mr Jones would

have had the Coroner say?     He gave us a long passage ending
with these words:

            11    that the attempted avoidance of the
            perceived risk, namely by opening the gates, was
            attended by such a high degree of negligence that
            it justifies a conviction for unlawful killing".


So directed, he submits, the jury could have found unlawful

killing.    But there is nothing to say they would have done.


                          8
The verdict they in fact brought in was a perfectly rational
one.

       What then, we asked, would be the point of sending the

matter back for another inquest?    Mr Jones's answer was

that, whatever the verdict might prove to be, the function

of the jury would have been fulfilled.    He agreed that no

prosecution of any police officer would result because the

decision was taken as long ago as September 1990 (before the

main inquest) that no one should be prosecuted.    It is, he

said, a point of legal purity.    Mr Coghlan said that a fatal

flaw in the application was that no notice of it had been

given to the South Yorkshire Police who, had they known of

it, might well have wanted to appear and to resist it.

Consequently, if we granted the application, there would

have to be an adjournment with yet more delay.    Once again

this Court considered that the application was made far too

late and that, if successful, it would achieve nothing of

value.    Consequently, we also rejected the application to
add this ground.

       I turn to the first ground in the application, which is

that the Coroner wrongly conducted the mini inquests by

reference to summaries of the statements of eye witnesses

which were read out and whose contents could not therefore

be tested by oral evidence and questioning.   The problem

that faced Mr Jones over this ground is the terms of the

Coroner Rules 1984, Rule 37(3)(c), which permits admission

of documentary evidence at an inquest provided the Coroner


                         9
first announces that objection may be taken to its

admission,   in fact, Mr Fraser, on behalf of the relatives,

expressed complete contentment with the use of the summary.

Accordingly, Mr Jones felt obliged to tell the Court

immediately that he could not pursue this ground.

     The second ground alleges that the Coroner failed to

comply with Rule 37 of the Coroners Rules in that he did not

go through the laid down procedure of first summarising the

contents of summaries and ascertaining whether there was an

objection to the proposed course.   As with ground one,

Mr Jones acknowledged that this ground had no substance and

accordingly abandoned it also.

     The next ground is that the Coroner wrongly introduced

a cut-off point of 3.15 pm at the outset of the main inquest

into the issue of how the deceased met their deaths, with

the result that there was no inquiry into whether, or how

far, their deaths were caused in part by the delay in

calling the emergency services and any shortcomings in the

response of the police and emergency services after

3.15 pm.   The Coroner gave his reasons for imposing this

cut-off.   This is what he said:

           "It is from my understanding of the pathological
           evidence, the overwhelming pathological evidence
           is and was that the people died as a result of
           crushing or traumatic asphyxia. Different words
           were used, but the sense was always the same. The
           underlying problem which these poor men and women
           were subjected to was an inability to breathe.

           That does not mean to say that some of them did
           not in fact respire for a period of time or even
           have a heart beat thereafter, but the damage was
           done, and indeed both, Dr Gumpert, Dr Slater, Prof

                         10
              Usher, who dealt with this question in an overall
              point of view, all in fact said, as I understand
              their evidence, exactly the same."

    Then a little later:

              "The medical evidence was that once -- I am not
              quoting verbatim -- but the sense of what
              Professor Usher said, and, indeed, the others as
              well, was that once the chest was fixed so that
g             respiration could no longer take place, then
              irrecoverable brain damage would occur between
              four and six minutes. That is the point."

         In justification of what the Coroner did, Mr Coghlan,

    appearing for him, drew to the Court's attention some words

    of Bingham LJ in R v Her Majesty's Coroner for East Kent ex

    parte Spooner 152 JP 115 at 122F:

              "     the coroner is by law an inquisitor; the
              witnesses called are those whom he, under the
              statute, thinks it expedient to examine, and he is
              very much the master of his own procedure.
D
              These considerations are fortified here because
              the coroner has immersed himself in a huge mass of
              material which the court has not seen. We have
              scarcely glimpsed the top of the iceberg of
              evidence with which he is familiar. Very great
              weight therefore should be given to his judgment,
              although on questions of law he is of course
              exercising a judgment, not a discretion.

              It is his duty to guide the jury to a correct
              verdict but his responsibility is to conduct a
              fact-finding exercise, not to apportion blame and
              not to decide civil liability.  In a case such as
              this the chain of causation may be of almost
              infinite length. The coroner had to break it
              somewhere to keep his inquiry within tolerable
              bounds. He broke it at what I judge to be a
              reasonable and sustainable point, particularly
              bearing in mind the exhaustive public inquiry
              which had already been conducted by Sheen J."

    I should say that that case was an application for judicial

    review in respect of the inquests into the capsizing of the

    Herald of Free Enterprise.   Adapting those words to the


                            11
H
present case,    it seems to me that on the face of it the

Coroner cut off the evidence    at a reasonable and sustainable

point, particularly bearing in mind the exhaustive public

inquiry which had already been conducted by Taylor LJ.       I

would add that it was also a compassionate point from the

aspect of the victims' relatives.

     However,    the applicants next point is connected,

because it is    there said that the Coroner wrongly refused to

call a Dr John Ashton and a Dr Glyn Phillips, who had highly

relevant evidence to give, because that evidence, or much of

it, fell after the cut-off point.

     It is necessary now to have a look at the interim

Taylor Report.    He found that the police had no alternative

but to open the gates, but that the blunder they made was

that the order to open was not accompanied or followed by

any other order to deal with the consequences, and, in

particular, to prevent those who entered from pouring

through the tunnel into the already crowded pens 3 and 4.

He went on to deal with what he had heard from Drs Ashton

and Phillips.    This appears at paragraph 296 of the report

under the heading "First Aid and Emergency Services":

          "I say at the outset of this chapter that no
          valid criticism can be made of the response' by the
          St John Ambulance, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade
          on 15 April.  Indeed, no represented party
          ventured any criticism of them. The only attack
          on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One
          claimed that ambulances did not arrive swiftly or
          with sufficient equipment and that there was a
          lack of triage. He was proved to be wrong in all
          three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to
          go on television on 15 April when he said more
          lives could have been saved if staff and equipment

                          12
             had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved
             wrong in fact as to the times of arrival of
             ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was
             not possible to say whether lives could have been
             saved. His comments on television were
             irresponsible. The other doctor complained of the
             absence of defibrillators.  I am satisfied on
             overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a
             defibrillator on the pitch with people milling
             about would have been highly dangerous owing to
             the risk of injury from the electric charge."

I should point out that Dr Ashton was the first doctor there

referred to, and Dr Phillips the second.     Continuing at

paragraph 297, Taylor LJ said:

             "I find that all three of the emergency services
             named above responded promptly when alerted, and
             that they brought appropriate equipment and that
             their personnel operated efficiently.



             301. There was insufficiently close co-operation
             between the police and the emergency services.   It
             is clear that SYMAS and the fire brigade should
             have been called earlier than they were. However,
             in view of the nature and extent, of the crushing,
             the time when police rescue began and the
             pathetically short period for which those unable
             to breathe could survive, it is improbable that
             quicker recourse to the emergency services would
             have saved more lives."

     We have been through the evidence of Dr Ashton at the

inquiry in considerable detail and, for my part, I am not

surprised that Taylor LJ took the view of him that he

expressed.     I do not think it would have made the slightest

difference to the result if he had given evidence at the

inquest.     Dr Phillips seems to have had only two criticisms

of the ambulance service and both of these were rejected by
Taylor LJ.

     One other witness at the inquiry, it is suggested,


                           13
should also have been called by the Coroner, a Mr Eccleston,

a senior nurse manager, but I do not believe that the

evidence he could have given was such that it should have

caused the Coroner to abandon his sensible cut-off point

based, as it was, on the plain and virtually unchallenged

evidence of the pathologists as to when the deceased would
have died.

     Mr Jones does not suggest that the Taylor Report should

have been ignored by the Coroner.    As to the statutory

position, by section 11(2) of the 1988 Act the Coroner is

required to call all persons who tender evidence as to the

facts of the death "whom he considers it expedient to

examine".    That gives the Coroner a discretion as to whom he

calls to give evidence, based on expediency.    In the light

of the contents of the interim Taylor Report, plus the

pathological evidence, I am very far from concluding that

his exercise of discretion was plainly wrong.

     I turn next to consider what is in fact the seventh

ground, which reads:

            "There is now available some evidence that the
            Coroner and his jury were not given a full picture
            of the evidence of some of the witnesses whose
            statements were partially summarised at the mini
            inquests, and that the result was that the
            proceedings were vitiated by the omission of
            certain facts."

Mr Jones looked in turn at each of the six victims whose

relatives have brought these proceedings.    I begin with

Paul Carlile.    Professor Alan Usher was the pathologist in

his case.    His evidence is at page 59 of the applicants'


                          14
bundle.   Here I read this question coming from Mr Fraser:

           "Q. Prof Usher, can you offer some reassurance
           to the family about the timescale for this type of
           injury in terms of the time that you think it may
           have taken for Paul to lose consciousness once the
           crushing that we have heard about actually started
           to take place?

           A. Yes, the reason for Paul's death was that his
           chest was held so tightly that he could not
           breathe in or out and, once that had happened,
           then he would have been unconscious in a matter of
           seconds, between 10-20 seconds. He would have
           died within a few minutes."

From the form of the question it is to be observed that the

aim of the advocate was to reassure the victim's relatives

that the victim had not had to suffer long.

     Mr   Hollinghurst, an off-duty nurse, was in pen 4.        At

themini inquest his evidence was summarised       by an officer

called Evans in these words:

           "After being subjected to this pressure for
           approximately 15 minutes, Mr Hollinghurst became
           aware of a space being created around him, and on
           looking down to the floor of the terracing, he saw
           a man he now knows to be Paul William Carlile.
           Mr Hollinghurst saw that Paul was blue in the face
           and, on not detecting a pulse, he tried to
           resuscitate him by heart massage and mouth to
           mouth resuscitation.  Paul failed to respond to
           the emergency treatment and Mr Hollinghurst then
           moved on to treat another casualty."

He gave   evidence at the main inquest and was asked:

           "Q. What happened then?    What     did you see or
           notice?

           A. The crush got worse rather than better and
           after a few minutes I was aware that somebody was
           on the ground right by where I was standing, by
           where I was positioned.

           Q. Was the match still in progress when you
           became aware of this or can you not remember?

           A.   Yes, the match was going on.

                          15
               Q.   This was in fact a young man?

               A.   That's right.

               Q. Being a charge nurse you checked to see
               whether his pulse was going and things like that,
               as soon as you could?

               A.   Yes, but not at that particular moment.
B
               Q.   I realise that.

               A.   As soon as the crowd cleared....

               Q. That is in fact my next question. How long
               did it take before you were able to get at this
               lad?

               A. I really could not put a timescale on it
               because it just seemed like for ever.  It seemed
               like it was getting tighter and tighter and you
               were fighting for your breath.  It was probably
               only a matter of ten minutes at the moment, five
               or ten minutes."

D   Later he was asked:

               "Q. As I say, at that point that is when you had
               a look to see whether there was anything to be
               done for this lad?

               A.   Yes.

               Q. In fact I think you came to the conclusion
               there wasn't, is that right?

               A.   I tried, as well the lad who was immediately
               below me. There was somebody just a couple of
               feet further away. He was also in the same
               condition.

               Q.   So you tried for both of them?

               A.   Yes, I was going back      "

    Then he went    on to say that he identified both the persons

    concerned asdead and that the     younger one was in fact Paul

    Carlile.

         Last week the applicant's legal advisers got from the


                              16
H
Coroner's solicitors a statement by Mr Hollinghurst dated

5th May 1989.   It was in essence what he had said before.

The rest of the story is that two police officers then tried

to resuscitate him and their attempts were taken over by an

unknown ambulanceman, but without success.   There is no

evidence of any lack of care by that ambulanceman, and

indeed at the mini inquest the deceased's family, through

Mr Fraser, thanked the two policemen and the unknown

ambulanceman for the efforts that he had made.   I can see no

valid ground for complaint in respect of this deceased.

                      (Short Adjournment)

     Before leaving this deceased, Mr Jones placed reliance

on a passage in the recently discovered statement by

Mr Hollinghurst which read as follows:

          I was aware of a hand grabbing at my leg. I
          reached down and took hold of his hand. I was
          shouting to everyone that someone was down but the
          crush was that bad no one could move anyway.  I
          was frantically trying to pull the person up,
          grabbing at any part of him that I could but it
          was hopeless."

It looks clear that the person who was doing the grabbing

was Paul Carlile; obviously he was alive at that stage.     But

the answer, I am afraid, is to be found in the further

passage in that statement:

          "After about 15 minutes I was suddenly aware of
          space being created around me and when I looked
          down I saw two men. The first was a white lad
          aged about 19 yrs."


He then describes him and says:

          "His face was blue in colour and he was bloated.
          I checked for a pulse but there was none."

                        17
A little later he says:

          "I then tried to revive the younger lad by heart
          massage and mouth to mouth resuscitation but I was
          getting no response so I then tried on the older
          man. Again there was no response and eventually
          someone took hold of me and said I'd done what I
          could and that I should get out."


It seems fairly obvious that by that stage he was in fact
beyond revival.

     I turn next to Michael Kelly.     The pathologist in his

case was Dr John Clark and his evidence is to be found at

page 185 of the applicant's bundle.    He said:

          "His face was rather congested and had a bluish
          discolouration. These changes, I have to say,
          were fairly mild in comparison to a lot of the
          other people and one of the other features of
          asphyxia is to find little haemorrhages on the
          skin. These weren't in fact present."


He continued later:

          "He hadn't inhaled vomit and he had not suffered
          any internal or severe injuries and there was no
          natural disease to account for his death and so I
          still think he died of crush asphyxia and for some
          reason the signs of that were rather mild."
Later again:

          "He probably lost consciousness within a short
          period of time, ten or fifteen seconds or so, and
          then knew nothing about it after that."

     At 3.08 pm the deceased was to be seen in a video in

pen 3 in "obvious distress".   The summary at the mini

inquest in his case was given by Detective Inspector Layton

and among other things he said this:

          "PC Maughan attempted to resuscitate a man at the
          Leppings Lane end of the pitch but without
          success. He assisted spectators to carry the man
          to the Spion Kop end of the ground where he states

                          18
            he left him with a St John's Ambulance Officer who
            has not been identified."


Then he continued:

           "It is fair to say that Michael's sister has since
           met PC Maughan and following that meeting I think
           they are both satisfied that it was actually
           Michael that he attempted to assist."


       At the main inquest this deceased's sister asked the

Coroner to call PC Maughan, and he did.      I read certain

passages of that evidence to be found beginning on page
196:

           "Q. You got on to the field just after three,
           about four minutes past three, is that right?

           A.   Yes.   The players were still on the pitch.



           Q. He did not appear to you to be breathing at
           that stage?

           A.   That is right.

           Q.   He also looked blue, is   that correct?

           A.   That is right.

           Q. I think you then positioned him and started
           resuscitation, is that right?

           A.   That is correct, sir.

           Q. In fact you thought you     were successful, is
           that right?

           A.   I did think I was successful."

A little later he said:

           "....with the help of some civilians we turned the
           man over, worked on him for a few minutes. He
           appeared to start to breathe again and then we got
           a hoarding and carried him to the ambulance area
           at the other end of the pitch.
          Q. Before you tell me about that you came on to
          the pitch about three or four minutes past three.
          How long was the time interval before you got to
          this chap? Have you any idea?

          A.   Probably three or four minutes."


Again on page 198 he gave this answer:

          "We continued breathing for him for a while, then
          he appeared to slip unconscious but he was
          breathing, it was just before we took him away to
          the other end of the pitch.



          Q. What did you do with him when you got to that
          position?

          A.   We handed him to the ambulancemen......"

Mr King cross-examined:

          "Q...... You say the players were still on the
          pitch when you got onto the field?

          A. That is correct, sir."


On page 200, Mr King:

          "Q. I know it is difficult, but you say you
          worked on the man Michael Kelly for a few minutes,
          I think you put it, didn't you?

         A.    That is correct.

          Q. You were clearly confident in your
          recollection and that you appeared to have won
          through, if I can put it that way?

         A.    Yes, sir, I was.

         Q. That was an expression which you used when you
         were describing it - I think you have spoken to
         Mrs Kelly about it, haven't you?
         A.    Yes.

         Q. And You used the expression 'We have won that
         one', or something like that?

         A.    That is right, I did.

                          20
             Q. So it does sound as if you were quite
             confident in your own mind when you took the man
             over to where you put him into the care of the St
             John's Ambulance, that he at that stage was still
             breathing?

             A.   I was quite confident he was, sir."


     The criticism made was that the summary could not be

reconciled with the evidence because the summary had it that

Mr Maughan's attempt at resuscitation had been "without

success".     The suggestion made was that Detective Inspector

Layton had been giving a false picture in order to create

the impression that Mr Kelly was then dead and nothing more

could have been done for him.

     Subsequent to that criticism being made by Mr Jones, he

was given by counsel for the Coroner a statement made by

PC Maughan on 15th February 1990, that is to say before the

mini inquest, and which was no doubt used by Detective

Inspector Layton in the compilation of the summary.     Looking

at thatstatement I see these words:

             "I saw that the man was blue in the face and
             appeared not to be breathing.  I placed the man on
             the ground near to the goal nets and started to
             resuscitate him. After a while the man started to
             breathe but kept slipping back unconscious."

Having seen that, Mr Jones fairly conceded that his

criticism of Detective Inspector Layton could not be
sustained.

     I deal next with Kevin Williams.     In his case the

pathologist was Dr Slater and I take up his evidence on page

248B of the applicant's bundle:


                           21
             "My examination of Kevin showed that the main
             finding was that of asphyxia. This opinion was
             formed through the extensive blueness on the face
             and upper part of the chest.     In addition there
             were small haemorrhages in both the face and
             internal organs, including the brain, heart and
             lungs.         This had also resulted in four
             fractures to the small bones in the actual voice
             bo x ...... the compression of the neck or chest has
             occurred here and unconsciousness occurs very
g            rapidly, certainly within a few seconds, and there
             is one reported case of it occurring apparently
             instantaneously. Following unconsciousness then
             there is no discomfort and no pain. Death then
             occurs after approximately three to five
             minutes."


    At G:

             Q. Now the reason why I asked you was this, and I
             want to put this to you because I would like to
             get your view on it, one Officer will be dealing
             with the value of this evidence in a moment but
             she [a Woman Special Constable called Debra
             Martin] says that at a point when this lad was in
D            the gymnasium, in other words he had already been
             moved across the pitch, she says she helped him
             into the gym from the pitch, presumably she
             carried him. He had stopped breathing. She gave
             him the kiss of life, did some heart massage, he
             opened his eyes, said a word and died. Now in the
             light of your pathological findings, is that in
             fact a possibility, do you think?"


    In answer the doctor made several comments, among them

    these:

             "     this was certainly the most severe case of
             traumatic asphyxia that I actually dealt with.



             This case was highly unusual in that in fact it
             had four fractures to the larynx.  It was by far
             the most severe case of voice box fractures. Not
             only does this indicate the severity of the
             traumatic asphyxia at the time but it also in fact
             makes it virtually impossible for the person to
             have spoken by virtue of the fact that there were
             fractures to the voice box, sir. So all I can
             say, sir, that scientifically and medically I find

                           22
H
          that inconceivable that the person could have
          spoken."


Then he referred to cortical coning and said:

          "The coning indicates the severity of the asphyxia
          and again that would have resulted in irreversible
          brain damage which again would totally prohibit
          any form of communication.

          Q. I have thought about this comment as well, of
          course, and there are several explanations (1)
          that it didn't occur and that the observer is
          mistaken but another possibility that has occurred
          to me and I want to put it to you and please
          disagree if it is not either right or you don't
          accept it; it is possible, is it not, that if a
          person having died is moved air or stomach
          contents might be expelled and might make a sound
          as it escapes, so to speak.  Is that a
          possibility?

          A. It is an interesting comment, sir, because it
          is a possibility that I considered also myself and
          that is certainly an explanation for the noise
          which could have been made which may have mimicked
          the word 'mum' but it would not explain the
          opening of the eyes, sir."

He added to the Coroner:

          "But it would explain the noise."

Then Mr Fraser said:

          "No questions, sir, but thank you very much,
          Dr Slater, for that sympathetic and detailed
          explanation."

    Then a Police Sergeant Killoch was called by the

Coroner to give the summary in this case.     Among other

things he said this:

         "Derek William Bruder, an off-duty Police
         Constable from the Merseyside Police who was a
         spectator at the match, recalls seeing a person
         lying on the pitch near the Spion Kop/North Stand
         of the ground. The person was having
         convulsions. Mr Bruder went on the pitch and gave
         mouth to mouth resuscitation aided by a St John's
         Ambulanceman who carried out cardiac massage.
          Mr Bruder recalls that a friend of the casualty
          was with him on the pitch. Resuscitation was
          continued and they were joined by a St John's
          Ambulancewoman who took over from Mr Bruder.
          After a short time the St John's Ambulancemen said
          that the casualty was dead. Mr Bruder then left
          the scene.

          Neither of the St John's Ambulance personnel or
          the friend of the casualty had been identified.
          The person Mr Bruder tried to resuscitate is now
          known to be Kevin.

          Special Constable Debra Martin went on the pitch
          to assist and she helped to carry several deceased
          persons and many injured persons to the
          gymnasium. She assisted to carry one youth who
          she now knows to be Kevin into the gymnasium where
          she remained with him.

          At 16.06 hours Dr Curpen examined Kevin in the
          gymnasium which had been established as a
          temporary mortuary. Dr Curpen certified life
          extinct."


At page 252D, the Coroner said:

          "We have already mentioned the evidence of
          Special Constable Martin who said about the lad
          speaking.  In no way do I want to run poor Special
          Constable Martin down because she had a very hard
          day but it is right she was obviously from her
          statement very distressed.

          A. I also wouldn't want to criticise WPC Martin
          in any way but I have interviewed her twice, sir,
          and she was particularly upset as indeed many
          people were but it affected her particularly badly
          the events of the day."


    At page 253, Dr Slater was recalled by the Coroner and

asked about Mr Bruder's account of the man lying on the

floor having convulsions.   He said:

         "Unfortunately when people have not got enough
         oxygen in the brain, as I said in my earlier
         evidence, which is really what the word 'asphyxia'
         means, individuals can in fact have fits."
Later he said:

             ''For somebody to have convulsions, this would
             imply that the amount of asphyxia is such that
             there must be virtually irreversible brain damage
             present and again this would fully support the
             concept that the evidence of opening eyes and
             speaking is not really conceivable, sir.

             THE CORONER:   Does that help, Mr Fraser?

             MR FRASER:  I am sure it does, Dr Slater.  It is
             difficult to find the phrase to sum the situation
             up. Kevin at that stage was beyond help. He was
             as good as dead?

             A.   Yes, that is right, absolutely.

             Q.   And would feel nothing and know nothing?

             A.   Absolutely.    He would know nothing."

     A stage came, on 4th May 1990, when the Coroner

recalled Sergeant Killoch and the sergeant dealt with

Mr Binder's account of the person having convulsions, going
on to say:

             "I then took his pulse in his neck.     I could feel
             a slight pulse."


     Then Inspector Sawers was called to give an account,

beginning at page 264, about what contact he had since had
with Mr Bruder:

             "He goes on to say as a result of feeling
             depressed about the incident he applied of his own
             volition for further first-aid training within
             Merseyside Police."


At page 265B:

             "He has given very careful consideration, sir, to
             the expression he used of having convulsions and
             in the light of his further training and what he
             now knows and thinks about the incident was that
             'convulsions' was not the word that was
             applicable to these circumstances. He refers

                            25
           specifically to having seen epileptic fits and
           says that what he originally described as a
           convulsion was not anything like an epileptic
           fit. He goes on to say later, sir, that if there
           was a part of the body that he saw move it was his
           head and that the word that he best thinks
           describes this movement is that of a twitch."
At D:

           "On reflection, sir, he feels he would be much
           more skilful if he were required to perform this
           action again and he cannot discount the
           possibility that he did not feel immediately in
           the right place for the carotid artery."
At G:

           "     he cannot be categoric it was a pulse. He
           feels he may well be mistaken in that matter,
           sir."

At 266B:

           "In his original statement he referred to vomiting
           and thinking that Kevin had been sick. He has
           given this matter some further thought and he is
           absolutely satisfied that Kevin was not sick. He
           did not see Kevin vomiting and he did not see
           vomit on the ground or on his clothing."

At C:

           ".....he does have a clear impression in his mind,
           sir, of a fluid of some sort in the mouth, but he
           cannot discount that that could be spittle or
           phlegm of some sort."


Then at page 267E:

           "It was at this point, sir, that after
           approximately two minutes of the involvement of
           the woman St John's Ambulance Officer that the
           male St John's Ambulance Officer stood up and said
           'He's gone'. He referred to the expression being
           completely grey and would seek to reaffirm that
           choice of words as his description of Kevin at
           that particular moment in time. He says, sir,
           and I quote:

           'There is absolutely no doubt in my mind, both now
           and with the benefit of further training, that

                         26
             then at the moment the youth I had tried to save
             was dead, certainly dead, and beyond any further
             help.  I and St John's Ambulance personnel would
             not have stopped if there had been any glimmer of
             hope at all. There was none.'"

        Then Mr Fraser was given the opportunity of asking

questions but said he had none, but he added this, that

Mr and Mrs Williams "are appreciative both of the efforts

the officer has made and of his visit and they have no

questions.     They have decided not to come today, sir."

        Dr Slater was again recalled and stuck to his original

position.     I do not think it would assist to go through his
evidence.

        The Coroner was not content to leave it there.   He

called Dr Gumpert, a consulting clinical neuro physiologist

and consulting neurologist.     He spoke of the brain stem and
said:

             "Once this part of the brain is dead, and that
             death occurs, as you heard from Dr Slater, in
             between four and six minutes after deprivation of
             oxygen, then the person is going to die."


At page 279D he said:

             "It seems clear to me, sir, in this case that poor
             Kevin was probably dead before he got out of the
             area in which he was standing.  I would agree with
             Dr Slater.  I would think consciousness was lost
             probably within ten seconds."
At F:

             "     after people are brain stem dead, they can
             twitch."


Page 276A:

             "     feeling the carotid pulse is quite difficult
             in somebody who has got a low blood pressure, as

                           27
                 would have been here."

         At page 313 in the bundle is to be found a statement by-

    Debra Martin made on 17th March 1990.     I should read a few

    extracts from this.     She said, on the first page:

                 "My recollection of the events of that day are
                 vague and confused. As a result of the disaster I
                 was prescribed medication by my Doctor to assist
                 me to sleep.  I was really upset by the whole
                 incident and was on medication for about a week.
                 The result being that I was in state of what I can
                 only describe as a state of semi-consciousness. I
                 felt like a 'Zombie.'"


    She went on say that she can recall carrying a youth who she

    now knows to be Kevin Williams from the pitch to the

    gymnasium.     At the top of page 315:

                 "I didn't want to believe the boy was dead.  I
                 didn't know if he was dead or not but I decided
                 that I had got to attempt to revive him. I
                 started to give him mouth-to-mouth but someone, I
                 don't know who, touched me on the shoulder and
                 told me he was dead. By this time my head had
                 gone, I wasn't aware of what I was doing or what
                 was really happening.



                      under the circumstances I cannot be positive
                 that the details are accurate.  I have been quite
                 badly affected by the whole incident and I am
                 trying to erase it from my memory."

         It is to be noted that when a specific piece of

    evidence, or pieces of evidence, arose which might suggest

    that one of the deceased might have been alive after

    3.15 pm, the Coroner showed flexibility by going into it.

        We were told that some while after, Mrs Williams, the

    deceased's mother, made contact with Police Constable Bruder

    and Woman Police Constable Martin, and they alleged that



H
they had been pressurised into changing their stories and

that they now stuck by their original versions.         'Where does

the truth lie?     I see no fault in the Coroner in this

matter.   He made full inquiry.     He was not asked by the

applicant's representative to do more.      There was

overwhelming medical evidence that the deceased was in fact

dead by 3.15 pm.    In my judgment it would not be right to

quash the verdicts and order a new inquest on the strength

of these allegations made against the investigating police
officers.

     Before leaving this deceased, however, it would be

convenient to deal with a further point made by Mr Jones

which concerns this deceased.      This Court agreed to look de

bene esse at a letter written to the relative's solicitors

by a pathologist, Dr West.      It is dated 29th October 1993.

At their request he had looked at the post mortem reports

and photographs.    This was the first time he had seen them,

some four and a half years after the deaths.      He had not

been present at the post mortems or seen the bodies.         No

request had been made to the Coroner either at the mini or

main inquest to call him.      On the strength of a sight of the

reports and photographs, he doubts Dr Clark's diagnosis.          He

thinks there was substantial damage to the neck, possibly

caused by being crushed under people's feet.     This type of

injury, he says, is amenable to an emergency tracheotomy and

there was a realistic possibility that this young man was

still alive after 3.15 pm, though unlikely to have spoken


                          29
the word 'Mum1 if he had suffered convulsions.

     As I have indicated, no question arises of the Coroner

having refused to hear this witness.     He is in no way at

fault in this respect.     If the Attorney General's fiat had

been given, the discovery of new facts or evidence could,

under section 13(1) of the 1988 Act, have been held to make

it necessary or desirable in the interests of justice that a

new inquest be held.     I have grave doubts, however, whether

there is any power to look at fresh evidence of this nature

and in these circumstances in an application for judicial

review.   But, in any event, I find it of far too tenuous a

nature to justify ordering a new inquest.     I note that in R

v the Coroner for Inner North London, ex parte Linnane 155

JP 343, where the Coroner was held to have been wrong to

have refused the applicant's request to call a particular

doctor, the Divisional Court refused to order a new inquest,

or even to quash the verdict of the one that had occurred,

on the ground that it was 21 months since it had occurred

and the resolution of complex medical issues was not so

important as to overcome the other considerations against

holding a new inquest.

    As to Ian Glover, in the Coroner's documents volume 1

at page 249 is to be found the evidence of Professor Usher,

the pathologist in this case.    He said:

          "I give the cause of death as traumatic asphyxia.
          That means he died because his chest wall was
          compressed so it could not move in and out. When
          that happens you are not able to breathe properly
          and you die really in that way. Mercifully,
          anyone caught in that position once the chest

                          30
          becomes fixed they become unconscious very, very
          early, between ten and twenty seconds. Once this
          boy was unconscious then he would have no
          knowledge or any sensation subsequent to that. He
          would take between four and six minutes to
          actually die."


     The summary at the mini inquest showed he had gone to

the match with his brother Joseph.   They were in pen 3 and

were pushed forward by a surge.   He, Joseph, got out onto

the pitch and, looking back, saw his brother in a distressed

state four feet from the front of the enclosure.   Twenty

minutes later he saw his brother pulled from the enclosure

and onto pitch by two police officers.   There then followed

passages in the account given at page 251 of the bundle I
have referred to:

          "Joseph attempted to resuscitate his brother who
          was then placed on a temporary stretcher and
          carried across the pitch by a number of persons
          into the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had
          been set up.

          Sir, I have to include here that I have spoken to
          Joseph this morning and he wishes to state that in
          the gymnasium a doctor was present and when he
          examined Ian he did in fact find a pulse and
          attempted to resuscitate him for about fifteen
          minutes but was unsuccessful."


Then at E on that page:

          "Q. I think it is only fair to say that Joe,
          when he made his first statement, referred to the
          doctor?

          A.   Yes, sir.

          Q. But he never mentioned anything about the
          pulse being found?

         A. No, sir, that is something he brought to my
         attention this morning."


                           31
            Inspector Layton was called, on page 252 and said:

                 "Sir, in the summary you will see reference to
                 circumstances described by PC Fojut of the South
                 Yorkshire Police. He initially made an
                 identification from clothing and felt that he at
                 one stage had assisted to carry Ian across the
                 pitch."


    At D:
B
                 "Sir, it is now apparent having spoken to Joe
                 this morning, his recollection is that no
                 uniformed police officers were present when Ian
                 was carried across the pitch.

                 Q. The evidence of PC Fojut was based on
                 identification of clothing, as opposed to---

                 A.   That is right, sir.

                 Q. That is, of course, a relatively weak
                 identification?

                 A.   That is right, sir."
D
            At page 254 it is to be observed that the Coroner

    recalled Professor Usher to deal with the suggestion by

    Joseph of    a pulse being detected by    adoctor atthe

    gymnasium. He said, at the bottom of     page 254:

                "I think the only way that could have happened
                would be if this lad had sustained severe brain
                damage but not quite got to the point where the
                respiratory and pulse centres faded out.

                Q. He did not say there was any respiratory
                effect. He said there was a faint pulse.

                A. The two centres are close together.   If that
                was the case then if he had been revived he would
                have been severely brain damaged.




                Q. The other possibility is, of course, there may
                have been a mistake about the pulse?


                               32
H
            A. Yes.......it really means that either the
            doctor was mistaken in thinking he could feel a
            pulse or that this lad was severely brain damaged
            and then went on to die.11


     Mr Jones realistically accepts that the evidence put

before the jury of any pulse was weak.    It is another matter

that he relies on.    Mention has already been made of

PC Fojut.    It seems that in September 1993, the Glover

family learned of a flow chart, which read in respect of
PC Fojut:

            "I saw a person who I now know to be Ian Glover.
            I assisted in carrying him to the gymnasium.  I
            still thought he was alive at this stage as he was
            vomiting as we carried him."


     Last week the applicants were given a copy of a

statement made by PC Fojut dated 7th September 1982.     This

is to be found at page 522 of the applicant's bundle.      It is

a statement of 7th September 1989 and it begins: "Further to

my original statement" that the applicant had not seen.

Then in the second paragraph he says:

            "I am able to identify in a photograph the
            deceased Ian Glover and from a photograph of
            clothing shown to me as being the same male whom
            whilst I was on the pitch (by the Leppings Lane
            terraces) I went over to and assisted to carry off
            the pitch. When I approached Glover he was lying
            on the grass surrounded by a group of Liverpool
            fans two of whom I believe were his brothers. At
            this stage I believed Glover was still alive and
            my main concern was to get him moved to enable him
            to receive first aid treatment. A hoarding board
            was brought over Glover was placed on this board
            and together with the group that had been
            originally surrounding him I assisted to carry
            Glover off the pitch and up to the Spion Kop end
            of the ground.  I still thought he was alive at
            this stage as he was vomiting as we carried him.
            We took him to outside the gymnasium by a sandpit
            and placed him on the ground and the hoarding
            board was taken away. I tried to feel or a pulse
            but couldn't find one. Then a woman who stated
            she was a nurse came over and checked him over at
            my request to do so and I then moved away leaving
            the nurse whom I do not know with two men who I
            believe were Glover's brothers with him."


     The problem that has faced the Coroner's legal

advisers, we are told, and the reason for late delivery of

statements to the applicants is that the statements are in

the possession of the investigating police force and have to

be extracted from them.     It is obviously unfortunate that

this statement that we have seen was not put in evidence and

Professor Usher asked to comment upon it.     I for my part

would acquit the Coroner of blame for this.    As we have

seen, he was scrupulous.    Whenever a matter was brought to

his attention suggesting that a victim might have survived

the cut-off point, he investigated it and in particular

soughtthe reaction of the    relevant pathologist.   He had

done just   that, as we saw, in respect of the pulse.     I have

no doubt that he would have done the same about the vomiting

had the matter been drawn to his attention.    I do not

believe that Professor Usher would have been caused to alter

his whole opinion if given this information.    A clue to his

answer may be afforded by the evidence which Dr Slater gave

in respect of Kevin Williams that if a person who had died

is moved, air or stomach contents may be expelled.

     This may, however, be an appropriate stage at which to

mention that Mr Jones asked me to record that he wishes to
reserve the right to argue in a higher court that the

decision of the Divisional Court in R v Her Majesty's

Coroner at Hammersmith ex parte Peach [1980] QB 211 that the

denial by a Coroner to a properly interested party of sight

of the statements of witnesses was not a breach of the rules

of natural justice, was wrongly decided.

        As to Richard James and Peter Tootle, it is accepted

that the pathological evidence in each of their cases was

that they were dead before 3.15 pm.     The way Mr Jones puts

it is to say: "In the first four cases we have now got

evidence to suggest that the pathological evidence may not

have been correct, which raises doubt as to whether it may

not also have been wrong in the cases of Richard Jones and

Peter Tootle."     This is pure speculation and I do not find

it persuasive.

        That takes me on to the sixth ground which alleges that

the Coroner should have left the verdict of "lack of care"

to the jury.     Rule 42 of the Coroner's Rules 1984 provides
that:

            "No verdict shall be framed in such a way as to
            appear to determine any question of -

            (a) criminal liability on the part of a named
            person, or

             (b) civil liability."

However, in R v Southwark Coroner ex parte Hicks [1987] 1

WLR 1624, where a prisoner had died in custody and the

Coroner refused to leave a verdict of "lack of care" to the

jury because he thought such a verdict would offend against
    Rule 42, the Divisional Court quashed the verdict.     It was

    held that a verdict of "lack of care" was permissible where

    the death was caused by neglect of the deceased's condition

    and that "lack of care" was not synonymous with a breach of

    the common law duty of care but bore a more restricted

B   meaning.   There are other authorities to the same effect but

    I do not find it necessary to refer to them.   In my judgment

    the following analysis by Mr Coghlan of the verdict "lack of

    care" well conveys the legal position, namely "it is

    concerned with the failure to provide care in the form of

    food, medicine, clothing, shelter, etcetera, not with

    carelessness, and is appropriate only in cases which are the

    other side of the coin of self-neglect such as starvation,

D   hypothermia and persistent failure to provide medication."

         I conclude, therefore, that such a verdict would not

    have been appropriate in this case.   Indeed, I understood,

    in the end, Mr Jones to concede this, for I noted him as

    saying: "In the present case it may have been right not to

    leave 'lack of care1 because there were no circumstances of

    dependency at the time that the injuries causing death

    occurred, but the more you narrow down the application of

    the acknowledged verdict of 'lack of care' the more you

    promote the importance of being allowed to give a narrative

    verdict, i.e. one incorporating primary and secondary

    causes."   The impression given by those words is that the

    jury were not allowed to give any narrative verdict, but

    that would not in fact be accurate.   In the Coroner's


                             36
H
documents volume 2, at page 642, the Coroner is to be found

saying this to the jury:

           "I will give you another example of what you
           might say. They are all basically the same but
           there is slight variance.  You could say, 'Died on
           15th April, 1989, as a result of crush injuries
           sustained     ' and you could add, if that is what
           you thought the evidence said, '     following
           overcrowding and/or crowd movement and/or
           following the opening of concertina gates,' or
           anything else that relates to the circumstances
           which you feel have been found in relation to that
           death and which you think ought to be included."

The following page at A:

           "That is the way I would tackle it but I do want
           to stress to you that in the final analysis it is
           your decision."

In passing I draw attention to the fact that at F on that

page he went on to say:

           "In this particular instance I have come to the
           conclusion that there are three possible
           conclusions or verdicts which you might be able to
           return. These are unlawfully killed, accident/
           misadventure -- I will explain this to you in a
           moment -- and, thirdly, an open verdict."


     The answer is, therefore, that he did give the jury the

opportunity to bring in a narrative verdict but they chose

not to do so.   Mr Jones makes two further points on that,

however.   He says, first, that what the Coroner was

suggesting was not a true narrative verdict.     He gave us

some examples of what he says would have been.     I mention

two of these.   First,   "Accidental death caused by the

failure of the police to divert the supporters away from the

tunnel to other parts of the spectators accommodation", to

which he said might have been added a second, for example,
"A contributory cause of death was the failure to summons

the ambulance service promptly".

     His second criticism was that the Coroner was

suggesting to the jury the wrong box for the inclusion of

the narrative verdict.   This conveniently takes me to the

last ground which is number 5, which reads:

          "The Coroner wrongly limited the inquiry into how
          the deceased met their deaths so as to exclude
          inquiry into whether lives could have been saved
          by calling the emergency services sooner and
          providing better emergency care for the injured
          thereafter."


It is necessary to have regard to the terms of two

subsections of section 11 of the Coroners Act 1988.

Subsection (5) reads:

          "An inquisition -

          (a) shall be in writing under the hand of the
          coroner and, in the case of an inquest held with a
          jury, under the hands of the jurors who concur in
          the verdict;

          (b) shall set out, so far as such particulars have
          been proved -

          (i) who the deceased was; and

          (ii) how, when and where the deceased came by his
          death; and

         (c) shall be in such form as the Lord Chancellor
         may by rules made by statutory instrument from
         time to time prescribe.

         (6)   At a coroner's inquest into the death of a
         person who came by his death by murder,
         manslaughter or infanticide, the purpose of the
         proceedings shall not include the finding of any
         person guilty of murder, manslaughter or
         infanticide; and accordingly a coroner's
         inquisition shall in no case charge a person with
         any of those offences."
       I look next at the Coroner's Rules 1984, Rule 36, which

reads:

             " (1) The proceedings and evidence at an inquest
             shall be directed solely to ascertaining the
             following matters, namely -

             (a) who the deceased was;

             (b) how, when and where the deceased came by his
             death."


       Form 22 is the one prescribed.    It was used by the

Coroner and the jury in these inquests.      We have been taken

through one of the inquisitions.     With the exception of the

names of the deceased, they were all identical.      In the

inquisition it is said:     "The following matters are

found         " Then comes "Name of deceased" and that was

completed.     That answered the question who the deceased

was.    Next came section 2, "Injury or disease causing death"

and the answer given was "Crush asphyxia".      Section 3 reads

"Time, place and circumstances at or in which injury was

sustained".     The answer given was "Died on 15th April 1989

as a result of crush injuries sustained at Hillsborough

Football Ground, Sheffield."     Here it was the Coroner

invited the jury, if they chose, to add a narrative

verdict.     Mr Jones says that was wrong.   It should have come

under section 4 which reads "Conclusion of the jury/Coroner

as to the death".     Here the jury answered "Accidental

death".    "Time and place" in section 3 dealt with the

questions when and where the deceased came by his death, but

the form also asked under section 3 for the circumstances in


                           39
which injury was sustained.     What can it there be asking for

if not an answer to the question how the deceased came by

his death?     I am unable, therefore, to accept Mr Jones's

submission that the right place for any narrative verdict

was under section 4.     That section is for the conclusion

and, in my judgment, the jury were entitled to answer there

as they did "Accidental death", having been directed by the

Coroner, as we have seen, that three verdicts were open to

them -- unlawful killing, accidental death and an open

verdict.

      I would hold that the inquisition was correctly

completed and the Coroner's direction to the jury as to the

manner in which they should approach its completion was

impeccable.     The proceedings were solely directed to

ascertaining who the deceased was and how, when and where he

came by his death, as they were required to be under the

statute.     Accordingly, I have discovered no good reason for

ordering a new inquest or for merely quashing the existing

verdicts.

      If I had found such reason and had to exercise my

discretion the following matters would have weighed with

me.   What would be the purpose of fresh inquests?    To get a

verdict criticising the police?     Such criticism has already

been firmly levelled by the Taylor Report.     The police have

admitted fault and paid compensation.     To get a verdict

criticising the emergency services?     I see no evidence to

justify such criticism, and in any event it would be
    irrelevant if all six were brain dead by 3.15 pm.   To obtain

    further examination of the last minutes of their lives?      I

    doubt that anything more would be learned, but the process

    would be a very harrowing one involving large numbers of

    witnesses and lasting if not for 96 days, for not far

    short.   Moreover, irrespective of whose fault, if anyone's,

    it is, the fact is that four and a half years have already

    passed since the tragedy occurred.   As to the alternative

    suggestion of a mere quashing of the existing verdicts

    leaving nothing in their place, I would regard that as

    absolutely valueless.

         Mr Jones says that the families are pursuing this

    matter because they have a deep instinct to know the

    circumstances in which their relatives died.   I am perfectly

    prepared to accept that that is their motive and I respect

    it, but I hope they, for their part, can understand that I

    have to take an objective view and I have to consider the

    interests of all concerned including those of all the

    witnesses who would have to come along five years later and

    try to cast their minds back to events that they must have

    been trying to forget.   Taking that objective view, and

    considering the interests of all concerned, I would in my

    discretion conclude that this was not a case in which it

    will be right to order fresh inquests.

         For all these reasons I would dismiss the application.

MR JUSTICE TURNER:   I agree and add a few words of my own out of

    deference to the careful arguments to which we have listened


                             41
and out of respect to the concerns of the applicants.

     The essential complaint made against the Coroner is

that having introduced evidence from the various

pathologists as to the causes and probable timescales of

these several deaths at the preliminary inquests, he

proceeded to limit or exclude evidence from the main inquest

which might have led the jury to form a different

conclusion.   As my Lord has demonstrated, to the extent that

he could the Coroner not merely led further evidence that

might have persuaded pathologists to form different

conclusions than those expressed at the preliminary

inquests, but also recalled some of pathologists, either

once or twice, in order to explore or further explore

matters which had become known since the time of those

preliminary inquests.    This was to enable the Coroner to

explore in the presence of the jury alternative factual

bases upon which the pathologists could have, formed and then

expressed their conclusions.    Having regard to all the

pathologists who gave their evidence at the preliminary

inquests and those who were recalled at the main inquest,

the overwhelming burden of that evidence is that there was

no possibility of the prolongation of life beyond a period

of about ten minutes from the occurrence of the injury which

led to the asphyxia.    I say this but with the possible

exception in mind in the case of Mr Glover.    But in his

case, and indeed in others, there was clear evidence that

bodily functions may continue and give a semblance of life
    when the prior occurrence of brain death renders the

    existence of life unlikely, if not impossible.

         On the evidence to which our attention has been drawn

    on the hearing of this application I, for my part, conclude

    that there is nothing to show that there was any lack of

    fairness, or unreasonableness in the well-known Wednesbury

    sense, in the manner in which the Coroner conducted the

    inquest; and so far from there being any sustainable

    criticism of his decision to call before him "such persons

    having knowledge of those facts", that is to say of death,

    whom he considered it expedient to examine, there was no
    error.

         No one having even a broad knowledge of the

    circumstances of these deaths could be other than deeply

    moved.   It is of importance for all to understand that the

    relief which can be provided in this Court is tightly

    circumscribed by the law which we have to apply.   We can

    only interfere in cases of procedural irregularity, legal

    error or unreasonable decision.   I agree with my Lord that

    the applicants have failed to raise any cogent argument to

    support relief on any of those three grounds and I, too,

    would dismiss this application.

MR COGHLAN: My Lords, there remains only the matter of costs.
    I am not going to apply for costs, but may I just say this:
    five of the six parties are legally aided and one is not.
    It would, therefore, have been open to me to have applied
    for, against the five, an order not to be enforced without
    leave of the Court, and against the sixth an outright order
    for costs. I do not do so; that would be very harsh. But
    those on this side of the camp have been much concerned from
    the very outset at the enormous expense of an application
    which was regarded as doomed to failure, and when we hear

                             43
f




            talk of going on to next stage, and appeals and so forth,
            further concern is felt. I wish only to place this marker
            that the merciful attitude taken with regard to costs on
            this occasion may not be repeated if we should have to face
            the further expense of an appeal.

        MR KALLIPETIS: My Lords, on behalf of my clients I have a
            similar approach.  I merely observe this, if I be permitted
            to do so, that every pound spent by those instructing me in
            resisting this sort of application means a pound less to
    B       heal those who need it. I trust that those who advise the
            applicants would draw to the attention of the Legal Aid Fund
            that if that matter is to be advised to go further we shall
            not take the same attitude in a higher court.

        MR JOOT!S: My Lords, there are two matters I want to raise.
            First of all, I apply for legal aid taxation, which I have
            formally to do.

        LORD JUSTICE MCCOWAN:   Yes, you may have that.

        MR JONES: My Lords, the second matter is upon the question of
            appeal. My Lords, of course under the new regulations if an
            application is sought to appeal then one has to canvass the
            Divisional Court first. No decision in any case can be
            taken as to whether to seek leave to appeal until the
    D       judgments have been digested and studied and one has advised
            and taken instruction from the applicants. My Lords, we
            appreciate that obviously any such decisions must, in the
            interests of everyone, be made quickly.  I, therefore, apply
            to your Lordships for a period of seven days so that that
            matter can be discussed.

        LORD JUSTICE MCCOWAN:   Is there a timescale?

        MR JONES: My Lords, the regulations are very new. One has
            formally to apply. As I understand it, one can certainly
            ask that that matter be considered within a period. It is
            in what is called the stop press in the new supplement to
            the White Book at IB:

                      " (1) The classes of cases prescribed for the
                      purposes of section 18(1)(a) of the Act (appeals
                      subject to leave) are the following -

                      (a) a determination by a divisional court of any
                      appeal to the High Court."

           My Lords, as I understand the matter, this has only come
           into force on the 1st October of this year. Application
           must be made, at least in the first instance, to this
           Court.  I do not understand it has to be made at once and
           obviously it could not be made at once. One has to take
           instructions from all the applicants and consider the

                                     44
    H
r




            implications.

        LORD JUSTICE MCCOWAN:   Is this the determination of an appeal to
            the High Court?

        MR JONES:   My Lords, no.   I think it is probably (c):

                       "an order granting or refusing and relief made at
                       the hearing or an application for judicial
                       review     11
    D
        LORD JUSTICE MCCOWAN: You worried me. Yes, it falls under
            (c). What you are saying    is there does not appear to beany
            particular time in which you have to do it. There is
            nothing to stop you, but I agree that one would normally, if
            one was going to make it, make it straight away. You are
            asking may you have some more time?

        MR JONES: For a period of seven days, my Lords.   If the Court
            does not hear from us, obviously the matter will lapse.

                  My Lords, may I also just say this in the light of the
            comments which have just been made. Of course one considers
            the implications involved    in deciding whether to seek leave
            to appeal. Of course one     is aware of the costs and I am
            sure ^the Court will appreciate that Mr Fitzgerald and I are
    D       sufficiently conscious of that without it being pointed out
            by others.

        LORD JUSTICE MCCOWAN: I think we should mention that although I
            shall be available the week after next Mr Justice Turner
            will not. He will be here be here up to next Friday but no
            further.

        MR JONES: My Lords, we will certainly try and make a decision
            within days.  I know the applicants have to return to
            Liverpool today, but we will certainly treat the matter with
            the great of urgency.

        LORD JUSTICE MCCOWAN: Insofar as you need it, we say you have
            seven days, subject to the point we have made about
            Mr Justice Turner. Thank you very much, Mr Jones, for all
            you have done.




    G



                                     45
    H
