                                                                                                  M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM
      ZCcz>S'           ■
                                                             D ate and tim e raised   rsgy-s'ho                Number   CLa
Title'                      pr
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action —                    o
                                                                                                                            Receiver




                                                                                                                            Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                        Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                            Indexer
Indexed as indicated
                               V   c   j   k   3   n   T ~                             >


No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                           SIO




                                                                                                                        153)
F urther action No(s)                                                                                                       Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
    HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                 (WEST DISTRICT)



          INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

      VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                 STADIUM DISASTER




              PRELIMINARY PROCEEDINGS




                       Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B .MED.Sci , B M . B S , MRCGP.


              (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                         At

                The Memorial Hall,
                    City Hall,
                    Sheffield.

                         On

           Wednesday, 18th April, 1990.




             TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                  (MORNING SESSION)



      From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
           Official Shorthand Writers,
       55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER             Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                          Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH              Medical and Dental Union of
                          Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                          Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                         INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT



                                               Pa&e


OPENING BY THE CORONER                            1.


JOHN HERVYN JONES Sworn

   Examined by THE CORONER                       34.


MICHAEL LAYTON Called

   Examined by THE CORONER                       37.
   Cross-Examined by HR. ISAACS                  45.
   Re-Examined by THE CORONER                    45.
                                                                        THE CORONER



                                          PRELIMINARY PROCEEDINGS

                                        WEDNESDAY,       18th APRIL,   1990


                             THE CORONER:   Welcome everybody.    Some of you         will
                    B   have seen me, of course, once or twice before, but we         are
                        now resuming these inquests proper.

                             Uhat we are going to do in the first instance is we
                        are going to deal with the selection of the Jury.  We will
                        deal with representation after I have done that.

                             Now ladies and gentlemen of the Jury, can you see me?
                        Yes.    I want to, before we ask you to take the oath,
                        remind you that these inquests are going to deal with the
                        people who unfortunately lost their lives at the disaster
                        at the Hillsborough Stadium on the 15th April, 1989.       I
                        therefore want to check, before we swear you in, one or
                        two things.    Are any of you related or close friends to
                        any of the bereaved or their immediate families?      (No)
                    D   Are any of you related or close friends to any police
                        officers who were involved at the Hillsborough Stadium on
                        that day?   (.No)   Are any of you related or close friends
                        to any of the stewards who were working on the Leppings
                        Lane end of the Stadium?     (No)    Do any of you know any
                        other reason which I may not have put to you why you feel
                        you are disqualified and may be biased in dealing with the
                        evidence which you will be hearing in relation to these
                    E   deaths?    (NcO    Finally, are there any particular
                        personal reasons which you think you ought to tell me
                        about which might make you feel you cannot give your
                        attention and time to these particular inquests?     (No)

                             Gentlemen, I know I have not taken representations
                        yet, but I hope I have covered the main grounds we need to
                        be concerned about.   Is there any particular matter you
                        want me to put to the Jury other than the peremptory
                        challenges which don't apply in the Coroner's Court,
                        before we swear them?   (N

                              Then in that case ladies and gentlemen, we are going
                        to ask you to take the oath.    Sergeant Griffiths will do
                        this.    You will be asked to put your hand on the New
                        Testament and he will read the oath to you and I will ask
                        you to repeat it.    Before you do it I have to read the
                        list of names of the people who died, at this inquest,
                        because it is in respect of those that you will be asked
                        to deal with.    I want you to listen to these names which
                        I am going to read out, not only to you, but, of course,
                        to everybody else, but in particular it is read for you
                        and also for the Presenting Officers.    Are the Presenting
                H       Officers in Court?    Are you all here?   (Y e s ) I have to

                                                 -   1    -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                THE CORONER


                        say because of the way the place is set out I cannot see
                        you very well.   I think you can see me quite well, but
                        you will have to forgive me if I peer round a little bit
                        because you are all in darkness.

                             Now listen to the names, would you?   The names I am
                        going to read in alphabetical order.   This is not the
                    B   order in which we will be taking the evidence but it is a
                        convenient way of doing it:

                            John Alfred Anderson
                            Colin Mark Ashcroft
                            James Gary Aspinall
                            Kester Roger Marcus Ball
                            Gerard Bernard Patrick Baron
                            Simon Bell
                            Barry Sidney Bennett
                            David John Benson
                            David William Birtle
                            Paul David Brady
                            Andrew Mark Brookes
                            Carl Brown
                    D       David Steven Brown
                            Henry Thomas Burke
                            Peter Andrew Burkett
                            Paul William Carlile
                            Raymond Thomas Chapman
                            Gary Christopher Church
                            Joseph Clark
                            Paul Clark
                    E       Gary Collins
                            Stephen Paul Copoc
                            Tracey Elizabeth Cox
                            James Philip Delaney
                            Christopher Barry Devonside
                            Christopher Edwards
                            Vincent Michael Fitzsimmons
                            Thomas Steven Fox
                            Jon Paul Gilhooley
                            Barry Glover
                            Ian Thomas Glover
                            Derrick George Godwin
                            Roy Harry Hamilton
                            Philip Hammond
                            Eric Hankin
                            Gary Harrison
                            Peter Andrew Harrison
                            Stephen Francis Harrison
                            David Hawley
                            James Robert Hennessy
                            Paul Anthony Hewitson
                            Carl Darren Hewitt
                            Nicholas Michael Hewitt
                            Sarah Louise Hicks
                H
                                                -   2   -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                THE CORONER


                            Victoria Jane Hicks
                            Gordon Rodney Horn
                            Arthur llorrocks
                            Thomas Howard
                            Thomas Anthony Howard
                            Eric George Hughes
                            Christine Anne Jones
                            Gary Philip Jones
                    B       Richard Jones
                            Alan Johnston
                            Nicholas Peter Joynes
                            Anthony Peter Kelly
                            Michael David Kelly
                            Carl David Lewis
                            David William Mather
                            Brian Christopher Matthews
                            Francis Joseph McAllister
                            John McBrien
                            Marian Hazel McCabe
                            Joseph Daniel McCarthy
                            Peter McDonnell
                            Alan McGlone
                            Keith McGrath
                    D       Paul Brian Murray
                            Lee Nicol
                            Stephen Francis O'Neill
                            Jonathon Owens
                            William Roy Pemberton
                            Carl William Ritnmer
                            David George Rimmer
                            Graham John Roberts
                    E       Steven Joseph Robinson
                            Henry Charles Rogers
                            Colin Andrew Hugh William Sefton
                            Inger Shah
                            Paula Ann Smith
                            Adam Edward Spearritt
                            Philip John Steele
                            David Leonard Thomas
                            Patrick John Thompson
                            Peter Reuben Thompson
                            Stuart Paul William Thompson
                            Peter Francis Tootle
                            Christopher James Traynor
                            Martin Kevin Traynor
                            Kevin Tyrrell
                            Colin Wafer
                    G       Ian David Whelan
                            Martin Kenneth Wild
                            Kevin Daniel Williams
                            Graham John Wright

                             Is anybody aware of any name I have not read out?
                        don't think so.   (No r e s p o n s e )
                H                               - 3 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                  THE CORONER


                             Sergeant Griffiths,   would you be kind enough to swear
                        the Jury now?

                             (The Jury was sworn by their swearing the oath
                             collectively as follows, taking the New Testament in
                             their right h a n d s :

                             "I swear by Almighty God that I will diligently
                    B        inquire on behalf of our Sovereign Lady the Queen,
                             into the deaths of the ninety-five persons whose
                             names have been read out in my presence and hearing
                             by Her Majesty's Coroner, and give a true verdict
                             according to the evidence."

                             THE CORONER:   Sergeant Griffiths, would you please
                        arrange for the release of all the other people who have
                        been held in reserve in case we needed other Jurors?

                             The next thing we need to do is to deal with the
                        legal representation;   some of you, of course, I already
                        know or know about. For the sake of the record and      so we
                        all know who is who, I would like you to tell me who you
                        are and whom you represent.     If I start with Mr. Fraser,
                    D   then we have someone     whom I recognise. Mr. Fraser, if
                        you would please introduce yourself?

                             MR. FRASER:   Sir, my name is Fraser.   I am a
                        solicitor and I represent the Hillsborough Solicitors'
                        Group Steering Committee.

                             It may assist you and the Jury and the Officers if I
                    E   explain a little of the background as to how and why that
                        Committee was set up and so you may understand why I am
                        here this morning.

                             Following this tragedy a large number of firms of
                        solicitors were consulted by injured and bereaved in
                        Liverpool and elsewhere, those people seeking advice on a
                        variety of legal problems which arose as a result of this
                        disaster, including, of course, sir, the inevitability of
                        holding these inquests.   Liverpool Law Society called a
                        meeting at its offices in Liverpool on the 27th April,
                        1989, and invited those firms who had at that stage been
                        consulted by the injured and bereaved, to send a
                        representative for general discussion about the best way
                        to deal with the various legal problems which arose, which
                        then took place.   It was decided that a small committee
                    G   consisting of six solicitors should be elected to collate
                        and disseminate information to member firms who had joined
                        the group, which that meeting decided to form.

                             That committee has undertaken a variety of tasks
                        which I will not go into at this stage, sir, but one of
                        those tasks obviously has been to try to co-ordinate
                H                                  - 4 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                    THE CORONER


                        representation of the bereaved families before you, sir,
                        on an en bloc basis;  the alternative being for you to be
                        faced witK upwards of fifty practices before you to
                        represent the individual interests of the bereaved
                        families.   I am pleased to be able to tell you, sir, that
                        our efforts have been largely successful in relation to
                        more than ninety of the bereaved families, those
                        solicitors representing the vast majority of those who
                    B   lost their lives have confirmed from their clients that
                        they are happy that my committee should represent them
                        en bloc before you.   There are one or two individuals who
                        either seek no representation at all, or who will appear
                        before you with their own solicitors, for reasons which
                        are entirely within their own control and so far as I can
                        I will assist those solicitors who appear and those
                        families who are not represented at all by handing to them
                        any information which may appear relevant.

                             I am therefore here, sir, as a representative of that
                        steering committee and it is my intention and wish to
                        remain in your court throughout the presentation of all
                        the ninety-five summaries which will follow, to assist the
                        families in any way in which I can and by putting to you
                    D   supplementary questions which are known to arise from some
                        of the summaries which have been presented and also, sir,
                        to assist you.   I will then obviously report the outcome
                        of each day's events to the solicitors individually who
                        represent families and hopefully by that method all the
                        families who will be represented through me will have a
                        full report of the day's hearing before you.

                    E        On that basis,   sir,    I seek representation before you
                        today,

                             THE CORONER:   I am very happy indeed to grant that.
                        Now we can go either way, but do you want to move this way
                        or shall we start at the end?   Let's start with you.

                             MR. SMITH:   Sir, I am Sean Smith, Counsel.   I am
                        instructed by the Medical and Dental Defence Union of
                        Scotland to appear on behalf of Dr. Alexander Robert
                        Walker Forrest.   He is to give evidence to this inquest
                        as to blood tests carried out either by him or under his
                        supervision on ninety-four of the victims.

                             Sir, I intend to stay here only for the duration of
                        his evidence.
                    G
                             THE CORONER:     Thank you.

                             MR. CALLAGHAN:   Sir, my name is Callaghan.   I am a
                        partner with Dibb, Lupton, Broomhead.   I appear for Trent
                        Regional Health Authority and the South Yorkshire
                        Metropolitan Ambulance Service.   It will be my intention
                H                                    - 5 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                 THE CORONER


                        to attend today and to attend any of the inquests where
                        there may be anything relevant to my clients.

                             THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, were you able to
                        hear that?   Did you say no?   We are limited with
                        microphones.   If I may just repeat it for you.    It is
                        Mr. Callaghan who represents the Trent Regional Health
                        Authority and the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service and it
                    B   is his intention to be here today and on those days where
                        anything which may be relevant to them might be raised.

                             I am sorry we have not got enough mikes,   but if you
                        can shout or pull the mikes over towards you.

                             MR. GREGORY:   My name is Gregory, sir.    I am a
                        solicitor.   My firm is Keeble Hawson.    I represent
                        Sheffield City Council.    Like Mr. Callaghan, I would
                        like to be here today and on other days, with your
                        approval, where it is considered relevant.

                             THE CORONER:    Thank you.

                             MS. THORPE:   My name is Catherine Thorpe.    I am the
                    D   representative from Reynolds, Porter, Chamberlain,
                        solicitors for Eastwood and Partners.   I also intend to
                        be here today and any other day where evidence will be
                        given which is relevant to my clients.

                             THE CORONER:    You are just here as an observer,   I
                        believe?

                    E        MS. THORPE:    That is right.

                             MS. ADDLEMAN:    Sir, my name is Andrea Addleman of
                        Counsel.    I am instructed by Russell, Jones and Walker,
                        solicitors.    I am here to represent the Police Federation
                        of England and Wales.    It is my intention to stay
                        throughout this hearing.

                             MR. ISAACS:   Paul Isaacs, sir, Counsel, representing
                        the interests of Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield.
                        Sir, with your leave, I propose to be here for those days
                        when it is deemed necessary and relevant.

                             THE CORONER:   Yes, that will be perfectly all right.
                        Mr. Fraser, we have heard from you.

                    G        MS. NORCLIFFE:    Sir, my name is Belinda Norcliffe
                        from Hammond Suddards.    I am a solicitor and representing
                        the Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police.   Sir, I
                        intend being here for the duration of the interests,
                        although it may be that my colleague Mr. Peter Metcalfe
                        will attend to the representation upon some days.

                    H                            - 6 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                THE CORONER


                            THE CORONER:    Yes.

                             MR. CATCIIPOLE:  Sir, my name is Stuart Catchpole of
                        Counsel.  I appear on behalf of Sheffield Wednesday
                        Football Club, along with my friend Mr. Jackson.    It is
                        my intention to remain for the duration of the inquest
                        with your leave and to be of such assistance as we can.

                    B        THE CORONER:   Thank you.   Well, I have no problems
                        at all in agreeing and I am very happy for you to be
                        represented at these inquests.   I confirm that whilst, of
                        course, I am delighted if you are able to stay here, those
                        of you who feel that some of the evidence does not require
                        your attendance, that is a matter entirely for you.   It
                        would be helpful if you told us, as indeed you have done,
                        if you are not intending to be here, just so that we know
                        whether to expect you, that is all.

                             Now the next thing I want to do and it is a little
                        bit unusual.  We are going to have the case summaries
                        presented by eight Officers of the West Midlands Police.
                        I want to arrange for them all to be sworn now in respect
                        of all the inquests, partly because a lot of the families
                    D   are here so they can hear them, and partly because it is
                        convenient.   If the Officers would come down now please.

                             Ladies and gentlemen, I propose to swear the Officers
                        in the same way that I swore the Jury.   In other words,
                        collectively, but each one, of course, repeating the oath
                        in persona.   Are you content with that, or do you wish to
                        hear them sworn individually?   (Y e s )
                    E
                             Right, if you would then, ladies and gentlemen either
                        put your hands on the Bible or New Testament in the
                        conventional way.

                             (The Presenting Officers were sworn swearing the oath
                             collectively as follows, taking the New Testament in
                             their right h a n d s :

                             "I swear by Almighty God that the evidence I shall
                             give shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing
                             but the truth, in relation to each of the ninety-five
                             persons whose names have been read out by Her
                             Majesty's Coroner, in my presence and hearing,
                             touching whom I am called upon to give evidence."

                             THE CORONER:   Thank you.   You will introduce
                        yourselves as opportunity presents itself.

                             Finally, while we are still on formalities, as and
                        when the pathologists come I intend to get them to swear
                        in respect of each of their inquests as well so we don't
                        have to ask them to repeat the words however many times it
                H                                  - 7 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                THE CORONER


                        is that they happen to have dealt with cases.   I hope
                        that is all acceptable to you.   I think it is more
                        convenient and altogether more satisfactory.

                             Now that completes what I call the preliminary
                        formalities.    I want to take a few minutes to address you
                        and in particular, ladies and gentlemen, these remarks are
                        addressed to everybody but in particular to you because
                    B   you, as you will hear in a moment, have a function to play
                        in these proceedings and it is important that you should
                        (a) understand what we are doing, (b) what your function
                        is and various other things, so please listen.    You will
                        forgive me if I don't look at you all the time because I
                        am trying to take in everybody as well, so if I turn my
                        back on you from time to time that is not because I am
                        being rude or impolite to you, it is just the nature of
                        the auditorium.    I ought to say I am not used to being in
                        an auditorium like this and I am certainly not used to
                        being under the spotlight, so I hope you will forgive me
                        if I falter on occasions.

                             The office of Coroner is a very ancient one.    It
                        goes back almost 800 years.   Its function hasn't always
                    D   been identical to what we are doing now but it has always
                        been concerned, to a certain extent, with dealing with
                        people who have died.   I am not going to give you a
                        history lesson except you should know you are
                        participating in something which has long antecedents.
                        It is not something which has just been invented.

                             A Coroner's Court is a court of record and therefore
                    E   has a certain status in the hierarchy of the judicial
                        process in the United Kingdom.    It differs - and this is
                        a very important point - from, I think, all other courts
                        in the United Kingdom in that it is inquisitorial rather
                        than adversarial.    What that means is if you think of a
                        normal court, some of you may have been in a court, I
                        don't know, but certainly everybody has seen them on
                        television, you have a judge and you have two parties and
                        they are striving, so to speak, to persuade the judge or
                        the jury, as the case may be, to reach a decision or
                        verdict in accordance with the evidence which they produce
                        before the Tribunal.

                             A Coroner's Court is not like that at all.   The
                        Coroner is charged with make inquiries.   That is why it
                        is inquisitional, an inquest.    It is he, together with
                        his Officers and the people who support him, who make the
                        inquiries and then that evidence, or such part of it as
                        the Coroner feels right, is presented.   Now you might say
                        to me, "What on earth are all these people doing here, if
                        it is not adversarial?"   The answer to that is that the
                        rules which I will mention in a moment, allow certain
                        classes of people to be represented, (a) to protect their
                H                               - 3 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                     THE CORONER


                         interests, (b) to make sure that points which they feel
                         need to be put are put and also to ask questions of
                         witnesses in order to establish the facts or the truth of
                         the evidence which is being placed before you in order to
                         enable you to reach a decision.

                              All inquests have limited objectives - not just this
                    _    one, every inquest - and I will deal with those in a
                    ®    moment or two, but you should remember that.   An inquest
                         is not an open ended enquiry, there are bounds to it.

                               Why do we have an inquest at all?  We have to
                         remember in this particular case there has already been a
                         J udicial Inquiry in this town undertaken by Lord Justice
                         Taylor, which lasted about thirty-two days - quite a long
                         time - and quite a lot of words were said.   So why have an
                         inquest?    The short answer is because the Coroner's Act
                         says that we must.    It is Section 8(1) of the Coroner's
                         Act 1988 which provides for that.    I am not going to read
                         you the Section, I think you can accept that is true.

                              The next question is why are you here, because it
                         must be common knowledge that nearly all inquests are done
                    J)   without the presence of a Jury.   The answer to that is
                         that firstly the Coroner may, if he chooses, call a Jury
                         in any case if he thinks it is desirable.   However, more
                         importantly, under Section 8(3) sub-section (d) it says:

                              "Where the death occurred in circumstances, the
                              c ontinuance or possible recurrence of which is
                              prejudicial to the health of safety of the public, or
                    E         any section of the public, he shall proceed to summon
                              a Jury."

                               Now this is another vaguely worded sub-clause, as you
                         wi 11 realise, but I think I would be hard pushed, bearing
                         in mind that a Judicial Inquiry has already taken place,
                         to say that these particular inquests don't fall within
                         that sub-paragraph, and that is the view I have taken and
                         that is the reason why I have decided to ask you to come.

                              Now, what are the objectives of the Coroner's
                         inquest?   Apart from what might be said in the main Act,
                         which is the Coroner's Act 1988 - that sounds a very new
                         Act, doesn't it?    In fact it is a consolidating Act.
                         There have been loads of Coroner's Acts over the years but
                         one of the crucial ones was in 1887.          That really set the
                         modern system up.    It was the intention of Parliament, so
                         to speak, to make a h u n dr e d t h birthday present to Coroners
                         by consolidating the legislation in 1987, but I think a
                         General Election intervened and so the Bill was lost and
                         it was then re-introduced in 1988 and this is why we have
                         this new Act.    It is convenient because instead of
                         looking up half a dozen Acts we only need to look at one.
                H                                   - 9 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                THE CORONER


                             However, there are also Coroner's Rules.  These were
                        formulated in 1984, the Rules we are working to.   I want
                        to read you Rule 36.   Rule 36(l)(b) reads:

                             "The proceedings and evidence at an inquest shall be
                             directed solely to ascertaining the following
                             matters, namely, (a) who the deceased was;  (b) how,
                             when and where the deceased came by his death;  (c)
                    B        the particulars for the time being required by the
                             Registration Acts to be registered concerning the
                             death.

                             2. Neither the Coroner, nor the Jury,   shall express
                             any opinion on any other matter."

                             Now I did tell you at the beginning that inquests
                        were limited in nature and this Rule is the Rule which, if
                        you like, sets out the parameters more or less.    The
                        registration particulars - these on the whole are not
                        usually either controversial...   Well, they are certainly
                        not controversial, they are sometimes a little bit
                        difficult to ascertain.  They are the sort of things like
                        what is a person's job, where was he born, what is his
                    D   date of birth, things of that nature.   Although we have
                        to deal with it I don't anticipate any particular
                        difficulty.   In fact I am not saying I anticipate any
                        difficulty with anything, but usually registration
                        particulars are very straightforward.

                             There are then other things:   who the deceased was.
                        That usually is not a problem, and it is not a problem, I
                    E   believe, in this case.    When he died.   Where he died and
                        how he died.   In most inquests the who, when and where
                        are very straightforward.   The time that is spent is spent
                        on the question of discussing how.    In these particular
                        inquests - and by the way you will notice that I try to
                        refer to the inquests in plural because although we are
                        all sitting here, each one of the deceased is a separate
                        person and therefore we are actually doing ninety-five
                        separate inquests, as you will discover in a little while.
                        Some parts of it, of course, we are doing together, like
                        the opening address, for example.    It would be pointless
                        my repeating this ninety-five times to you.

                             As I say, in most inquests the time is spent on the
                        word "how", say a road traffic accident or something of
                        that sort.   In these particular inquests, the proceedings
                        which are taking place today and over the next few days
                        are even more limited than normal because I will not be
                        dealing with the quest ion of how.  I will tell you why in
                        a moment.  What we are going to concentrate on is who the
                        deceased was, when he died, as far as it can be
                        established, and where he died, as far as it can be
                        established, so we are dealing with those three things and
                H                               -   10 -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                THE CORONER


                        the registration particulars.   At the end of each inquest
                        we will adjourn it and I will tell you what the plans are
                        with respect to that in a little while.

                             Why is it I am not intending to deal with the
                        question of how?   The reason for it is that at the
                        present time there is an ongoing inquiry by the Director
                        of Public Prosecutions into questions as to whether or not
                    B   the incident at Hillsborough discloses any criminal
                        proceedings which warrant prosecution by the DPP.

                             The DPP has not yet made any announcement as to what
                        his conclusions are and as far as I know, he is not in a
                        position to do so yet because all the material that he
                        needs has not yet been presented to him.   That is nobody's
                        fault.   You might think if there has been a Public
                        Inquiry everything is done, but an awful lot of work has
                        been done since then and, indeed, is still going on.    So
                        the DPP is in the middle, if you like, of an inquiry.
                        When I heard this was going to happen my initial reaction
                        was that I would have to adjourn these inquests and there
                        are various reasons for it which I will not bother you
                        with for the moment.    Indeed I did, I said I wasn't
                    D   starting because quite apart from any other
                        considerations, it is in the interests of justice that
                        nothing I should do at an inquest should impede or imperil
                        the DPP's inquiries.  This is in the interests of justice
                        for everybody concerned.

                             However, as a result of various matters which
                        happened in correspondence which took place I felt it
                    E   might be possible to resume these inquests on this limited
                        basis, which I have already described to you, and, indeed,
                        after consultation with the DPP the DPP agreed that that
                        was a satisfactory way of proceeding.    It has the
                        advantage that it will answer quite a lot of questions
                        which are in people's minds, even though it will not
                        necessarily answer them all.   It does mean there are
                        certain limitations on the way the evidence has got to be
                        presented, because the overall consideration is that we
                        will not adduce or allow evidence to be adduced which is
                        critical of, or which could be treated as an attack on
                        anybody, or on any corporation, for that matter, because
                        we do not know where that might lead to.

                             Now in some respect I am fortunate because the word
                        "how", you know, what on earth does it mean, and how far
                        should I go anyway in an inquest of this sort, luckily for
                        me at this stage I don't have to address you on that point
                        because we are not going to deal with it.   If and when
                        the time comes for us to deal with the question of how,
                        then will be the time for me to say what I intend to do.


                H                               -   11   -



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                 THE CORONER


                             In order to avoid any misunderstanding I want to
                        repeat this because it is important for you to understand
                        it and, of course, for the legal representatives also to
                        appreciate, if you like, the ground rules on which we are
                        proceeding.   One, all inquests are limited in scope;
                        two, these particular hearings are even more limited than
                        normal because we are excluding a whole section of
                        evidence at this stage.   No criticism or attack on any
                    B   person or corporations will be permitted and if a question
                        is asked then I will not allow it.  We will do nothing
                        which is detrimental to the DPP's inquiry.

                             Now as a small interlude, I want just to tell you
                        because having mentioned the DPP you might say, "What will
                        happen when the DPP makes up his mind?"     I will just very
                        briefly outline two possible scenarios which I can think
                        of.   One is that the DPP will decide not to prosecute
                        anybody.     They will decide there is not sufficient
                        evidence to warrant a criminal prosecution of the nature
                        which would affect an inquest.     If that happens then as
                        soon as it is conveniently possible we will resume.     I
                        think it is only fair to say I anticipate that assuming
                        the DPP takes that view, we will not be resuming the next
                    D   day, because a lot of further work will have to be done by
                        me to (a) re-absorb it all and (b) to decide which
                        witnesses to call and so on.     However, as soon as
                        reasonably possible we will resume and conclude the
                        inques t s .

                             That is scenario 1.   If the DPP decides to prosecute
                        for an offence which falls within Section 16 of the
                    E   Coroner's Act, and for all practical purposes the only
                        real one which I think is relevant in that section is
                        manslaughter.   The other ones are murder, infanticide,
                        reckless driving and aiding and abetting a suicide, so I
                        don't think any of the others can be within contemplation.
                        However, assume for a minute that he were to decide he
                        wanted to prosecute somebody for manslaughter, or some
                        corporation or more than one - it has nothing to do with
                        me, that is a matter entirely for the DPP - then as soon
                        as a person is charged with such an offence, Section 16(1)
                        of the Coroner's Act provides that I am informed by the
                        Clerk of the Magistrates' Court and there are also
                        provisions for the DPP to let me know in certain
                        circumstances and the Section then goes on:

                             "The Coroner shall, in the absence of reason to the
                             contrary, adjourn the inquest until after the
                             conclusion of the relevant criminal proceedings..."

                        It goes on to say:

                             "...and if a Jury has been summoned may,   if he thinks
                             fit, discharge them."
                H                                -   12 -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                    THE CORONER


                         Now what happens in practice is when a person - after all,
                         we have sufficient cases of people who do get charged
                         under this Section - I, and I think nearly all Coroners,
                         adjourn as we have to.   Then because of various other
                         sub-sections in that section, we wait for the outcome, and
                         it is normal practice not to resume the inquest after the
                         conclusion of the criminal proceedings.   Now I am not
                         going to announce at this stage what I will do in these
                    B    particular inquests, apart from saying that it is normal
                         practice not to resume and to hear the rest of the
                         evidence.  The reason for this is because of course the
                         evidence will have been fully explored in the Crown Court.
                         It does not actually say that in the Act but I am sure
                         that is what was behind the thinking when these provisions
                         were being drafted.

                              As I say, it is the normal practice not to resume,
                         but I am not announcing at this stage what I intend to do.
                         We will let people know if and when the time arrives.
                         This does not mean to say there will be a prosecution.
                         It does not mean to say there will not.    I am just
                         explaining to you what may happen.   There are two
                         possibilities.    One, that you might be back to hear a lot
                    J)   more evidence.  Two, just for a formal morning while we
                         adjourn under Section 16 and then for practical purposes
                         nothing more, or you might even be back at the end of the
                         criminal proceedings, but I will let you know when the
                         time arises.   I don't want to anticipate either decisions
                         or actions by me.

                              That was a little interlude, nothing to do with
                    E    today, just so you know how things worked.

                              Now to return to today.       Because of the limitations
                         which I have already described to you, I have decided I
                         will not be calling any South Yorkshire Police Officers.
                         In fact we will be calling very few witnesses to give viva
                         voce evidence.    In other words, orally, apart from these
                         Presenting Officers.   What we have done is we have
                         prepared summaries of the evidence for each individual
                         deceased and the Officers will present those summaries.
                         The summaries have been prepared in such a way that they
                         comply with, the rule, if you like, which I have laid down
                         as to the scope of these inquests, so you are going to
                         hear summaries from Police Officers.        They have already
                         taken the oath so they are going to tell the truth as they
                         know it.    However, you must remember, and it is a
                         terribly important point to grasp, that they were not
                         there and they are recounting to you what other people are
                         saying.    All right?   They have done it to the best of
                         their ability and I have gone through every single file.
                         They are about as big as t h i s .    They look like t h a t .
                         There are ninety-five of those.        Some summaries” I Felt
                         needed possible re-thinking in places.       I have drawn it to
                    H                              - 13 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                THE CORONER


                        the Officers' attention.  We have done our best in order
                        to get these summaries as accurate and as fair as we can.
                        That is not to say there may not be errors in them.    I
                        expect if there are, my colleagues down here will draw
                        those to my attention, in particular you, Mr. Fraser, and
                        any other solicitors who represent the bereaved.

                             We have allowed the solicitors for the bereaved and
                    B   Mr. Fraser to see the summaries.  We have not circulated
                        them to other firms.   You may feel that is unfair, but I
                        did spend quite a bit of time thinking about this and on
                        reflection I don't think it is because the summaries, as I
                        have already explained, are drafted within the limits of
                        the proceedings and their only objective is to disclose
                        the who, when and where of the deceased.    It was they who
                        needed to see them.  I think you will have plenty of
                        opportunity, because of the way they are read, if there is
                        anything you need to pick up I am sure you will be able to
                        do it without any prejudice to your clients' rights.

                             In addition to the summaries, we will hear post
                        mortem evidence.   Certainly in the beginning we are going
                        to have the pathologists here to give the evidence
                    D   themselves.   There may be a few cases where we don't need
                        a pathologist and we will just deal with it on paper.
                        However, at the present time the arrangements are that if
                        need be the pathologists will be here for every single
                        inquest because we want the families to be able to hear
                        what the pathologist has to say for themselves, from him
                        or her as the case may be.

                    E        Then there are one or two other little bits of
                        evidence, mainly dealing with the registration
                        particulars.   I have had various forms signed and there
                        is the opening of the inquest which I did two or three
                        days after the event in order to enable people to have the
                        bodies of their loved ones back and in order to enable
                        them to arrange for the funerals, because as you can
                        appreciate, I am sure, one of the things that everybody
                        wants when a tragedy like this strikes them is they want
                        to be near their loved one and they want to be able to
                        arrange the funeral.   If we have got all the bodies in
                        Sheffield and all the families are in Liverpool or London
                        or wherever then that creates a great deal of problems.
                        I opened the inquests very, very quickly, in fact, after
                        the event in order to try to satisfy people's legitimate
                        needs in that respect.

                              At the time I realised we were likely to make some
                        mistakes in the opening evidence because we were doing it
                        so fast we did not really have time to double check
                        everything, but I decided in the interests of speed it was
                        better to do that than to wait until I could cross every
                        " t" and dot every      and I felt if we did need to make
                H                               - 14 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                  THE CORONER


                        any amendments or corrections to what was said to me at
                        the time we would have the opportunity to do so now.    In
                        fact you will hear that there were some of the openings
                        where errors were made either about a name or places or
                        birth or ages on occasions.    There were also one or two
                        cases where we have got - what we did was we prepared a
                        standard form and because we used a standard form and
                        because we did not double check everything in some cases
                    B   the standard form is incorrect, but I will draw those
                        points to your attention.    They will not strictly affect
                        you, but I want everybody to know if there is an error as
                        far as I am able I will draw it to your attention so you
                        know what is going on.    None of us, I am afraid, are
                        perfect, and that goes for me as well!

                             Now there is one other matter I have to deal with on
                        this point and that is what I call the visual evidence.
                        You will hear in a few minutes from one of the Presenting
                        Officers, and, indeed, also Mr. Jones, whom I will
                        introduce to you in a moment, that there is a an enormous
                        amount of visual evidence and a great deal of time and
                        effort has been spent in trying to look at the videos and
                        photographs and try and find where people were on the day.
                    D
                              I have   given this matter a considerable amount of
                        thought as to how to deal with it and I have decided,
                        having looked at some of the photographs, that if I passed
                        photographs around it would not be particularly helpful
                        and it would be even less helpful to start to try to show
                        hours and hours of video recording, quite apart from the
                        problems it    might impinge on the limitations.   What we are
                    E   going to do    is to use plans where we need to locate
                        people.    The Officers have prepared plans.    They are
                        basically plans like those on the wall.    That one, for
                        example, is a plan of a pen.    They are not as large as
                        this.    They are much smaller, they fit into the folders.
                        On them there are different coloured spots, blue ones and
                        green ones.    You will hear about those in a few minutes.
                        From that it will be possible to trace what the evidence
                        is as to where a person was at various stages, insofar as
                        it has been possible to establish it.

                              In fact, having said that we have got all these
                        little plans, in practice what we are going to do during
                        these hearings is that as the Officer presents a case - I
                        will not be using every plan, there are hundreds of these
                        plans as well and there is no reason why I should use them
                        all, I will use those which I consider we need.    However,
                        instead of passing plans round we will try and point on
                        the bigger plans so that the Officer will say, 'That is
                        where the spot is", and you will be able to see it.   We
                        are here today, as you know, and tomorrow we are here as
                        well.    The next day we are in the Medico-Legal Centre and
                        that is where we are going to continue.   That is a very
                H                                - 15 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                           THE CORONER


much smaller, more intimate court, and it will be a lot
easier for everybody.  We will all be closer together and
we will all be able to see that much better.   I think
that is going to be the easiest way for all of us to know
what we are talking about in any particular case.

     We will probably bind a copy of the plan into the
transcripts, which I will mention in a moment.  That does
not really affect you, but if we have referred to a plan
the record, if you like, will have a copy of it bound in,
at least the master copy will certainly have that.

     I have already said we will not be calling many
witnesses, definitely no South Yorkshire Police Officers
and we are not calling any stewards or, for that matter,
club officials either.

     Now I very briefly want to turn to the rules.        I am
not going to take you through all these rules and I am
going to be selective, but I ought just to say this:       that
under Rule 2 0 ( 1 ) (b) I am entitled to disallow any question
which is not relevant or which I consider to be improper.
That does not mean rude, but not proper for the purposes
of an inquest.        I do not think that is going to happen
but it may be that occasionally a question will be asked
which I consider to be outside the scope.        If that is so
then I will just have to say that I am not allowing that,
but we will see as we go along.

     There is an important rule,    Rule 22, which I will
read because although it is not    relevant at this stage, it
is a rule which has to be borne    in mind at all inquests
and I think it is worth knowing    it at this stage.  Rule 22
says:

     "No witness at an inquest shall be obliged to answer
     any question tending to incriminate himself."

In other words, you cannot make somebody answer a question
which might make them liable to some criminal prosecution,
what ever that might be.

     Sub-paragraph (2):

     "Where it appears to the Coroner that the witness has
     been asked such a question the Coroner shall inform
     the witness that he may refuse to answer."

Now you will appreciate because of the limits which we
have got on the inquest nobody is likely to be asked any
questions which fall within this rule at this stage.

     Rule 24 provides   that:


                          - 15 -
                                         THE CORONER


     "Anybody whose conduct is likely to be called in
     question is entitled to be present."

That is one of the reasons why we have got representatives
here, but again because of the way the evidence is going
to be presented, if a person's conduct is likely to be
called in question it is not likely to happen at these
hearings, but it is still wise and proper, and I am
greatly obliged to all of you for coming because I think
at the opening at least you ought to be here so that you
know what is happening and how we are dealing with it.

     Rules 26 and 27 deal with the question of
adjournments in certain circumstances and I am not going
to deal wit h these now but they are the rules, if you
like, which support adjournments when the DPP gets
involved.

     I have already drawn Rule 36 to your attention.    I
want to remind you of it.    It says specifically that
apart from those matters that are mentioned in that rule
we don't deal with other things.    In particular it is
clear from that rule we don't add riders to the verdicts.
At one time juries used to say, "So-and-so died as a
result of this and what is more we make the following
twenty recommendations", or whatever it might be.    That
is no longer permitted.   Some people do not like that, of
course, but that is how it is.

     We now turn to Rule 37 and this is more a matter for
the lawyers than for you, but Rule 37 makes provision for
evidence to be produced by way of documents.    In other
words, it is permissible in certain circumstances not to
call the witness at all but just to read his evidence, or
such part of it as is appropriate and relevant.    That is,
if you like, the reason why it would be possible to take,
say, pathological evidence without the pathologist being
here because we could just use the PM report as
documentary evidence.   In many cases the evidence is not
actually controversial which is one of the criteria.     You
do not use this rule for evidence which is contentious,
shall we say.

     The problem with the rule is that strictly speaking I
ought to tell you at this stage every single item of
documentary evidence we are going to call, together with
the names and the addresses of the deponents and together
with a summary of the content of the document.  Well, I
have to tell you in these particular inquests that is an
impossible task and there is a further sub-clause which
says you are entitled to see the document.   Now we have
got a lot of problems with this where we want, for
example, to refer to parts of the evidence of people who
are within the folders, or, if you like, on which the

                         - 17 -
                                                                  THE CORONER


                        summary is based.  What I propose to do is not to give you
                        this information at this stage, mainly because I am not in
                        a position to do so.   That is partly due to the fact that
                        it depends to a certain extent upon what questions arise
                        after the summaries are presented.    However, if it were
                        to be that we needed to amplify, or for some reason I felt
                        it would be helpful to read an extract from a statement
                        which I have in respect of any particular deceased person,
                    B   I would propose and I hope you will agree, to read the
                        relevant bit that is relevant to the proceedings within
                        the limits that I have set.    I will be prepared to give
                        you a copy, if you like, of that little bit, with
                        everything else blanked out in the statement because we
                        cannot disclose at this stage the statements because of
                        the DPP's involvement.

                             However, on the other hand it will all be transcribed
                        so you may find if we do read anything out of statements
                        you will actually have, if you request it that is, in
                        black and white what has been said.

                             I think if we do read extracts - I have gone through
                        these files, as I have explained to you already and I have
                    D   marked the bits that I consider would be either relevant
                        or readable, or perhaps the other way round, if necessity
                        demands.   I hope that will be acceptable to you.   I
                        think it is the best I can do at the present time in the
                        circumstances in which I and all of us find ourselves.

                              One other point, just in order to make it absolutely
                        crystal clear, if I were to read an extract out of the
                    E   folders, so- there is no m isunderstanding on this point,
                        what I read is an edition.     It is not the complete
                        statement and it may on occasions be bits pieced together
                        from the statement which I have picked out.    For example,
                        let us imagine there is a particular statement which deals
                        w ith where a person has been found and for some reason I
                        want to read that.   That may be in three sections on three
                        different pages.    I may join that all out as I read it.
                        I will deliberately leave out any c riticism of any person
                        for the reasons which I have already explained to you.
                        Conversely, I have marked it in such a way as to leave out
                        any praise of any person, because otherwise, if I were to
                        read, if you like, all the goods bits about people, you
                        may get the wrong impression of the import of the
                        document.    In other words, if I do read something - and
                        it is unlikely I will do it often, the chances are I may
                        not do it at all - but if I do do it I want you to
                        understand that it is an edited portion of the transcript,
                        but that I am reading as fairly as I can the evidence
                        relating to what we are dealing with at the moment.

                             Have I made that clear?     I want to be sure you have
                        understood this point.
                H                               - 18 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                THE CORONER


                             Summaries, of course, as I have already said, are
                        based upon these statements and to the best of our ability
                        they are correct, subject to the limitations which I have
                        already explained to you.

                             We have got a technical difficulty with regard to
                        exhibits because the rules provide that exhibits in
                        Coroner's Courts are supposed to be labelled "C.l" and
                    B   "C.2" and so on, to wherever you go.    We are going to try
                        and do that.   I am going to try and write down the
                        numbers as we go along, but from a practical point of view
                        I think it is infinitely preferable to refer to the
                        exhibit numbers which have been used by the West Midlands
                        Police because those are, if you like, common currency in
                        judicial inquiries and so on.    Therefore, if we do have
                        to refer back to any particular thing we will probably
                        refer to the West Midlands Police references rather than
                        to my own coronal numbers.    I am only doing it if I am
                        able to comply with the rule.

                             As you know, Coroners are to keep notes of evidence.
                        As you also know tape recording has been considered to be
                        a satisfactory method of doing it.   In these particular
                    D   inquests I have asked for a firm to attend to take a
                        shorthand note and, indeed, I think they use recordings as
                        well as a back-up for themselves and they will produce a
                        transcript for me of the evidence which will constitute
                        the notes of evidence for these inquests.   They will not
                        be produced immediately in the sense that they will be
                        available in the morning or the afternoon or the next day,
                        because I don't think we need that.   On the other hand,
                    E   they will be available relatively quickly, within the
                        abilities of getting things transcribed, and subject to
                        whatever the usual provisions are with regard to copies,
                        it will be a matter for you to decide whether you want
                        some or all or none of the transcripts, but we will have
                        them available once they have been transcribed.

                             Now then, ladies and gentlemen, what on earth are you
                        going to be doing?    Your duty is to listen to the
                        evidence in accordance with the oath and then to reach a
                        verdict.    It must be obvious to you already that you will
                        not be in a position to reach a verdict at this stage
                        because you will not have heard all the evidence and at
                        the end of each inquest I am going to adjourn it.    Your
                        task at the moment is to listen.    You may say, "How on
                        earth can I listen for fourteen days, remember it all, go
                        away maybe for three months, six months, come back and
                        reach a verdict?"    Well, the answer to that is it is
                        exceedingly difficult, but when the time comes, and I am
                        not saying...   The time may never come because it depends
                        very m uch upon what happens under the provisions of
                        Section 16 of the Coroner's Act.    However, assuming for
                        the moment that the time were to come when we were all
                H                               - 19 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                  THE CORONER


                        together again, then it is my task to sum up for you and
                        the summing up includes summarising the evidence.   I hope
                        that at that point I will be in a position to remind you
                        of the salient parts of what we have heard and what you
                        need in order to enable you to reach a verdict.

                             I am afraid at this     stage you are here to comply with
                        the law, because I decided, and I did think about this
                    B   quite hard, and I decided in the end that we had to have
                        this inquest with a Jury at this stage.      You are here to
                        comply with the law and for you to listen.      If, when the
                        evidence is presented, there is something which is not
                        clear to you, then I am going to try to remember to look
                        towards your foreman.     Now you probably have not yet
                        chosen a foreman, but at a convenient adjournment, say
                        over lunch, can you...       I could nominate somebody but I
                        would much prefer you to choose somebody amongst
                        yourselves who you would     like to act as your foreman. He
                        or she is the spokesperson who communicates, if you like,
                        with me.      Communication with me has got to be here in
                        open court.    All right?    We don't talk, if you like,
                        outside.   This is not because I am snobbish and don't want
                        anything to do with you.      It is just for the sake of
                    D   proprieties and so that everything that is done is done
                        correctly.

                             Now, Members of the Jury, it is not your fault that
                        you have been catapulted, in a sense, I suppose it is a
                        niche of history because it was, whatever the outcome,
                        what ever the verdict, a terrible, terrible tragedy, that
                        ninety-five people lost their lives and you have been
                    E   picked - I don't know any of your names or anything about
                        you, expect I know that letters were sent out by the Jury
                        Officer to various people and you happen to be the eleven
                        who have been picked to sit on these inquests and so in a
                        sense you are now part of history, relating to these
                        particular inquests.  What you are going to be doing is -
                        it is an arduous task and it may be a distressing task for
                        some of you - all of you.   However, I am sure you will be
                        able to do it.

                             You will know, as I am sure all of us do, that there
                        are many people in caring professions - social workers,
                        doctors, nurses - who are faced all the time with sadness,
                        sickness, disasters, maybe not on an individual basis but
                        if you are, say, a nurse on a ward you might have hundreds
                        of desperately ill people going through your hands, so to
                        speak.   Everybody in that situation has in the end got to
                        reach a situation where they balance detachment with
                        emotional involvement with the people or the cases they
                        are dealing with.   If you become too deeply, too
                        emotionally involved with a particular matter and if there
                        is a lot of it, then you may not be able to cope with it
                        because it is hitting you so hard.   On the other hand, if
                H                                -   20 -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                  THE CORONER


                        you become too detached and you just sit back and say, "It
                        has nothing to do with me", you rnay feel you are being
                        cold.   Therefore, if you like, the nurse on the ward has
                        always got to balance this, how to be close to the patient
                        and yet a -little bit to one side, to preserve her own
                        professional abilities to cope.

                             Now I have got no idea what your occupations are or
                    B   what your backgrounds are, but to a certain extent you
                        have got to do the same.   You have got to listen to this
                        evidence.   You have got to listen to it detachedly.   That
                        is not to say you must not realise that we are talking
                        about real people, real families, real tragedies, but
                        remember your job is here as a Jury.   OK?    That is
                        very, very important because you will be hearing ninety-
                        five cases, one after the other.   Unless you get this
                        right at the beginning you may feel uncomfortable.

                             Now, we are all different and all of us have our own
                        personal families, our own personal tragedies, our own
                        personal responses.  Some of you may find some cases more
                        moving than others.  We are all like this because I
                        noticed this when I was reading some of the cases.    Some
                    D   of the things which affected me most were not necessarily
                        what other people might have said were horrific, there
                        were little tiny nuances.   All of you may respond to
                        different things.   That is natural, that is you.   You
                        are human.   Do not expect all of you to respond
                        identically to every single bit of evidence.  All right?

                             Because of the   nature and the volume of the evidence
                    E   that is being given   to you some of you may feel a little
                        bit upset from time   to time.  Again, be prepared for that.
                        It is no reflection   on you.   It is perfectly normal and
                        when it is over you   will settle down again to be your
                        normal selves.

                             In addition you have got yourselves, the eleven of
                        you, you will be together for quite some time.  I don't
                        suppose you know each other but at the end of it some of
                        you may form friendships which will last, I don't know,
                        but you have certainly got each other and in a sense you
                        are a mutual support group and when you meet for coffee
                        and so on you can do that, you can help yourselves if you
                        find you need a little bit of encouragement.

                             I have to tell you that you are not to discuss the
                        evidence with anybody else.    People will want to talk to
                        you about the evidence.     They will come up to you and
                        express sympathy and they will want you to tell them and
                        they will want your views.    Perhaps even more, they will
                        want to tell you their views.    You are the Jury and you
                        are not to discuss it with anybody else.   All right?
                        That is hard, but do it, because the one thing we don't
                    H                             -   21 -



J.-L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                THE CORONER


                        want is any mistakes made in inquests of this nature,    All
                        right?

                             Now this restriction has worried me quite a bit in
                        fact because it could happen that despite everything I
                        have said one or other of you really gets hit hard and you
                        just feel you cannot cope without some support from a
                        doctor or a social worker or something like that.    I
                    B   think I still have to say to you that you are not to
                        discuss the evidence but if that situation were to arise I
                        can see no reason...   First of all, I cannot see any
                        reason why any of you should really suffer.   That is not
                        what we want, nor do we want any long term harm to any of
                        you.   I am not saying that that will happen.    I do not
                        think it will, but I am just assuming this.    However, if
                        any of you were to be in that situation, then I think it
                        would not be improper for you to seek help from
                        professional people, not with regard to the evidence that
                        you hear here, but with how you are responding.    In other
                        words, help for you rather than help for the evidence.
                        You can discuss your response with a professional person,
                        but you are not to discuss the evidence.

                    D        I would prefer, of course, if that were not to arise
                        because that is quite a difficult distinction which I am
                        making, but I am trying to think of you as people, because
                        I don t think anybody would want you to be hurt
                        unnecessarily.   Is that clear?

                             I think that that is a correct direction on this
                        point.   It is a very difficult problem with regard to
                    E   these particular inquests and I have given it a bit of
                        thought as to how to help you on this point.

                             Now we have virtually finished the opening.    We have
                        got a very tight schedule.  Today is unusual because I am
                        doing the opening address and we are doing various other
                        things which we will not normally be doing.    Normally we
                        are going to start at 9.30.   We want to do eight inquests
                        a day.  We will have coffee and lunch breaks and we will
                        probably rise in between each inquest just for a moment or
                        two.   We are going to try and fix lunch for one o'clock.
                        It is a nine-thirty start, one o'clock until two for lunch
                        and then in the afternoon if we can finish at about four
                        thirty to five that is what I am aiming at, but I cannot
                        always guarantee it because I cannot guarantee precisely
                        how long each inquest will take.    Although we have a
                        tight schedule and although everything is planned on that
                        basis I don't want anybody, and in particular the
                        families, to feel we are rushing them.    If it takes
                        longer then it will just have to take longer.    On
                        balance, I think we will be all right but we want to do
                        the proper thing for each individual inquest.     Each one
                        of those is a person who was loved.   We have got to
                H                               -   22 -




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                THE CORONER


                        remember that and we have got to give them and their
                        families and the legal representatives and everybody who
                        is here supporting them the proper respect which is due to
                        them and that is how we are going to do the inquests.

                             Now there are a few inquests where we have already
                        had definitive advice from either the family or their
                        legal representatives that the family does not wish to be
                    B   present.   That is entirely proper.    It is their right,
                        their privilege and it is no criticism whatsoever.    We
                        have given them times.    What I intend to do is to use, if
                        I can put it like this, those inquests as fillers, if I
                        may use that word.     If, for example, we find we have
                        finished earlier on a particular day then we may bring in
                        an inquest forward where we know people will not be here
                        and deal with it then because it gives us a little bit of
                        extra space which we may need later on.   We don't think
                        anybody will be prejudiced by this because they have
                        already indicated that they are not coming.    Of course,
                        if they change their mind and decide they do want to come
                        and they let us know then obviously we would not do that.
                        I am just saying this, particularly to you, Mr. Fraser,
                        because you will want to know this.    You have had the
                    D   schedule and you will know the ones who are proposing not
                        to come.  As I say, it gives us a little bit of
                        flexibility with our timings.

                             Because of the schedule we must start on time and so
                        everybody has got to be here when they are supposed to be
                        and we will start.    I mean, the Jury, you must be here.
                        All right?   We cannot start without you.    Once you are
                    E   here and I am here we have got to get cracking at the time
                        laid down.   So please, if you are members of the family
                        and your inquest is listed for a particular time or day
                        please be here at the right time.   This is not because I
                        am being horrible and nasty to you and have no
                        flexibility, but because if we wait we are putting
                        everybody else out and we want to start.    However, having
                        said that, we may of course overshoot ourselves.    If that
                        happens, and inquests are delayed because we have taken
                        longer, that is tough.    I want us to do a proper job with
                        each inquest, but as far as possible we are going to work
                        to time.   All right?

                              Now I have already said we are here today.  We are
                        here tomorrow.    On Friday we are at the Medico-Legal
                        Centre.    Members of the Jury, if you don't know where
                        that is please speak to Sergeant Griffiths or Mrs. Taylor,
                        you have met her, and make sure you know where to come.
                        It is not difficult once you know how to get there.
                        Please, please be there on time.    Proceedings are
                        starting at 9.30 so you have got to be there earlier than
                        that.   We will try and make you as comfortable as we can
                        within the limits of available accommodation.
                H                               - 23 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                           THE CORONER


     At the Medico-Legal Centre our normal work is
proceeding.   Unfortunately people are dying in Sheffield
all the time and many of the cases that are reported to me
in Sheffield are very, very tragic.    Each one is as much
a loss to that family as every one of these young people
whom we are dealing with today so when we are at the
Medico-Legal Centre let us remember that there are other
people there as well.   We will tend to swamp them a little
bit.   Please let us remember them and act, as I am sure
all of you will, with courtesy and care to them because it
is very easy to forget that those people are mourning
people just as you are.    I am sure I do not have to say
this, but it is terribly easy to forget when there are a
lot of us, that there are others there as well.    So we
want to be sensitive, that is really what I am saying.

        Now that brings me very, very conveniently to the
media who I cannot see, but I think you are somewhere up
there!      Now ladies and gentlemen, I know that you have a
right to be at the court and that you have a right to
report proceedings.      I also know that the media have not
had the best press, if I can put it like that, with regard
to the Hillsborough Stadium disaster, although in passing
it is only fair to say that a lot of the photographs which
were taken and which caused such a lot of distress at the
time, have proved exceedingly useful subsequently to the
inquiries and in particular to me because it has enabled
us to deal with identifications.       So some good, if you
like, has come out of a lot of        the photography. However,
you don't want to have a bad press any more than any of us
do, so I would ask you, please, firstly to record
proceedings accurately.      I don't really have to ask you
that because I am sure you are        going to do it anyway.
However, it is not so much the        reporting that is
inaccurate, what upsets people is - I am not a media man
so I don't know, but I think it is the sub-editors and the
editors who then pick out the bits they want to blow up
for the headlines.      Be, as I have said to the families
with regard to the Medico-Legal Centre, be sensitive.
Th i n k before you write.  Think before you speak.    Think
before you print.     Ask yourselves the question, "Would I
want it presented like that about me and my family?"
Then take a reasonable, professional decision.

     I know you have a duty to convey information to other
people and you have to do it in such a way that people
want to read it and you have, because it is a business, a
responsibility to sell or market your product.   I accept
that, but do it within the ambit of what I have outlined.

     Secondly, I don't want you, please, I am going to use
the word harass - I don't like the word "harass" - my
families, if I may refer to you like that, and in
particular not within my court or the precincts of my

                          - 24 -
                                                                   THE CORONER


                        court, by which I mean the corridors and the rooms either
                        here or at the Medico-Legal Centre.    I want you to deal,
                        if you do want to take statements or things like that,
                        away from the court.   That is a matter for you but please
                        remember what I have said about sensitivity.   Within my
                        court and within the precincts of my court I want
                        relatives to be treated with the respect that they deserve
                        and I would take a pretty dim view if that was not done.
                    B
                             I also have to remind you both here and at the
                        Medico-Legal Centre that the - well, the court is public
                        but the building is not.   I don't expect people to wander
                        all round the building, down corridors and into rooms
                        where they have no business to be.   There are offices
                        there, there are other activities.  They are private and
                        they are not public ground to anybody in fact.    We use
                        the bits of the building which are reserved for us.

                             As the families know, but perhaps you don't, Members
                        of the Jury, the social services and others have done an
                        enormous amount of work in supporting people and there are
                        many social workers who have come with families or who
                        will be coming, not only social workers, a lot of the West
                    D   Midlands Police Officers have had to spend time with
                        families and have also, I think, make a lot of
                        relationship and it sounds as if some very good
                        relationships have been made with families and they too
                        have supported and helped the families.    I would like to
                        say how very much I appreciate the help that people have
                        given to you and also, of course, to recognise the help
                        you have given to yourselves by your own support
                    E   organisations which you have set up.    That may well in
                        the end be the best form of help that you can have.

                              The WRVS have very kindly agreed to deal with our
                        teas and coffees and so    on.   I am afraid some of you will
                        have    to pay as you will discover when you approach them,
                        and some of you might not, but you will sort that         out for
                        yourselves I am sure you will.      I am grateful to them for
                        coming and doing this both here and at the Medico-Legal
                        Centre.

                             Now there are a few matters which have been raised by
                        members of the families which are clearly outside the
                        ambit of the inquests altogether, never mind about the
                        restrictions we have placed on them.    The difficulty is
                        that they are things which have really worried and upset a
                        lot of the families.    There is not really an adequate
                        forum where they can be dealt with, but I am going to deal
                        with   one or two of these items very, very briefly, just so
                        that you can hear what I have to say.

                             Some people have asked the question why on earth was
                        the gymnasium used as a temporary mortuary?   I don't know
                H                                 - 25 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                  THE CORONER



                         precisely who it was who said to use the gymnasium as a
                         temporary mortuary but I can tell you this that in
                         retrospect, given the tragedy of the nature which we had,
                         having that gymnasium there was exceedingly fortunate
                         because it was such a larger building and it was so close
                         to the event that it did enable people to be accommodated
                         very much more conveniently than otherwise might have been
                    B    the case.   In retrospect I still feel that that was a
                         good choice at the time and I think if I had been there -
                         I was not at the game so I did not make that decision at
                         the time - but I am quite certain that if it had been
                         drawn to my attention I would have said, "Yes, that is a
                         splendid place".   I personally do not have any criticism
                         with that.

                              It enabled us to - and I did have something to do
                         with this - to segregate the bulk of the bodies from the
                         area where statements were being taken and the area where
                         families and relatives and friends were viewing individual
                         bodies.   You were obviously all terribly distressed and
                         who wouldn't be, but it would have been, in my view,
                         infinitely worse if we had not had that possibility for
                    £)   segregation.

                              The Polaroid photographs which were taken were taken
                         at my suggestion.   I take responsibility for those.
                         Again, we did it because I felt that it was kinder to try
                         and find the person, if he was there, rather than make
                         people walk up and down rows and rows of ninety-five dead
                         people to look for their own individual deceased person.
                    E    Of course it wasn't nice, but it was the best I could
                         think of, if you like, at the time and I still think it
                         was the right decision, but it was my responsibility.    I
                         did that.

                              The next thing that has worried people is the moving
                         of the bodies from the hospitals back to the temporary
                         mortuary.   There were thirteen bodies which had actually
                         gone to the two hospitals.    Most of them were at the
                         Northern General, one was at the Hallamshire.    They were
                         then brought back to the temporary mortuary.    That was
                         done on my authorisation.    There was a reason for it and
                         the reason was that firstly if we were going to do the
                         identifications with the Polaroids we had to take a
                         photograph and secondly, we thought it was inhuman to let
                         people view a partial list, so to speak, because if you
                         did not find your loved one on those photographs it did
                         not necessarily mean they were not dead because they might
                         have been somewhere else.    We took the decision we wanted
                         everybody in one place.    Whether that was right or wrong,
                         people may have different views on that, but I authorised
                         it and I take responsibility, if you like, for that.

                H                                - 26 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                THE CORONER


                             The bulk of the deceased people were unidentified,
                        as far as I was concerned and as far as the people at the
                        mortuary were concerned, the temporary mortuary, that is.
                        There were one or two, as we will hear, that people had
                        identified actually beforehand because they happened to be
                        with relations or relations happened to find them early,
                        but that was not always known at the temporary mortuary.
                        When you have such a large number of people you have to
                    B   have a system and we decided that the system, the way
                        people would come along and view, identify, give a
                        statement and deal with it in a formal way.   Some people
                        have been upset by that and obviously I am sorry that that
                        should be so, but one of the problems is communication.

                              There are one or two cases where people carried
                        identification on them and the question has been asked,
                        why, if they had had, say, a Barclaycard or something
                        which had their name on, or maybe even an address book
                        with their name, then why didn't we know it was them
                        straight away?    The reason is that a lot of the
                        clothing...    Well, one could guess but one could not be
                        sure.

                    D        We also knew a lot of clothing had been mixed up and
                        it was not felt right to proceed on the assumption that
                        somebody was dead on evidence which wasn't pretty certain.
                        So people, even if we had a pretty good idea that they
                        might be X, we still wanted it to go through the standard
                        procedure.

                             Some others have queried the question of the blood
                    E   samples.   Why were samples taken for alcohol?    The
                        answer is because I authorised it.   I decided I wanted
                        that done.   Somebody has said, "Is it normal?     Well, of
                        course, Hillsborough disasters are not normal, so in that
                        sense it is not, but there are very many inque st cases.
                        We don't take alcohol samples from everybody,    It would
                        be a lie to say that every single inquest I do we do do a
                        alcohol level.   Of course we don't.   However , we do do
                        it in a great number of cases and in this part icular case
                        I took that decision.   People are entitled to have their
                        own views but I took the decision and that is why we did
                        it.

                             Remember that at the time when I was taking decisions
                        we knew nothing, apart from the fact there had been a
                        terrible disaster at Hillsborough.   Oddly enough, I knew
                        less than most because I did not watch any of the
                        programmes.   I heard none of the comments.   I heard
                        nothing because I was at the Medico-Legal Centre trying to
                        deal with day to day things.   You probably knew a lot
                        more about what was happening on the day than I did, but
                        that is how it is.

                    H                           - 27 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                THE CORONER


                             Mow the final thing is the viewing.  There have been
                        a lot of people who have been very unhappy about the
                        viewing arrangements at the Medico-Legal Centre.    What
                        they did not like - at the Medico-Legal Centre we have a
                        viewing room which is approachable only through the
                        mortuary.   It has a glass partition so you view the body
                        through a glass screen, which means, of course, you cannot
                        touch it.   A lot of people have felt very, very unhappy
                    B   about that.

                             I was not Coroner when the Medico-Legal Centre was
                        designed but I know that at the time a lot of thought was
                        given to the viewing arrangements and that was the system
                        which was selected and I, if you like, inherited it.    I
                        am quite satisfied in my own mind that bearing in mind
                        what was happening, it would have been quite impossible in
                        all the circumstances to have allowed people into the
                        viewing area through the mortuary on that day.   If
                        anybody had asked me and said, "Can we let somebody in to
                        the viewing area?" I would have said no.   In fact we
                        don't normally do it anyway for, if you like, Sheffield
                        people.

                    D        We have got to remember that the arrangements at the
                        Medico-Legal Centre are arrangements at a mortuary.  We
                        are not a Chapel of Rest and the object of the viewing is
                        identification.   There is a specific purpose behind it.
                        Now I realise this has caused upset and distress to people
                        and I am obviously very sorry that that is so, but we have
                        got to live within what we have got and the viewing
                        arrangements are designed as I have just told you.
                    E
                              When this is all over I will think about it again.
                        I want to re-think, if you like, the design of that.     I
                        am not saying I will make any changes, and I am not
                        thinking of it now because I have got other things to
                        think about, but I do know a lot of you have been upset by
                        this.    I am sorry.   Nobody wanted to cause you
                        additional pain or distress, but that was the situation
                        and you have also got to remember there were an awful lot
                        of people there and an awful lot of people who wanted to
                        view - not surprising, because although we use it for
                        identification, in fact people do come and view because
                        they want to see their loved one, quite understandably.

                             Now I want to very, very briefly just outline to you
                        what happens.   Inspector Layton, could you just come and
                        help me?   We all know it was football match, a semi-final
                        on the 15th of April, being played at Hillsborough Stadium
                        between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.

                             You will hear in the evidence references to various
                        gates and so on.   There are really four gates which are
                        relevant.   First of all there are the outer perimeter
                H                               - 28 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                THE CORONER


                        gates.   Can you just show where those are?    Those are
                        the gates at the Leppings Lane entrance.    They lead to a
                        sort of courtyard, or outside the turnstiles.    Those are
                        the second gates, the turnstiles.    There were seven of
                        them, I think, A to G, which are relevant for this
                        purpose.   Next to the turnstiles there was a great big
                        gate called gate C.   There are other great big gates as
                        well, but they are not terribly relevant as far as these
                    B   inquests are concerned.    That gate C features in a lot of
                        the summaries and it was a gate which was opened.    Then
                        there are some more gates which are what I call the
                        internal perimeter gates.    Can you just point to them?
                        They are the little gates on the terraces which lead out
                        on to the pitch.    The gates are numbered 1 to 7, but the
                        only relevant ones - well, there are four that feature,
                        the two most important ones are gate 3 and gate 4.    There
                        is a gate 2 which is on the right hand side of gate 3, of
                        course, and gate 5 which is a very narrow area and which
                        is on the left of gate 4, of course.

                              You will see that there appear to be lines down the
                        drawing which are actua lly fences and which divide the
                        terrace - incidentally, the terrace apparently is the
                    D   place where you stand,     The stands are the places where
                        you sit.    In fact the stands in the West End were above
                        the terraces.    Be care ful because people may refer to
                        stands.   When they say "stands" they don't mean the
                        terraces, they mean the areas above them where people were
                        sitting.    All right?    It took me a little while to twig
                        that.    It is very easy to get confused.

                    E        There are these dividing fences.   There are actually
                        gates at the back which would be, I suppose, the fifth
                        gates.   There is one and then there are some at the back
                        there.   These fences divide the whole terrace into
                        enclosures and we will call the one opposite gate 3
                        enclosure 3.   It was not known as enclosure 3, but it is
                        easier to think of it like that and the other one, of
                        course, is enclosure 4.

                             Gate C - can we go back to gate C, that is the big
                        outer perimeter gate - was opened at three relevant points
                        of time.   It was opened at about 14.48 to let somebody
                        out and some people actually managed to get in - not all
                        that many but some got in.   It was opened again at 14.52.
                        That is four minutes later or so, and was kept open for
                        about five minutes to 14.57 and at that point a lot of
                        people came in.   That was the object.   It was opened
                        again at 14.59, just before kick-off.   Kick-off was at
                        14.59.30 - half a minute to three.

                             At almost five minutes past three there was an event
                        on the field when somebody, Mr. Beardsley, hit the
                        crossbar.   That is an important event which people
                H                               - 29 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                         THE CORONER


remember.   At 15.05.36 players   left the field and the
game was stopped.

     St. John's Ambulance was on the pitch at 15.15 - you
don't have to remember these times but I am mentioning
them because they are sort of markers.

     The only other thing I need to say is the gymnasium,
which I have already mentioned.   The gymnasium - can you
point to where it is?   It is on the opposite side of the
football field.    Point to the West Terraces again.
Leppings Lane.   The gymnasium is diagonally across.
That is, if you like, where the first aid/mortuary area
was.

     That is all I have to say.    Now, gentlemen, is
there any representations or applications you want to make
at this stage?

     MR. FRASER:   Sir, there are two matters.    One is
the presence of a video camera  at the back of this hall.
Perhaps for the benefit of the  Jury you might explain why
that is there.   Secondly, sir, I may have misunderstood
you.   If I have I apologise.    Is it your intention to
have the contents of each post mortem report read to the
Jury, or will you simply receive that report in evidence?

     THE CORONER:   Let me deal with the TV cameras.     We
are filming the proceedings.    This is mainly for the
benefit - I don't think you are being filmed, it is us up
here who are being filmed - this is mainly for the benefit
of the press because we have provided a press room for
them so they can sit and look at the proceedings at their
leisure.   It is not so important here because we have got
plenty of space, but as we do not know how many people are
going to turn up at the Medico-Legal Centre and as space
is very much more limited there, we have had to make some
provision so that there is an adequate amount of space for
the press.   We are actually also recording it, I believe,
but that is for our, if you like, internal use.    As we
have got the video cameras we are just running it on to a
machine, but it is not of any significance.

     Now the second point was the post mortem reports.
As I say, certainly for the first two days we are
definitely going to have a pathologist present and we may
well have a pathologist here for all of them.   However,
my normal practice is that if I use PM reports as
docomentary evidence I do not...   Some Coroners read them
verbatim, blow by blow.   I don't.   I extract the cause
of death and sufficient, if you like, of their findings to
justify it.   I do that because I think it doesn't advance
your knowledge for me to read you two pages of detailed


                        - 30 -
                                                                      THE CORONER


                        medical pathology and it is also very upsetting for
                        everybody.

                               Are you content with that if we dealt with it in that
                        way,   Mr. Fraser?

                             MR. FRASER:   Certainly in general terms, yes, but I
                        know that in many cases the families have no questions to
                    B   raise on the contents of the post mortem reports, but in
                        some cases obviously they have questions and it is nice on
                        behalf of the families to know the pathologist will be
                        available in the event matters arise on a day by day basis
                        as we go.

                             THE CORONER:    This is what I felt.   I thought on
                        balance, although I knew there were many, many families -
                        incidentally, the families have seen the PM reports, at
                        least their representatives have had them - so they know a
                        lot of this already.    However, I felt on balance it was
                        better if we had the pathologist here for most of the
                        cases.

                               MR.   FRASER:   I am obliged,   sir.
                    D
                             MR. CALLAGHAN:    Sir, I wonder if you might re­
                        consider your decison about the circulation of the case
                        summaries.   I, and a number of my colleagues, have
                        indicated that following today we would only intend to
                        come to the particular inquests which were relevant to our
                        respective clients.    If we have not seen the case
                        summaries in advance it will not be possible for us to be
                    E   selective in that way.

                             THE CORONER:   I understand.   I realise that that is
                        a problem.   I think, Mr. Jones, we have got a few copies
                        of the summaries.   The reason why I did not want to
                        circulate them was because strictly speaking they are not
                        evidence.   The evidence is what we hear in this court and
                        the presentation may well be different.   However, what I
                        think I would be prepared to do, if it will assist you, I
                        don't think we have got enough for everybody, but for you
                        to be shown or to be given a set for each day and for you
                        to look at them, pick the ones which you think you need to
                        be present at and then return them to us, and read them on
                        the basis that they are substantially correct but not
                        necessarily the verbatim evidence as they may possibly be
                        modified in one or two respects.   Would that help you?

                              MR. CALLAGHAN:  That would be very helpful, sir,      if
                        thay could be made available the previous day in each
                        case.

                                THE CORONER:   We will try and sort this out for the
                        af t e r n o o n .
                H                                   - 31 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                             THE CORONER


                             Is there anybody else who is in the same difficulty
                        with regard to these summaries, amongst you?

                             MR. ISAACS:   I think that all people would welcome
                        the opportunity to have that same facility.  Whether
                        everybody decides to use it or not, of course, is a matter
                        for them.
                    B        THE CORONER:   I do not think we are going to have...
                        We have not got nine copies, so we will have to be a
                        little bit selective but I think you will be able to sort
                        that out amongst yourselves.

                             MR. ISAACS:    We will either share,             sir, or be quick
                        readers!

                             THE CORONER:   That is right.   That is another way
                        of doing it.   I want to be helpful to you and make life
                        as easy as I can for you as well as for everybody else.

                             Now we were going to go straight into the evidence
                        but I think we ought to rise for at least five minutes so
                        that people can stretch their legs.   Would you take the
                    D   Jury out please?

                                            (Short a d j o u r n m e n t )

                             MR. FRASER:    Before you begin, s ir, to take
                        evidence, it has been suggested to me in the short break
                        that the Jury might feel the benefit o f a short visit to
                        the ground to get a better idea of the geography, of the
                    E   layout of the pens.    This obviously i s a matter for you,
                        sir, but it is a suggestion which has come from behind me
                        and it is an attempt to give the Jury, as it were, a
                        hands-on impression of the geography o f the area they are
                        dealing with.    The plans are accurate but give no real
                        idea of scale or size or view and it i s a matter that
                        perhaps you might like to consider.

                             MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, obviously we would be more than
                        delighted to put in train any plans you might have.   I
                        should say I am not sure at the moment whether Leppings
                        Lane is still under the control of the West Midlands
                        Police.   In that case I am sure there would be absolutely
                        no problems.

                             THE CORONER:      Perhaps during the luncheon
                        adjournment you could get in touch with whoever the
                        appropriate person is.      Find out whether this would be
                        possible.    Would you wish to do that, Jury?    Let's just
                        check.   (Y e s ) This is only to make it easier for you to
                        follow, you understand.      If it is possible, perhaps you
                        could find out some times.

                H                                 - 32 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                 THE CORONER


                             MR. CATCHPOLE:    Presumably either today or tomorrow?

                              THE CORONER:   I think ideally we ought to do it,
                        bearing in mind we have got a pretty tight schedule, we
                        ought to do it in the afternoon when we have finished with
                        the hearings.    Maybe we could do it tomorrow morning at
                        nine.    I think strictly speaking the Jury may have to go
                        on their own on this, without me.   Find out whether it
                    B   would be convenient at nine o'clock tomorrow morning.
                        Would that be too early for you, ladies and gentlemen?        V
                        If we don't start on time we have got all these families
                        queuing, if you like, and we don't want that to happen.

                             If we do do it then I think this is a visit for the
                        Jury and not for the press and everybody else.   It is
                        just for the Jury to go and see what the ground looks
                        like, on the ground.

                             MR. FRASER:   Sir, I am sorry to keep rising.   The
                        other matter which I know was canvassed yesterday was the
                        question of whether or not the model that was available to
                        Lord Justice Taylor should be available to your Jury today
                        and on successive days.   It is the view of those behind
                    D   me that the presence of that model would assist the Jury
                        and would not - and I stress that this is a matter which
                        has been canvassed - would not cause certainly those who
                        are present and are likely to be present, any undue
                        distress.   They have already seen that model, sir, and
                        they think it might assist the Jury.  Again it is a matter
                        for you, sir.

                    E        THE CORONER:     I shall decide that over the luncheon
                        adjournment.

                              There are three other things before we start taking
                        evidence.    Dr. Forrest, we will not get to your evidence
                        this morning.    I can tell you that already.   Two, where
                        is Inspector Tope?    Gentlemen, would you see Inspector
                        Tope?    Inspector Tope would you come down so they can
                        recognise you?    That is Inspector Tope, he is a West
                        Midlands Police Officer, to discuss the summaries and how
                        to organise that and we will see what we can do to help
                        you on that.

                             The third thing, is to tell you about this gentleman
                        is sitting next to me.   Most of you, of course, know in
                        fact that this gentleman here is Mr. Mervyn Jones.   He is
                        the Assistant Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police
                        Force.   He will be giving evidence in a moment so he will
                        be telling you a little bit about his involvement.   He
                        wears several hats but for the purposes of our inquiry he
                        is heading up the coronal inquiry and I want to say now
                        how exceedingly grateful I am to him and to all his team
                        for the enormous amount and help and support they have put
                H                                - 33 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                             JOHN MERVYN JONES



                        nto the inquiry and which they have given to me.   I want
                        /erybody to know I am most grateful to you, Mr. Jones,
                        nd, of course, to your team members as well, but
                        articularly to you.

                           How we are going   to start in fact with Mr. Jones.
                    B                   JOHN MERVYN JONES Sworn

                                        Examined by THE C O R O N E R :

                    Q    Yes, Officer? - A. Sir, I am John Mervyn Jones,
                         Assistant Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police.
                         If it is helpful to you and to your Jury, sir, I would
                    C    like to explain the role of the West Midlands Police in
                         this investigation, the nature of the investigation
                         which had led to the material which is before you today
                         and in future days to come.

                    Q    Yes, please, if you would. - A. Also the progress of
                         the investigation overall.   Sir, on the 16th of April
                         last year I was invited to head up the investigation on
                    D    behalf of Mr. Geoffrey Deare, the Chief Constable of
                         the West Midlands.   This took place on the Sunday
                         immediately after the tragedy the day before.   I
                         formally took charge of the investigation on the 18th
                         of April in the afternoon and my first Officer arrived
                         in Sheffield the following day.

                         The responsibilities at that stage were two-fold.   One
                    E    was to service the needs of your goodself and, indeed,
                         I did meet you on the Tuesday and you first gave
                         instructions to me then and we followed those on from
                         that time, gathering evidence on your behalf.

                         My other master at that time as well was Lord Justice
                         Taylor who, as most people in this room know, followed
                         on the oral hearings which commenced on the 15th of May
                         and concluded in July, leading later to the publication
                         of his report at the beginning of August.

                         An enormous amount of information was gathered in those
                         early days and has continued since, although I would
                         like to point out that the bulk of the information was
                         gathered at the time of the public hearings.

                           THE CORONER:   Can I interrupt you for one second?
                         Jury, can you hear?   (Y e s )

                         I am sorry to interrupt you in mid-statement. - A. The
                         majority of the information was actually gathered in
                         the early days of the inquiry and, indeed, was supplied
                         to Counsel servicing Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.    I
                H                                - 34 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                               JOHN MERVYN JONES


would like it to be known to you, sir, that nothing new
or significant has been found in our inquiries since
the closing of those oral hearings in July of last
year.

Lord Justice Taylor published his report on the 4th of
August and immediately after the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire wrote to the Director of Public
Prosecutions and invited the Director of Public
Prosecutions to decide whether a criminal investigation
should follow.   The DPP did respond and we formally
took responsibility for the investigation into any
alleged crime in September of last year.

All those inquiries have continued since with my
Officers, with a very large team at the beginning.
Now a team something in the order of fifty-odd
Officers.   You may well wonder why it is taking so
long to conclude that investigation.    Well, the
material we gathered for Lord Justice Taylor was
enormous and to give you some feel of that, the
situation at this moment, today, on the computer is
that we have had contact with something in the order of
13,081 named persons.  We have deployed over 8,500
Officer actions, as we call them.    Indeed, we have
completed nearly 8,000 questionnaires.    That has
actually led to nearly 4,000 people making statements,
many of whom have actually made more than one
statement.   In fact there is something of the order of
5,000 statements available.

In addition, we have something in the order of 5,000
documents in our possession.

Now all this w ealth of information, sir, has been
analysed in detailed.    Much of it has been processed
on to a computer and over the months we have actually
been working through that material, analysing it, in
order to prepare the summaries which will be heard
today and later and also to assemble the evidence for
the Director of Public Prosecutions.

Because of the bulk it has taken so long.  With regard
to the criminal inquiry, I can advise you, sir, we have
in fact submitted certain papers to the Director of
Public Prosecutions in the last week or so and we are
now awaiting his directions as far as further inquires
to be followed.  We have not, sir, concluded the
investigation at this time.  When precisely the
criminal investigation will be concluded will depend on
directions that the Director of Public Prosecutions
will give.   It will also depend on the length of time
the carrying out of those further investigations will
take.

                     - 35 -
                                                             JOHN MERVYN JONES


                    A   Precisely when the decision will be announced by the
                        DPP is as yet unclear, sir.

                    Q   As far as the overall investigation is concerned, this
                        has been an absolutely enormous task, from what you
                        say?   Of course, it is not just coronal activity you
                        have been involved in, but even if you look at just the
                        work that has been done for each individual case there
                    B   has been a considerable effort, is that right? - A.
                        That is right, sir.

                        Gould I just raise one matter about the clothing of the
                        deceased?   I made a decision on the Wednesday, the
                        19th of April of last year, to actually retain the
                        clothing a little bit longer in order for that clothing
                        to be listed, photographed and help us subsequently in
                        the identifications.   I know, sir, that that caused
                        distress amongst some families and I deeply regret that
                        but by way of explanation I would like to say that if
                        we had not taken that decision and did what we did with
                        it, we would not be in a position today and in the
                        following days to actually identify them.   So I would
                        like to apologise through you, sir, to the families
                    D   where distress was caused, but say there was good
                        reason.

                        Yes, thank you, I am sure that is accepted now,
                        although at the time I know it did cause a great deal
                        of anxiety.

                          THE CORONER:     Mr.    Fraser,   any questions?
                    E
                          MR.   FRASER:   No,    sir.

                          THE CORONER:   Shall I just work my way along.         Any
                        questions of Mr. Jones?   (No)

                          Mr. Jones, I am most grateful to you, as I have
                        already said, for the effort which has been put into
                        this inquiry by the West Midlands Police, and, as far
                        as I am concerned, the coronal inquiry, but I do know,
                        of course, that you have worked very hard.

                          THE WITNESS:   In leaving the box, sir, could I
                        mention that the Director of Public Prosecutions has
                        actually charged me to bear in mind the restrictions,
                        the parameters of the inquests?

                          T HE CORONER:   Yes, I am glad you have said that
                        because that reminds me, I have already indicated the
                        DPP's view but it is right, Mr. Jones, that...    You
                        have probably seen this letter but it is addressed to
                        me.    The substance of what the DPP has said is this,
                        that he is happy with the evidence relating to the
                H                                - 36 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                       JOHN MERVYN JONES


 movements on the 15th of April, 1989, of those who
 died, with evidence of identification and medical
 evidence of the cause of death to be given at the
 inquest, but he has said that any requests for evidence
 exceeding this restriction should be refused:

 That is right?    - A. That is correct.

 I think I am right in saying that he is looking to you
 in your capacity as the Officer dealing with the DPP
 inquiry to try and safeguard his interests in that
 respect? - A. That is correct, sir.

   THE CORONER:   I am, of course, very aware of that
 requirement and as far as I am concerned the DPP has
 nothing to fear.   Thank you, Mr. Jones.

   Inspector Layton.

                   MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                  Examined by THE C O R O N E R :

 Inspector Layton, you have already taken the oath,        that
 is right? - A. Yes, sir.

, If you would just introduce yourself so we know who you
  are?   Give us your full name and title. - A. Yes, sir.
  Michael Layton, Detective Inspector with the West
  Midlands Police.

, Inspector Layton, you have prepared a statement for me
  giving me an outline in particular of the work of the
  video/photographic section which I will listen to in a
  moment, but before we do that there are just two other
  points on those plans.   Can you just walk back to the
  plans?   I think if you look at the gymnasium.   I
  think you were actually pointing to the corner.   The
  gymnasium is actually that big building? - A. Yes, that
  was an error on my part.

   THE CORONER:   Members of the Jury, can you look?
 The gymnasium, the temporary mortuary and so on which
 features as you will hear in a little while, is that
 building up there.  OK?   It is not diagonally across
 but it is certainly not next to the terraces:

. The other point I forgot to ask you, is that there were
  actually four collection sites for people who had died.
  Two were the hospitals which are not on that plan.
  One was the gymnasium and there was an even more
  temporary collection point near Leppings Lane, I
  believe? - A. It was in this area here, sir.


                           - 37 -
                                                                MICHAEL LAYTON



                          THE CORONER:    You will hear about that in the
                        course of the evidence.   People will say the bodies
                        were placed, and then were moved.  There were about
                        eleven people who were collected there and then were
                        moved to the gymnasium from there.

                    |0. Now if you take me through your statement please? - A.
                        Following the Hillsborough disaster, a Video and
                        Photograph Section was formed as part of the major
                        inquiry team.   This was to look at all aspects of
                        visual evidence available from various sources.    As
                        such, since the 19th of April, 1989, I have been
                        engaged with a team of Officers in the collation and
                        examination of such material, initially for the
                        Judicial Inquiry and latterly for the Coroner's
                        inquests.

                        Specifically with regard to the deceased, we have
                        attempted to identify each person's position at the
                        ground, where possible, before and after their deaths.
                        The search for such information has been exhaustive,
                        but the degree of success in achieving an accurate
                    D   picture for each individual does vary greatly.    In
                        some cases the information obtained has been very
                        limited and in some instances it has not been possible
                        to confirm with any degree of certainty some of the
                        identifications made.

                        The first step which was taken with regard to obtaining
                        visual evidence was to obtain copies of the facial
                    E   Polaroid photographs of the deceased, which have in
                        fact already been mentioned.   These were taken after
                        the disaster at the behest of the Coroner.   In
                        addition the clothing of a vast majority of the
                        deceased was photographed prior to being returned to
                        families.   Again, as has been mentioned.   At a later
                        stage a number of families did in fact assist us by
                        supplying recent photographs of their loved ones taken
                        prior to the disaster.

                        For reference purposes each of the deceased was
                        allocated a number from 1 to 95 and the Polaroid
                        photographs equate to that same numbering system.   The
                        clothing photographs are prefixed with the letters
                        "NA", followed by the number.   The photographs   which
                        were supplied to us by the families are prefixed by the
                    G   letters "RPOD".   I mention those at this stage because
                        that will help to make sense of the reference numbers
                        as we go through each individual inquest.

                        The material is obviously potentially very distressing
                        in nature and every effort has been made to limit
                        exposing witnesses to it.   However, it has to be said
                H                            - 38 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                MICHAEL LAYTON


                        these photographs have proved to be vital for
                        identification purposes.

                        The next step taken was to secure the video recordings
                        of the event which were obtained on a voluntary basis
                        from a number of agencies, such as the South Yorkshire
                        Police, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, and in
                        particular BBC television who had several cameras at
                    B   the ground to film the match.

                        The video material was copied and referenced so that
                        each individual tape had a unique identifying number
                        with prefix letters indicating the source of the
                        material.

                    C   In all some 71 hours of video have been examined in an
                        effort to identify the deceased.

                        The BBC television tapes have proved to be a
                        cornerstone in this respect.   They are of very good
                        picture quality.   They are in colour and they have
                        sound recording.

                    D   With the exception of a short section of film on tape,
                        the BBC material is superimposed with a display in the
                        top right hand corner of the screen, which gives the
                        accurate time that the footage was recorded.   Reading
                        from left to right as you view the display, the figure
                        on the extreme left is the hour, the next figure the
                        minutes and the next figure the seconds.   In some
                        cases the final figure shown on the extreme right
                    E   refers to the film frame number.

                        For ease of viewing, where identifications have been
                        made from video tapes, we have produced a video print
                        using the technical services of the Home Office
                        establishment in Sandridge.   In addition, where
                        appropriate, the prints have been, as it were,
                        enlarged, to assist in the actual identification.
                    F
                        The next step taken was to obtain still photographs
                        taken at the ground on the day of the disaster.

                        A series of some 600 still colour photographs were in
                        fact taken by South Yorkshire Police for normal
                        intelligence gathering purposes on that particular
                        date.  These photographs are of good quality and have
                    G   again proved to be invaluable.   Superimposed on each
                        print is the date and the time that each photograph was
                        taken.  This appears in the bottom right hand corner of
                        the photograph and the first figure shown is the actual
                        date.  The second figure the hour and the third the
                        minutes.

                    H                        - 39 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                         MICHAEL LAYTON


It should be pointed out that the time shown on these
photographs was set by the individual camera operator
and in each case it has been established that the time
set was by reference to the cameraman's own watch, so
as such they were not synchronised and nor are they
verified.   For example, on a photograph which has been
given the reference number P R . 11.A, which was taken by
Mr. Philip Rich of South Yorkshire Police, it will be
seen that the database time, in other words, the time
printed on the photograph, is shown as 15.01, whilst on
the actual photograph there is a clock in the ground
which shows the time as being 15.00.

In addition to these photographs being available, it
became apparent that some 50 professional photographers
were present at the ground and these photographers
represented local and national newspapers and in many
cases were freelance agencies.

As a result of approaches to these various sources and,
indeed, a small number of supporters who had also taken
pictures, we took possession of a further 1,800
photographs for use in the inquiry.

Continuity in respect of this material is not complete
in all cases since the person handing over the material
is not necessarily the person originating that
material.   In each case the photographs again are
prefixed by letters which indicate the source and a
unique number for each individual print.

Where identifications have been made by way of a
photograph, these have been reproduced on a colour
photocopier.  The appropriate ones have been submitted
to the Coroner.

Having collected the material referred to,   the task of
making identifications began.

In the initial stages whilst the public part of the
Judicial Inquiry was being held, efforts were made to
make identifications purely from the deceaseds'
clothing and the facial photographs.   At the
conclusions of those proceedings in July, members of
the Video and Photographic Section began interviewing
witnesses in an effort to identify deceased and to
obtain continuity of their movements.,  To this end
over 300 South Yorkshire Police Officers have been
shown visual evidence during the last twelve months.
Where identifications of the deceased has been
established, but it has not been possible to find that
particular person on video or photograph, then a plan
has been completed which shows the location at which
the Officer was involved with that particular person.

                      - 40 -
                                                                MICHAEL LAYTON


                        Examples of this are where an Officer knows for certain
                        that he has assisted with a particular deceased but is
                        not shown on video, or, indeed, where the identity of a
                        deceased has been ascertained by using clothing or
                        facial photographs.

                        It should be stressed that by the very nature of the
                        disaster the degree of certainty in respect of each
                    B   identification does vary to a great extent from being
                        absolute where there can be no question, to where in
                        fact there has to be a degree of doubt.

                        It is perhaps worth mentioning at this point, and it
                        has been touched on already, that to indicate locations
                        we devised a series of coloured dots, which were
                        basically a colour code, along the following lines.   We
                    C   used a red coloured dot where we felt we had found a
                        particular deceased alive;  a blue dot where apparently
                        the deceased was dead;  green where in one or two cases
                        we felt the deceased was located both alive and
                        subsequently dead in the same place;  and in some
                        instances yellow where it was an identification which
                        was still, and, in some cases, is still subject to
                    D   confirmation.

                        In addition to the South Yorkshire Police Officers, a
                        further 10 Police Officers from other Forces who were
                        off-duty at the game, have also been seen, together
                        with 21 members of the South Yorkshire Fire Service and
                        19 members of the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service,
                        who attended the aftermath.
                    E
                        Following examination of written evidence, a total of
                        169 civilians who stated they had had some involvement
                        with deceased, have also been shown visual evidence.
                        Again, where appropriate, plans were completed to show
                        locations of the deceased and these also bear a unique
                        reference number.

                    F   In addition to those plans I have prepared plans which
                        bear the reference numbers "MWJL", followed by a
                        number.   These particular plans are designed to show
                        the location of deceased where they have been found on
                        video or photographs.   Having said that, as a general
                        rule I have not prepared one where there is already a
                        plan available from another source which clearly shows
                        the same location and as such does not take the matter
                    G   further.

                        Perhaps I should stress at this point - it has been
                        raised already - that plans now form an important part
                        of the evidence to be presented.


                H                            - 41 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                MICHAEL LAYTON


                        In the initial stages a conscious decision was made to
                        try to avoid the necessity for families of the deceased
                        to view visual evidence.   However, it soon became
                        apparent, following a meeting with members of the
                        Steering Group, that certain families did wish to be
                        appraised of such information as was available to us.
                        At the same time it was evident there were a number of
                        instances where we were unlikely to find any visual
                    B   evidence without the help from a family member.

                        Following consultations with the Social Services
                        Department, a small number of families were initially
                        shown visual evidence.   In the vast majority of cases
                        this proved very positive and as a result a decision
                        was eventually made to give the families in relation to
                    C   all ninety-five deceased the opportunity to view video
                        and photographs.

                        As a result of these approaches which in the main were
                        done in conjunction with the relevant social workers,
                        families have now been seen in relation to eighty of
                        the deceased.   That contact has varied from seeing
                        parents and wives, to aunts, uncles and grandmothers
                    D   and the amount of material shown has always been
                        regulated by the families themselves.

                        It has to be said, and I do stress this, that but for
                        the highest degree of co-operation from the Social
                        Services and, indeed, from the enormous help given by
                        the families, there is no doubt that in many cases we
                        would not have been able to produce any visual
                    E   evidence.

                        In respect of the remaining fifteen deceased, the
                        families have decided not to view that evidence.

                        Taking that a step further now, in all, since we
                        started, over 600 people have in fact viewed video or
                        photographs.
                    F
                        I should point out that on a small number of occasions
                        it has subsequently transpired that both police and
                        civilian witnesses have made mistaken identifications.
                        Although I would again stress they were made at the
                        time with the genuine belief that they were correct.
                        For instance, if I can perhaps quote one occasion, a
                        witness who in fact was involved with a number of
                    G   deceased, initially felt he had identified somebody who
                        he had removed from the terraces to the pitch.    We in
                        fact found out that that particular person was carried
                        from the terraces to the rear of the West Stand.   So
                        whilst he was mistaken in his initial recollection, it
                        transpired that he had in fact been involved with that

                H                            - 42 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                             MICHAEL LAYTON


                        person on the terraces themselves,            but not on the
                        pitch.

                        Where a subsequent re-examination of material has
                        highlighted such mistakes, these errors have been
                        corrected.

                        As a result of the continuing process of examination of
                    B   visual evidence, information is now available by way of
                        video, photographs or plans along the following lines.
                        Eighty-two of the deceased are believed, with some
                        degree of certainty, to have been in pen 3 of the West
                        Stand Terraces.   Three of the deceased may have been
                        in pen 3, but it has not been possible at this stage to
                        confirm those identifications.   Seven of the deceased
                        are believed with some degree of certainty to have been
                        in pen 4 of the West Stand terraces.   Two of the
                        deceased may have been in pen 4, but again it has not
                        been possible to confirm those identifications.

                        At this stage in one case it has not been possible to
                        establish in which particular enclosure that person was
                        located.   However, he has been identified in the
                    D   company of another person who subsequently died, prior
                        to the disaster, and that person was known to have been
                        in pen 3.

                        As I said at the beginning, the visual evidence by no
                        means presents a total picture, but I believe that
                        based on our day to day experience over the last twelve
                        months, that at the present time it is as accurate as
                    E   it is possible to be.

                        May I just ask you one or two supplementary questions?
                        First of all, I cannot remember whether I asked you at
                        the beginning, but just in case I didn't, you were one
                        of the Officers who took the oath earlier? - A. I was,
                        sir, yes.

                        I am not going to ask you that every time you appear
                        because you will be appearing frequently.   I just
                        wanted it confirmed once.

                        The second thing is, it is right that everybody who
                        viewed visual evidence, be they family, social workers,
                        Police Officers or otherwise, were co-operative in
                        assisting you? - A. Very much, sir, yes.
                    G
                        With regard to the m i s i d e n t i f i c a t i o n s , if we can just
                        dispose with that aspect of the matter.                     Firstly, I
                        think in your presentations to me you have discounted
                        the m i s i d e n t i f i c a t i o n s , that is right? - A. That is
                        right, sir.            The evidence that will be presented on

                H                                   - 43 -


J. L, Harpham Ltd
                                                                   MICHAEL LAYTON


                          each individual inquest will be that which we feel is
                          accurate.

                          At the present time? - A. To the best of our abilities,
                          yes.

                          Secondly, because some people might feel, how can it be
                          that somebody does not recognise somebody in a
                    B     photograph, would I be right in thinking that it is not
                          quite as easy as a snapshot that one is looking at?
                          Can you describe a little bit the problems of
                          identification with the visual evidence which people
                          had? - A. Although the video evidence we have is of
                          good quality in places, it does not give a complete
                          picture in the sense there is a lengthy film which
                          shows the entire terraces for any particular length of
                          time.  As such it is very often snatches of an area
                          that we are looking at and in some cases, for literally
                          seconds.

                          Where we are looking at photographs, very often those
                          photographs only show a partial view of the person we
                          believe is one of the deceased.  Sometimes they are in
                    J)    black and white so they don't assist in terms of colour
                          of clothing and very often they don't given an actual
                          precise, clear picture.   Very often you only see
                          clothing and not facially, and sometimes vice v e r s a .
                          So there is no complete set of video of photographs
                          which will give us and (a) to (b) for each individual.

                          In addition to that, of course, it was a very stressful
                    E     occasion for all the people who were there? - A. That
                          is right, sir.   I can say on average that in each
                          individual case for those people we saw, we saw them
                          for a minimum of two hours.   In some cases up to a
                          maximum of six.

                          V/hich leads me to the next question.  When we are
                          talking about you seeing 600 people, this was a very
                          lengthy - when I say "you" I mean you and your team - a
                          very lengthy procedure? - A. Very lengthy, sir.

                          Very many hours.   Indeed, at least 1200 from what you
                          say and possibly more, was spent on just seeing
                          families or other people who viewed? - A. That is
                          correct, sir.

                         . That is quite apart from the time which you and your
                           team spend... - A. Researching and...

                          The material.   In fact, if I can summarise it, you
                          said 71 hours of video film? - A. That is correct, sir.



                H                               - 44 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                MICHAEL LAYTON


                    Ac   And about, what,       2,400 photographs altogether?          - A.
                         That is correct.

                         Would I be right in thinking that in many, many cases
                         video film was viewed over and over again to try and
                         form a picture of what you were seeing? - A. Very much,
                         sir, yes.
                    B      THE CORONER:         Mr.   Fraser?

                           MR.   FRASER:       No,    thank you,   sir.

                                      Cross-Examined by MR.          ISAACS:

                         Inspector, have efforts been made to trace the
                         movements of the deceased from the time before they
                         actually went on to the terraces? - A. There is a
                         limited amount of visual material available of the
                         outside of the ground at the Leppings Lane end and
                         where we have been able to locate people on that video
                         then that is included in the summaries.

                         So where the information is available to show that a
                    D    particular deceased arrived at the turnstile, for
                         example, at a certain time, moved in through the ground
                         and then to the position they were at on the terracing,
                         that would be in the summaries that are presented? - A.
                         Yes.    It may in fact be contained in statements as
                         opposed to visual evidence.    I can only refer to
                         visual evidence at this stage but where we have found
                         visual evidence that is included.
                    E
                           MR.   ISAACS:       Thank you.

                                           Re-Examined by THE C O R O N E R :

                         As far as I can remember there is no visual evidence of
                         anybody within what I call the concourse area, that is,
                         between the turnstile and the entrance to the tunnel,
                         is that right? - A. I can think of just one instance,
                         sir.  The camera which covers that particular area is
                         black and white and of very particular poor quality.
                         In one instance only that I can recall at the moment, a
                         Police Officer identified himself carrying one of the
                         deceased after the event, but it was of very poor
                         quality.
                    Gr   Which reminds me that we did not even mention the
                         tunnel when we were talking to the Jury.  When you
                         finish your evidence I am just going to get you to show
                         that to them.

                           THE CORONER:   Any other questions?              No.   Inspector
                         Layton, thank you very much indeed.              Perhaps you could
                H                                      - 45 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                  MICHAEL LAYTON


                        just walk back to our plan.  I forgot the tunnel,    I am
                        sorry.   It is terribly important but I forgot.

                          To get from the turnstiles or gate C on to the
                        terraces - there are several ways on to the terraces
                        but the one that features for all practical purposes in
                        this inquiry is a central tunnel which is being pointed
                        out now.   Then on the other plan it is shown t h e r e ,
                    B   exiting, so to speak.   You will see it is split into
                        two so you can get into enclosure 3 or enclosure 4,
                        depending which side of the tunnel you are coming down.
                        The tunnel has got a bit of a slope, quite a bit of a
                        slop towards the end in fact.   One in six, I believe.

                          Thank you,   Inspector.
                    C     I have already fallen down on the job and overshot
                        lunch hour.   Before we adjourn there is just one other
                        thing I want to do.   When I opened the inquests last
                        April I said I was admitting as documentary evidence a
                        letter from the South Yorkshire Police confirming that
                        they had no objection to my releasing the bodies.
                        This was a technicality at the time which I felt I had
                    D   to do and in fact they wrote to me on the 18th of April
                        and I am reading it now so that it is formally on the
                        record and that applies to everybody.   It says:

                          "I refer to your recent conversation with
                          Superintendent Sleath concerning the release of the
                          deceased persons from the Hillsborough incident to
                          their respective next of kin following the
                    E     adjournment of the inquest.

                          After consultation with Professor Usher I have no
                          objection to this course of action.

                          Yours sincerely."

                        It is signed by the Deputy Chief Constable.
                    F
                          It is purely for the record, and for you,    Members of
                        the Jury, to know that was done.

                          Now we are going    to adjourn.   Would it be asking too
                        much if we said we    would start at quarter past two?
                        That is shortening    your lunch hour by a little bit, by
                        ten minutes.   Can    you manage that?   (Y e s )
                    G
                          After lunch we are going to listen to Dr. Forrest who
                        is going to deal wi t h alcohol.    Mr. Wardrobe, who is
                        going to tell us a little bit about the set-up at the
                        hospital.   Professor Usher who is going to give us a
                        short lecture on pathology.      Then we are going to deal

                H                               - 46 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                           MICHAEL LAYTON

                    A   with two cases.    All right?   Thank you.              Ladies and
                        gentlemen, remember, don't talk to anybody.

                                       (Luncheon a d j o u r n m e n t )




                    B




                    C




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




J. L. Harpham Ltd
         HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                      (WEST DISTRICT)
t \


               INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

            VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                       STADIUM DISASTER




                   PRELIMINARY PROCEEDINGS




                            Before

      DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M . B S , MRCGP.


                    (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                              At

                      The Memorial Hall,
                          City Hall,
                          Sheffield.

                              On

                Wednesday, 18th April, 1990.




                  TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS

                      (AFTERNOON SESSION)



            From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
                 Official Shorthand Writers,
             55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                         INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                                               Page

STATEMENT BY THE CORONER                        1


     DR. A.R.W. FORREST Affirms

          By The Coroner                        3
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Fraser         17


     J. WARDROBE Sworn

          By The Coroner                       19
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Fraser         27
          Further by The Coroner               28


     PROF. A. USHER Sworn

          By The Coroner                       28
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Fraser         35


PROCEDURAL MATTERS                             35
               PRELIMINARY PROCEEDINGS (Continued)

                        (AFTERNOON SESSION)

     MR. FRASER:   Sir, I apologise for this, but over the
luncheon adjournment it has been specifically asked of me to ask
you if you would expound a little, if you are able so to do, upon
the reasons for your order that ethanol analysis should be taken
from each of the deceased, bearing in mind that some of the
deceased were very young.  I have no wish for you to deal
specifically with any deceased at this stage, but the decision to
order an analysis to be undertaken has apparently caused some
concern.  Can I ask you to expound upon that, sir?

     THE CORONER:     Not really, I think would be the answer to
your question.    I think I will just say these two things, that
when on the evening of the 15th that I knew there were 94 people
who had died, because at that time there were only 94, it is true
that I do remember I saw somebody who was very young, but at that
time I knew    no ageswhen I first dealt with the matter, except
from looking    at the people, that I realised the vast majority
were in fact extremely young.     So I did not really apply my mind
to the question and say, "How old is this person? Do I
specifically want blood alcohol or    not?” . Once I had made up my
mind that we    wanted alcohol levels done, I said we were doing
them for all, irrespective of any other considerations, and I did
not have lists prepared to see how old somebody was.     If I had
wanted to do that of course I could have done it, and may be you
might say I should have done it, but at that time my primary
concern was to arrange for the post mortems to be done as quickly
as possible.    In fact, 70 were done on the Sunday - we don't
normally work on a Sunday, as     you will I am sure appreciate -
because I perceived it as the     most important and vital matterwas
to try and put myself into a position where the Inquests could be
opened.

     Secondly, I did not know at that time whether or not alcohol
would be relevant or otherwise.  It might have been.  The levels
might have been such that the cause of death might have been due
to that.  I had no idea.  They might all have been negative.  I
did not know that either.  So in that situation, and if I equate
this with a normal RTA, in other words, a situation where alcohol
might have played a part, I would have asked for it in those
circumstances and I asked for it in these.

     Thirdly, it is true that   some of the people turned out to be
very young, but even the very young ones, as we all know from
experience, and I am not talking about these deceased, but all
young people, youth these days is no guarantee that alcohol is
not ingested.  So it would have been a little bit foolish of me
to say, ”1 will only do alcohols of those over 18” , because
anybody under 18 by definition does not drink.   I know very
well that is not so. So I think if I had once taken the
decision to do alcohol levels then I am afraid that decision
would apply to everybody in that situation.

     There is no harm in it, furthermore, because if I have done


                                1
a blood alcohol for somebody who was, say, 14, and it turns out
to be negative, that merely confirms what one ought to expect.
It does not make them any more alcoholic or less alcoholic by
measuring the level, and I felt it was a justifiable
investigation, given where it happened and all the circumstances
surrounding it that I knew at the time.

      So more than that I do not think I can say.    There is
nothing I can say and I don't think I want to say any more
Bither.   I hope that satisfies your clients, because I want them
to be as satisfied as I can make them.    We could have done dozens
of other things. We could have checked for drugs. We could have
checked all kinds of things.   We did not do that because I could
not see any good reason for doing it and so I didn’t, but the
alcohol level was something which sprung to mind as something
,jhich could possibly be relevant.   Whether it was or not is a
natter which we will be sorting out at theInquests..

     MR. FRASER:   I am   grateful for that, sir.

      MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, may it be an appropriate momentto
discuss the visit tomorrow? Unfortunately, we have not been able
to contact Mr. Mackrell, but we are assured that someone at the
-lub will be there to give access to the Leppings Lane terraces
at 9 o'clock tomorrow, and    we will be trying to get hold of Mr.
Hlackrell this evening just   tomake sure he is there as well
should you require his presence.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed.    What I think,
Ladies and gentlemen of the Jury, we will do, is we want you to
neet here at quarter-to-9.    Iknow that is quarter-of-an-hour
sarlier than what I said.    We will make arrangements, hopefully,
for transport to be available for you.    You, Sergeant
3riffiths,, must go with the Jury, and your task is to look
after them and shepherd them because for technical reasons, and
I don't need to explain that to you, we have to keep you apart
from witnesses and everybody else.    So we want you to go round
as a group with you responsible for seeing they are kept
separate from club people and everybody else, including
relatives and me, for that matter.

     We will ask Inspector Tope - where is he; this poor man is
/ery important to me - but Inspector Tope will also accompany you
Decause he he can find his way around the ground a little bit
setter than Sergeant Griffiths who does not actually know the
ground because he comes from West Midlands.  So does he but he
las been here for longer.  He will guide you through the gates,
if you like, and through the doors, but it is not his job to give
svidence or to explain things to you.  The purpose of the visit
is simply for you to get the feel for the size and the fact that
the tunnel slopes.  It is difficult for you to see on the model.
4e have now brought the model in as you can see.  If you look at
this model and the ground tomorrow you will have it clearly in
/our mind.

     Is it intended or the wish of legal representatives to be
sresent at this viewing?


                                2
                                           DR. A.R.W. FORREST


     MR. FRASER:   Sir, for my part I have had the advantage of a
visit previously.  I have no desire to go tomorrow morning, but
thank you for the invitation.
     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, obviously given that Mr. Mackrell or
any of the other officers won't be having contact with the
witnesses, I have no desire to go either.

      THE CORONER:   I am glad about that, because I think that is
the most satisfactory way of doing it.    Mr. Jones and I will
come along but we won't walk around with you.   We will be well
apart, so to speak, and we are just watching him watching you.
So quarter-to-9 here.   Please be on time for the reason I have
already told you.   The visit will be short, because again we are
pushed for time, but it is really just to reinforce the evidence
you have heard about the layout of the place.   All right?   Is
that reasonably clear? I think you have already seen Inspector
Tope.   That is the man to see if you need to sort that out.

     Was there anything else I have promised to deal with?

     MR. FRASER:   Not for the time being, sir, but I am sure I
will think of something.

     THE CORONER:   Right.   I think we will listen to Dr. Forrest
next.
           DR. ALEXANDER ROBERT WALKER FORREST Affirms

                         Bv THE CORONER:

Q. Dr. Forrest, could you please give me your full names, first
   of all? - A. Alexander Robert Walker Forrest, sir.

Q. And your position at the Royal Hallamshire? - A. I am
   a Consultant Chemical Pathologist to Sheffield Health
   Authority based at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

Q. Dr. Forrest, can you tell me a little bit about your
   qualifications? - A. Yes, sir.   I am a Chartered Chemist and a
   Registered Medical Practitioner, and my qualifications include
   the Degrees of Bachelor of Science with Honours in
   Pharmacology, Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery,
   the Diploma in Obstetrics of the Royal College of
   Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, Mastership in Clinical
   Biochemistry, I am a Fellow the Royal Society of Chemistry and
   a Fellow of the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, and
   a Member of the Royal College of Pathologists.

Q. Apart from doing the clinical pathology for the Royal
   Hallamshire Hospital you do a great deal of forensic
   pathology? - A. I am a Lecturer in Forensic Toxicology in the
   Department of Forensic Pathology at Sheffield University,
   sir.

Q. Following the incident of 15th April, you received, I think,
   94 separate and distinct specimens? - A. Yes, sir.  They were


                               3
                                                                 DR. A.R.W. FORREST


                           brought to me by Sergeant John Turner or a gentleman who
                           identified himself to me as Sergeant John Turner of the South
                           Yorkshire Police.

                        Q. And these were brought to you on the morning of the 18th
                           April.  Is that right? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. And the samples, how were they presented to you? - A. They
                    g      each came in a separate container in a plastic bag.   The
                           container was one of this general variety, and they were
                           identified with names and numbers.   There was also a container
                           o f this variety which contained two tablets which had been
                           found in the body of one of the deceased.

                        Q. And you then proceeded to analyse these samples? - A. Yes,
                           sir.

                      Q. Could you, before we deal with the results of your analysis,
                         briefly explain how one analyses, particularly of course for
                         blood alcohol? - A. Yes, sir.  The first thing to do, of
                         course, is to check that you have got the right sample taken
                         from the right person at the right time, and that is true in
                         clinical analyses as well as forensic analyses.  For that, of
                         course, we relied on the information we were given and the
                    D    information that was written on the sample containers.

                                The principle of the analysis that we use is exactly the
                           same as that used by the Home Office Forensic Science service
                           when they are analysing blood samples for alcohol in road
                           traffic cases.  How it works is that we use a standard
                           containing alcohol, and by "alcohol" in this context I mean
                           ethanol, which is the main alcohol present in alcoholic
                    E      beverages, at a concentration of 200 mg of alcohol per 100 ml
                           of fluid.  That is used as a standard to calibrate the assay.

                                What we do is we take a small sample of the blood, 200
                           microlitres in volume.  That is about the equivalent of a
                           large drop.  It is put together with what is called an
                           internal standard which is in fact another alcohol,
                           N-propenol, into a glass vial, which is then sealed, and the
                           whole lot is mixed gently.  We then allow the vial to reach a
                           temperature of 65 degrees in a thermostatically controlled
                           block for 20 minutes, and during this time vapour from the
                           sample equilibrates inside the vial.  So you have got air
                           which is, if you like, not saturated but which contains
                           alcohol vapour both derived from the sample and from the
                           N-propenol internal standard which has been added.

                                 We then take a gas-tight syringe and aspirate 2 ml of air
                           from the vial and inject it into an instrument called a
                           gaschromatograph. This is an instrument which essentially
                           consists of an oven with a long glass tube inside it.   The
                           long glass tube is packed with material which to some extent
                           binds alcohol, but it binds different alcohols in different
                           ways.   Flowing through the tube is a stream of hydrogen.   The
                H          effect of this is that the two different alcohols and various
                           other volatile components, any other volatile components that


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                      4
                                                                 DR. A.R.W.   FORREST


                          may be present in the sample of air that is injected into the
                          instrument are swept along the glass tube and are separated
                          out at different rates so they arrive at the other end of the
                          tube at different times.

                               They are then burned in a flame and you can measure the
                          electrical conductivity of that flame and produce an
                          electrical signal.  That is then amplified and fed into a
                          chart recorder which produces a series of peaks.  From the
                    B     ratio of the height of the ethanol peak from that sample of
                          air to the height of the peak produced by the N-propenol
                          internal standard in comparison to the known standard that
                          one has injected both before and after the run, one can
                          calculate the amount of ethanol that there is in any
                          particular sample. The assay is reliable and it is precise.

                        Q. I don't have to ask you the next question, but I will.   You
                           are quite satisfied that your assays of these alcohols are as
                           accurate as one would normally expect them to be? - A. In
                           normal circumstances, yes.   In fact our assay is intrinsically
                           slightly less precise than that used by the Home Office
                           Forensic Science Laboratory.   We achieve a coefficient of
                           variation in our assays of 2.8%.   That is, there is a
                           variance, if you like, with individual samples when they are
                    D      injected over and over again of something like 2.8%.   The
                           target for the Home Office Laboratories is, I understand, 2%.
                           They use automated equipment for their dilutions and
                           injections.  We do it manually.   We are not as well funded as
                           they are.

                        Q. Yes.  But within that limitation of 2.8% the assay is
                           accurate? - A. Yes, sir.
                    E
                        Q. The little yellow top bottles in which the assays arrive are
                           plastic containers, are they? - A. Yes.

                        Q. That presents a theoretical problem, does it not? - A. These
                           containers are perfectly adequate.   Perhaps I could just
                           explain what they are.  They contain two additional chemicals
                           They contain dried sodium fluoride, potassium fluoride and
                           oxalate,  The idea of the oxalate is to keep the blood
                           fluid. It removes the calcium from solution and stops the
                           clotting process taking place.  The fluoride present is
                           designed to stop yeast and other micro-organisms actually
                           producing alcohol within the sample.   For that purpose
                           these are quite adequate. The vials which the Home Office
                           Laboratory uses are for blood alcohol samples in road
                           traffic cases and are actually glass with a rubber septum
                           on the top rather than like this.  The problem with these
                           samples is that every time you open the top and put it
                           back on again you potentially lose a certain amount of
                           alcohol from them.  So it makes testing over and over
                           again slightly problematical in that there can be a
                           decrease in the amount of alcohol in the sample if you do
                           it.
                H       Q. That is really the point I am coming to.   The problem with


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                      5
                                                                   DR. A.R.W. FORREST


                             these as I understand it is not that if you repeated the test
                             that the alcohol levels would have gone up but that the
                             alcohol levels might have gone down because you would have
                             lost some when you open the bottle.  Is that right? - A. Yes,
                             sir, that is correct.

                        3. And the Home Office sample bottles which you are referring to,
                           are they bottles which are used presumably when drivers are
                           being tested for blood alcohol levels, and you certainly don't
                    B      want to lose any? - A. Yes.

                        3. So if one puts blood into that bottle and tests it the level
                           of alcohol if anything will be lower than it might have been
                           if it had been in a sealed road traffic offence bottle? - A.
                           Yes, sir.  I should say that these bottles if they are kept in
                           a refrigerator, if the samples in them are kept in a
                           refrigerator, are quite reliable, and you do get some
                           diminution in the alcohol content over a period of several
                           months, but you certainly don't get an increase.

                        3. That is right.  So if we were to take all these bottles out of
                           your fridge now and retest them we might well get lower
                           levels, but we should not get any higher ones, within 2.9? -
                           A. I think it is very unlikely that you would find any higher
                    D      levels.  I have one example from a recent case which perhaps I
                           won't identify because it is still to appear before the
                           criminal courts, where over a period of eight months in a
                           container similar to this a blood alcohol sample went from 109
                           mg/100 ml blood to 77 mg/100 ml of blood.

                        Q.   So it was a fall? - A. Yes, sir.
                    E   Q.   As far as you are concerned it makes no difference whether the
                             blood is put straight into that little yellow top bottle or
                             goes into one of the larger ones which I think are known as
                             universal containers and then decanted? Is that right? - A.
                             Yes.  In general one prefers as little sample manipulation as
                             possible, but provided it is done by one person at one time
                             with adequate controls there is usually little problem.

                        Q. Are you aware that the practice of pathologists varies as to
                           how they take the blood alcohol sample? - A. Indeed it does,
                           sir.

                        Q. Some put it straight into the container and others decant from
                           a universal container? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. And I presume you d o n ’t know the reason why they might be
                           doing that? - A. I think it is usually a matter of
                           convenience.  If, for example, one is looking at circumstances
                           such as an aircraft crash where the body has been disrupted
                           and there are various problems then it would usually be direct
                           into a primary sample container, and one would take samples
                           from different parts of the body.

                H       Q. Now, I want to turn to another aspect of the matter which is
                           endogenous manufacture of alcohol in deceased persons.  Can


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                        6
                                                              DR. A.R.W. FORREST


                        you just help me a little bit about that, both the occurrence,
                        the risk and prevention? - A. Yes, sir.  First of all, it is
                        perfectly correct to say that if a body is left lying for a
                        significant period of time, particularly at high temperature
                        then there will be production of alcohol within that body. The
                        classical case is, of course, the Moorgate Tube Disaster,
                        where the driver’s body was not retrieved for several days
                        after the incident.  There were high temperatures in the
                        tunnel, and there was significant argument at the Inquiry and
                    B   I believe the Inquest as to the nature of that alcohol,
                        whether it was as a result of endogenous generation of alcohol
                        or as a result of alcohol consumption before the incident.

                             What happens when death takes place is that first of all
                        the immune systems of the body do not instantly die or cease
                        functioning at the time of death.  There is some residual
                    C   ability of the body which persists for a variable length of
                        time to resist infection.  But micro-organisms usually from
                        within the gut eventually spread through the lymphatics and
                        into the bloodstream, and some of those micro-organisms, in
                        particular yeasts, will be micro-organisms which are
                        capable of fermenting the sugar in the blood to form
                        alcohol. There are also some other micro-organisms present
                        which can produce other volatile compounds, butyric acids,
                    D   fusile alcohol, other higher alcohols.

                             First of all, it certainly does not happen within four
                        hours of death in a temperate climate.   It probably does not
                        happen within 12 or even 24 hours of death in a temperate
                        climate, particularly if the bodies have been stored in a cool
                        and ideally in a refrigerated environment. Where you tend to
                        see this in this country is where bodies have been some time
                    E   before they have been found, particularly in summer.   There
                        are usually obvious signs of putrefaction on the body where
                        this is a problem, and there are various techniques which
                        pathologists can use to attempt to get samples that give
                        meaningful results.

                              In this particular case I understand that the bodies were
                        cooled fairly rapidly after death, and my recollection is that
                    F   the weather was not particularly hot on the day in question,
                        and I was informed by Sergeant Turner that these samples were
                        in fact refrigerated between being taken and being delivered
                        to m e .

                          There is a final point.  On the analysis, if endogenous
                        fermentation has taken place, when one looks at the gas
                    G   chromatrography pattern there are virtually always peaks
                        present due to other volatiles and in particular higher
                        alcohols and butyric acid and other fatty acid
                        derivatives formed by other bacteria.  Now while some
                        other peaks were seen in these samples other than ethyl
                        alcohol which you may ask me about later, there were no
                        signs whatsoever that any of the higher alcohols which
                        I would expect to be associated with post mortem
                H       endogenous production of alcohol present in any of the
                        chromatographic peaks that I saw.


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                   7
                                                                 DR. A.R.W. FORREST



                          The day in question in fact was a sunny day, I believe, and
                          the bodies were removed from the temporary mortuary to the
                          Medico-Legal Centre any time - say the last body was about 6
                           o'clock in the morning or may be a little bit earlier than
                           that.   So that would give you what, about 12 to 15 hours from
                           the time of the incident at 3 until 6 in the morning.   Does
                           that alter - assuming all bodies were removed at that point in
                    g     time - does that alter your answer in any way? - A. No, sir.

                          In fact, what you are saying is if there was endogenous
                          production you would have expected to find the peaks of the
                          high alcohols? - A. I would have seen the peaks of the higher
                          alcohol and I would have commented on as such in my report.

                      Gj. That brings us conveniently at this stage to the other peaks
                           which you mentioned which were acetaldehyde acetone? - A. Yes,
                           sir.  When one does blood alcohol analysis by this technique
                           one seems two major peaks in the chromatographic and the
                           chromatogram in the tracing that the instrument produces.  One
                           is the N-Propenol alcohol that one has added as the internal
                           standard and the other is an ethanol peak, if indeed there is
                           any ethanol present in the blood sample.  Occasionally there
                           are tiny little peaks, and for example, if a person has been
                    D      fasting or if a person has been in diabetic ketoacidosis,
                           diabetic coma, before the blood sample has been taken, one may
                           see a very large acetone peak, and this is quite clearly
                           differentiatable from ethyl alcohol.

                                Rather less common is a peak due to acetaldehyde which is
                           an oxidation product of alcohol. Such peaks were present in
                           many of the samples. The nature of these additional peaks was
                    E      confirmed by repeating certain samples on a different gas
                           chromatographic system which gives different relative
                           retention times to the internal standard one is using than
                           does the standard column that we use in alcohol analysis.   The
                           acetaldehyde peaks were in any significant amount virtually
                           only present in those samples which contained alcohol.
                           However, many of the acetone peaks present were present
                           whether or not there was any ethyl alcohol, ethanol, detected
                           in the samples.

                        d). If we can just stick to the acetone for a moment, I think you
                            said that acetone is something which you would expect to find
                            say in a person who was fasting? - A. Yes, sir.

                  <fe. Would that mean that it is a product - perhaps you should tell
                       me why that should be? - A. What happens, when one is fasting
                       one is living off one's fat, quite literally.   There is only
                       enough sugar in the body or glycogen in the body to keep one
                       going for a very few minutes. Very rapidly one converts on to
                       running off fat, and when fat breaks down, and that is the
                       only source of fuel that the body has, it does not use it
                       particularly efficiently and it produces several compounds
                       which are known by the generic term, ketone bodies.   One of
                H      these ketone bodies is in fact acetone, and this acetone can
                       appear in the breath, and even with people who are perhaps


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                      8
                                       DR. A.R.W. FORREST


overdoing a Cambridge diet or something like that will know
the smell that this can produce on people’s breath, although
if a Cambridge diet is used properly it should not produce
acetone on the breath.  This acetone is associated with the
body taking its energy by breaking down its fat stores.

      Under circumstances of extreme stress and extreme anoxia
there is evidence also that the body can break down fat and
use that as a source of fuel for a very limited period of
time.   I should add that it is animal experiment by and large.
My belief is that this may be the source of the acetone in
these particular samples.

It was an unusual finding when measuring blood alcohol? - A.
it is not a particularly unusual finding.  One quite often,
when as you say, a whole variety of cases, you instruct me to
example blood samples for alcohol, it is not uncommon that
when is doing that that one notices the presence of acetone
perhaps in people who have not been eating before they die
under different circumstances, and I could quote specific
cases if you wish me to.

No, I d o n ’t think so. So that from a scientific point of view
is an interesting observation? - A. It is an interesting
observation and it is perhaps one that should be followed up.

Does it make any difference to your assessment of the alcohol
levels which you found? - A. None whatsoever, sir.

Can we now come to the acetaldehyde, which I think you said
was an oxidative product? - A. Yes, sir.  The normal mechanism
by which the body breaks down alcohol is by converting it with
an enzyme called alcohol dehydrogenase to acetaldehyde, which
is then handled by the body in a variety of ways.
Acetaldehyde can also be formed in samples collected at post
mortem.  The reason for this is that haemoglobin, when it
breaks down, it can actually oxidise alcohol to a small
extent, and in so doing produce acetaldehyde.  So the question
I had to ask myself when we found these acetaldehyde peaks in
the sample, was, was this acetaldehyde present because the
acetaldehyde was present in the person's body at or about the
time of death, or was it a product of post mortem change?
Now, I should say that we don't normally see large
acetaldehyde peaks of the size that we saw. Quite often one
sees a tiny little trace of a peak in a position where one
would expect acetaldehyde to be, but one does not see peaks of
the magnitude that we saw in these cases.

     On the balance of probabilities I feel that the
acetaldehyde present is likely to be endogenous, formed as a
product in most cases of alcohol breakdown and for some reason
which perhaps we could go into it has not proceeded beyond
acetaldehyde.   Normally acetaldehyde does not hang around for
very long.   It is quite nasty stuff in the body, and the body
has got very efficient mechanisms for removing it under most
circumstances.
                                                                    DR. A.R.W. FORREST


                        3. But presumably it would not remove it at the point of death? -
                           A. No, sir, but plenty of people die with alcohol on board,
                           and one does not often see large acetaldehyde peaks.

                        3. Do you have an explanation for it, or not yet, because it is
                           an unusual finding? - A. It is unusual.   Because you asked me
                           very specifically not to discuss these results with anyone I
                           have not been able to share these findings with colleagues in
                    B      the scientific and medical community.   So I have not had the
                           opportunity of discussing that with colleagues.   My own view
                           is that it is possible that in situations of extreme hypoxia,
                           and again there is perhaps experimental evidence to support
                           this, that there may be inhibition which in the metabolic
                           processes which prevent alcohol from going further down the
                           metabolic pathway to acetaldehyde - from acetaldehyde further
                           down the pathway.

                         . Would the fact that you found acetaldehyde have any bearing on
                           your levels of alcohol? - A. It might suggest that the true
                           level of alcohol at the time of death, it is generated as a
                           result of artefact in the test tubes after the sample has been
                           collected was rather higher, but it would be less than 1%.

                        3. So it would not enhance the level of alcohol that you found?
                    D      The acetaldehyde does not enhance the level of alcohol? - A.
                           No, sir.

                        3. And the differences it might make is marginal? - A. Very
                           small indeed.

                         . I think we have dealt more or less with the peripherals of        the
                           findings. Can we now turn then to your statement of 20th
                    E      April. - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q.    On it you have listed the names of cases. There are, I think,
                             three or four where there are some errors, so as we get to
                             them in names may be we will pause. - A. Yes, sir.  The names
                             in the statement are in fact the names on the documentation I
                             was given.

                        Q. Yes, I accept that.  What I am saying is we may want to
                           correct them as we go along.  If we just work our way through
                           this statement.

                                  THE CORONER:      Before I do, gentlemen and ladies, you
                             will see some of the names are in error in the sense that the
                             spellings may be a little bit wrong.    For example, No. 2 it
                             says "Inga", "I-N-G-A", whereas we know it is now spelled
                             "I-N-G-E-R". I d o n ’t propose to stop every time we get that
                             sort of error because we know who we are talking about.     Are
                             you content with that? So long as we are clear who we are ....

                                  MR. FRASER:    Sir, you mention a list.  I d o n ’t know
                             whether the list has been circulated.  I certainly have not
                             seen it.
                    H                            You have not seen it, but you know what
                                  THE CORONER:


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                         10
                                                                 DR. A.R.W. FORREST


                          the results are?

                               MR. FRASER:    Yes, sir.

                               THE CORONER:   Nobody has seen Dr. Forrest’s statement as
                          it is.  That is the reason why we are dealing with his
                          evidence now because it is more convenient to deal with his
                          evidence together rather than separately for each individual:

                          If you start with No. 1. - A. Yes, sir.  No. 1 was identified
                          as Howard, Thomas Anthony, with the number ACJ 8, and I found
                          a blood alcohol concentration of 20mg alcohol/lOOml blood.

                    <3. Stop.  I don't think you need give me the identification
                        letters. - A. Sample No. 2 was Shah, Inger, and no alcohol was
                        detected.

                    Q. That in fact was the lady called, as we know now, Inger Shah.
                          Her name was incorrectly noted at the time when these samples
                          were sent to you.  Right. - A. Sample No. 3 was from
                          Harrison, Gary, and no alcohol was detected in the sample.

                               Sample No. 4 was from Rimmer, David, and the alcohol
                          concentration present was less than lOmg/lOOml of blood.
                    D
                          Can we just stop for one minute at these "less than 10s",
                          because there are several of these. - A. Yes, sir.

                          What is the difference between those and "none detected",
                          apart from the obvious answers? - A. Well, there is a trace
                          of alcohol, and I would not wish to attempt to accurately
                          quantitate a figure of less than lOmg/lOOml, but there is some
                    E     alcohol there;  a very small amount;  the sort of thing....

                          Would it be fair to say that it is negligible? - A. It is
                          negligible.  It is the sort of thing that one might get if one
                          had had a couple of pints the night before.

                    (J.   Thank you.   Press on. - A. Ashcroft, Colin Mark, none
                          detected.

                               Whelan, Ian, none detected.

                               Hennessy, James R, 35mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                               Hawley, David, none detected.

                               Aspinall, James Gary, none detected.

                               Brown, David S, 15mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                               Harrison, Peter Andrew, 21mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                               Hamilton, Roy, 118mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                               Wafer, Colin, none detected.



J. L. Harpham Ltd                                         11
                                                                     DR. A.R.W. FORREST


                                  Church, Gary, none detected.

                                  Rimmer, Carl William, 144mg of alcohol/lOOmg of blood.

                                  Murray, Paul, none detected.

                                  Devonside, Christopher Berry, 32mg of alcohol/100 ml of
                             blood.
                    B   Q.    If you can just pause there, in fact   that is "Berry" spelled
                             with an "E"? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q.    In fact it should be spelled with an   "A".   It is Christopher
                             Barry.
                                  MR. DEVONSIDE:    It should be spelled with an "0", with
                             respect, sir.

                                  THE CORONER:     It is spelled with an "0" in this list,
                             "Devonside":

                        Q. Carry on. - A. Smith, Paula Ann, and with a name like Smith I
                           would like to give the identification number, AFW 1, none
                           detected.
                    D
                                  Cox, Tracey, none detected.

                                  McCabe, Marian, none detected.

                                  Fitzsimmons, Vincent Michael, none detected.

                                  Matthews, Brian, none detected.
                    E
                                  Burkett, Peter, 99mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                  Rogers, H.C., identification number DMG 15, none
                             detected.

                                  Clark, Joseph, 177mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                  McAllister, Francis, none detected.

                                  McCarthy, Daniel Joseph, 18mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                  Robinson, S.J., 141mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                  Hankin, Eric, 132mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                  Johnston, Alan, 34mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                  Burke, Henry Thomas, 16mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                  McGrath, Keith, none detected.

                                  Delaney, J.P., identification number ACJ 9, 38mg of
                H            alcohol/lOOml of blood.



J. L. Harpham Ltd                                          12
                                                                 DR. A.R.W. FORREST


                               Owens, Jonathon, none detected.

                               Jones, Christine Anne, none detected.

                               Tyrrell, Kevin, none detected.

                               Glover, Ian, none detected.

                               Edwards, C., identification number ACJ 2, none detected.
                    B
                                Tootle, Peter, none detected.

                               McDonnell, P., identification number DMG 12, 172mg of
                          alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                Hughes, Eric, 32mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                Hewitson, Paul Anthony, 88mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                Wright, Graham Sean, less than lOmg of alcohol/lOOml of
                           blood.
                                Hewitt, Darren Carl, less than lOmg of alcohol/lOOml of
                           blood.
                    D
                                Jones, Nicholas, 72mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                Brown, Carl, 83mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                Birtle, David William, 42mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                Collins, Gary, 29mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.
                    E
                                Thompson, Patrick John, 93mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                Brookes, Andrew, 89mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                Williams, Kevin Daniel, 56mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                Bell, Christopher Michael, less than lOmg of
                           alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                        Q. Can you just stop there.  This is in fact Simon, despite what
                           it says in this list.  Christopher Michael is in fact the
                           father's name.   We will be dealing with that during the
                           summaries.  An error was made on the labelling, not by you,
                           but there is an error on the labelling.  So be careful.   This
                           is a wrong name, No. 52. - A. Perhaps I should say it is also
                           labelled DC 1, sir.

                        Q. And the body number you have got is 52, is it? - A. That is
                           correct, sir.  Thompson, S., identification number TIB 8, 78mg
                           of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                Kelly, Anthony Peter, no alcohol detected.
                    H           Hewitt, Nicholas M., none detected.


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                      13
                                                                    DR. A.R.W. FORREST



                               Mather, D.W., identification ACJ 4, none detected.

                               Traynor, Martin Kevin, 60mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                               Clark, Paul, 67mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                               Horn, G . , identification number PHR 4, 55mg of
                    g     alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                               Traynor, C.J., identification number DMG 13, 54mg of
                          alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                               Sefton, Colin Andrew, none detected.

                               Glover, Barry, 138mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                               Jones, R . , identification number DMG 20, less than lOmg
                          of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                Hicks, Sarah Louise, none detected.

                                Pemberton, W. Roy, none detected.

                    D           Fox, Thomas Steven, 82mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                Chapman,   Raymond, 91mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                McBrien,   John, none detected.

                                Baron, Gerard, none detected.
                    E           McGlone,   Alan, 75mg of alcohol/lOOml   of blood.

                                Copol, Stephen Paul,   49mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                        Q. Can you stop one minute.    This is No. 71.   Is that right?   - A.
                           71, RDW 4.

                        Q. "Copol" is in fact Mr. Copoc. This I think is a transcription
                           error, not Dr. Forrest's, but that is what he had on his
                           label, "Copol".  Thank you. - A. Kelly, Michael David, none
                           detected.

                                Carlisle, Paul, 61mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                        Q. Can you stop one moment.    This is No. 73.   Is that that? - A.
                           Yes, sir.

                        Q. "Carlile" in this case is spelled with an "S".  In fact the
                           correct spelling is without an "S", but on your label it is
                           shown as an "S". That is right, but the number is 73? - A.
                           73, PHR 19, sir.

                                Ball, Kester Roger Marcus, none detected.
                H               Godwin, D.G., identification number DC 11, none


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                        14
                                                                   DR. A.R.W. FORREST


                          detected.
                               Anderson, John Alfred, 76mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                               Wild, Martin Kenneth, none detected.

                               Thompson, Peter Reuben, none detected.

                               Roberts, G.J. identification number TIB 11, 79mg of
                    B     alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                Benson, David John, less than lOmg of alcohol/lOOml of
                          bloodi.
                               Howard, Thomas, 34mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                               Steele, Philip John, none detected.

                               Gilhooley, Jon Paul, none detected.

                               Brady, Paul, 13mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                               Lewis, Carl James, none detected.

                    D          Jones, Gary Philip, none detected.

                               O ’Neill, Stephen Francis, none detected.

                                Bennett, Barry, 78mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                Hicks, Victoria Jane, none detected.
                    E           Thomas, David Leonard, 48mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                Harrison, Stephen, 30mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                Horrocks, Arthur, 92mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                Hammon, Philip, less than lOmg of alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                                Spearritt, Adam, none detected.

                        Q. Can I just ask you one other thing.  This list which you have
                           very kindly read out to me, in addition to the names, the
                           alcohols and their identification numbers, is also numbered
                           from 1 to 94.  Is that right? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. And Thomas Anthony Howard is No.l? - A. Thomas Anthony Howard
                           No.l, sir.

                        Q. And Adam Spearritt is No. 94? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. And everybody else whom you have read is listed in numerical
                           order from 1 to 94? - A. Yes, sir.

                 H


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                      15
                                                                DR. A.R.W. FORREST




                    B




                    C




                    D




                    E     Now, it is, of course, notoriously difficult to say, as I
                          understand it, and you may correct me, how many pints of beer
                          equals X mg/lOOml, but can you give us some help? - A. Well,
                          it depends first of all on the weight of the person and to
                          some extent on their sex.  What actually determines the blood
                          alcohol concentration that is reached after drinking a
                          particular amount of alcohol is the amount of water in the
                          body.  That depends on basically the person’s weight and how
                    F     much fat they have got in their body, because fat has got a
                          relatively low water content, and women have got less water,
                          more fat in their body per kilogram of body weight than men
                          have got.   So a woman of the same weight who drinks the same
                          amount of alcohol as a man of the same weight will actually
                          finish up with a higher blood alcohol concentration.

                    G          Typically, a 70 kilogram, a fairly small man, would have
                          to drink something like 2-and-a-half pints of a standard beer
                          of the sort which is sold in the North of England, to achieve
                          a blood alcohol concentration of around 80mg of alcohol/lOOml
                          of blood over the next hour or so.

                        Q. So about 2-and-a-half pints, subject to your qualifications,
                           equals 80mg drunk over an hour or so? - A. In very round
                    H      terms, yes, sir.



J. L. Harpham Ltd                                      16
                                                                DR. A.R.W. FORREST


                        And the reason why we pick 80mg is because, and if you d o n ’t
                    &   know please say so, that is the level above which you are not
                        allowed to drive? - A. Yes, sir.

                    Q   As far as you know? - A. Yes, sir.

                    Q   The question of the level of alcohol for driving is a fixed
                        standard. - A. Yes, sir.

                    %   But the effect that is either perceived by the individual, the
                        subjective effect, or the objective effect which other people
                        see, varies from person to person.  Is that right? - A. Yes,
                        that is correct, sir.

                    Q   I want you to be careful before you answer this question.   Are
                        you able to make any comment as to when a level of alcohol
                    c   becomes perceptible to any individual? - A. I think that is a
                        very difficult thing to say.   People do vary enormously in
                        their response to alcohol.   Objective tests by the Road
                        Traffic Research Laboratory and also studies on the rate of
                        accidents after people have particular amounts of alcohol in
                        their blood, show that people with a blood alcohol
                        concentration of between 20mg to 40mg of alcohol/lOOml of
                        blood are perhaps somewhat impaired in their ability to
                    D   respond to a novel situation.

                             I have seen individuals with blood alcohol concentrations
                        of the order of 200mg to 300mg of alcohol/lOOml of blood who
                        on cursory examination would appear to be perfectly sober and
                        to be able to conduct a normal conversation.  I should say
                        that those individuals have all been individuals who have had
                        a problem with chronic excessive ingestion of alcohol.
                    E
                             On the other hand, I have seen a young man from this part
                        of the world who with nothing else to show for it was dead
                        with a blood alcohol concentration of less an 80mg of
                        alcohol/lOOml of blood.

                    Q . So it is terribly individual? - A. Yes, it is, very, very
                        individual, indeed.
                    F
                    Q   I won't press you further about that.

                             THE CORONER:   Mr. Fraser?

                                       Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER:

                        Dr. Forrest, just two things.  You kindly explained in very
                        scientific terms, and I am grateful for that, the effect of
                        perhaps heat and stress on the individual.  Can you express
                        in perhaps less technical terms and confirm my understanding
                        if I am correct, and put me right if I am wrong, I think
                        what you said that under extreme tension or pressure or may
                        be fear, the blood alcohol level when taken would be
                        slightly but not significantly higher than it might have
                    H   been if that sample had been taken from somebody who had not
                        been subjected to stress? - A. No, sir, I don't think I said


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                    17
                                                                   DR. A.R.W. FORREST


                             that.
                        Q. I understood what you were saying was there might be a very
                           slight increase but nothing of any significance? - A. No, I
                           d o n ’t think that was the impression I intended to give, and if
                           that was what I said it was wrong.

                        Q. It was an impression that I got, and I am grateful for the
                    B      correction.  Thank you for that.

                                  THE CORONER:   Mr. Fraser, I wonder whether, I think what
                             you were talking about was acetone at the point in time as I
                             perceived your question:

                        Q. Would that be right? - A. Oh, yes, acetone, under the
                           circumstances we have described, one might well expect an
                           increase in acetone in the blood as the body in response to
                           stress goes over, and lack of oxygen, goes over to running on
                           fat rather than on sugar.

                        Q.        MR. FRASER:  But that would not of itself generate a
                             higher blood level? - A. No, sir.

                        Q. I am grateful for that.  Just one thing.  I have done some
                    D      very quick arithmetic.  If your analysis of approximately 80,
                           which as we all know is the breathalyser level is right, my
                           arithmetic, and please correct me if I am wrong, in fact 15 of
                           the deceased had alcohol levels above that? - A. That is about
                           right, yes, sir.

                        Q. Which is about one-sixth of the 95 who died? - A. Yes, sir.
                    E   Q. Were over the breathalyser level? - A. I would accept that
                           figure, yes, sir.

                        Q. There is no suggestion that any of them were going to drive,
                           but as a matter of fact it is about one-sixth who were
                           effectively too drunk to drive? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. Thank you very much.

                                  THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen of the Jury, did you
                             follow that? Some of it was a bit technical, as I am sure you
                             appreciate, but it is actually very interesting, and I thought
                             it was right we should let Dr. Forrest explain some of these
                             peaks and things to us so that we knew what he had found,
                             really.  You are happy with that? You have understood?    (The
                             Jury assented)

                        Q. Dr. Forrest, thank you very much, indeed? - A. May I be
                           released for today, sir?

                        Q. Indeed, you may.  I think the hospital is waiting for you.     I
                           am sorry I have kept you for so long.

                H                 THE CORONER:   It looks as though we are going to
                                               Will that be all right, ladies and
                             overshoot today.


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                        18
                                                                   J. WARDROBE


                           gentlemen? Would it be very inconvenient for you? I would
                           like to do what we are planning to do today.  We will be as
                           quick as we can, but as I said, I want to do it properly and I
                           want you to know what we are talking about.  We will listen, I
                           think, to Mr. Wardrobe next, and then we will break for a few
                           minutes and then come back and do Prof. Usher and the two
                           Inquests.  All right? We will certainly do one of the
                           Inquests.
                    B                         JAMES WARDROBE Sworn

                                                 Bv THE CORONER:

                     <J. Mr. Wardrobe, can you give me your full names, position and
                         qualifications? - A. My name is James Wardrobe.  I am
                         consultant in Accident & Emergency Medicine to the Sheffield
                         Health Authority based at the Northern General Hospital,
                         Sheffield.

                           And in fact there are two consultants in A & E at the moment?
                           - A. At the moment.  At the time of Hillsborough I was the
                           only one.

                           You were the only one. Could you give your qualifications as
                    D]     well, so that we know what you have got? - A. I am a Bachelor
                           of Medicine and Surgery, University of Edinburgh, I hold a
                           Fellowship in General Surgery from the Royal College of
                           Surgeons of Edinburgh and a Fellowship in General Surgery from
                           the Royal College of Surgeons, England.   I also hold the
                           Fellowship in Accident & Emergency Medicine and Surgery from
                           the Royal College of Surgeons and Physicians of Edinburgh.

                    E q . Mr. Wardrobe, the reason why I have asked you to come is
                          because I want you to very briefly describe the set up or at
                          least what happened at the Northern General so that we can
                          understand a little bit better the problems that you faced,
                          and also what happened to one or two of the cases. Can you
                          perhaps outline for me, it is quite a big department.   I think
                          you say about 55,000 patients a year.   Is that right? - A.
                          Yes, sir, there are 55,000 attendances per year to the
                         department.

                     4-    And that is 365 days a year, is not it? - A. Yes, sir.

                     (J.    And I worked that out at about 150 a day.   Would you agree? -
                           A. That is correct, on average.

                           Of those 150, and obviously this is just an average figure,
                           how many are admissions? - A. Our admission rate is about 10%
                           of that total.

                     Q.    So about 15 per day? - A. yes.

                 <$. Of those 15 how many would you expect to go to theintensive
                     care unit or the coronary care unit? - A. There would be on
                H    average about one seriously ill patient per day.



J. L. Harpham Ltd                                       19
                                                                       J. WARDROBE


                             So really, quite a small number to intensive care? - A. Who
                             are seriously ill, yes.

                        3. The others obviously need treatment and help? - A. Yes.

                        D. But they are not life threatening? - A. That is correct.

                        3. Now, the department is set up with the usual facilities,
                    g      including a resuscitation room? - A. That is correct.

                             And the resuscitation room has got how many beds or tables
                             within there? - A. There are two beds in the resuscitation
                             area .

                        3.    So you are really aiming to be able to    cope with    two seriously
                             ill people at any one time? - A. Yes.

                        3.    On the dayin question on the 15th how many doctors were
                             actually on duty, A & E doctors? - A. There were two accident
                             and emergency doctors on duty.

                        3. That is the average number for the hospital? - A. There are
                           always two on.

                    Dja.     Both SHOs or.... - A. Both Senior House Officers, yes.

                        3.    You carry a bleeper.   Were you on call thatday? - A. I was on
                             call that day, yes.

                        3. That does not mean you have got to be at the hospital? - A.
                           No.
                    E   Q.   You have got to be contactable? -A. Yes.

                        Q . In fact, you were contacted? - A. Yes.

                        Q. What time was it? About half-past-3 or so? - A. At about
                           15.23 I was contacted.

                        Q.   And you made your way to the hospital? - A. Yes.

                        Q.   Can you remember about what time you arrived? - A. 15.33.

                        Q.    At that point had any patients arrived then? - A. Yes, and
                             there were three patients in the resuscitation area and three
                             also were in other parts of the department.

                        Q. So at that time about six patients had arrived? - A. Yes.

                        Q. And then within the next hour how many patients approximately
                           did you receive? - A. 87 patients.

                        Q. So you got more than half-a-day’s work, on average, within an
                           hour? - A. Yes.

                H       Q. And of those patients how many went to the coronary care unit
                           - I mean intensive care or coronary care? - A. There were 17


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                         20
                                                                  J. WARDROBE


                         patients went to intensive care units.

                    Q. So a large number? - A. yes.

                    Q. In addition to that there were also patients who never made it
                       to coronary care, unfortunately, who were dead? - A. That is
                       correct.

                         And I think you made arrangements - I d o n ’t know whether you
                    EP
                         did it or whether this is part of your planning - that one of
                         the plaster rooms should act as a temporary mortuary.     Is that
                         right? - A. Yes, sir, that is part of the major incident plan
                         for the hospital.

                     Q. So that was a pre-planned arrangement? - A. Yes.

                    ©■   Obviously the department was overrun with patients, I think it
                         would be fair to say? - A. We were extremely busy, especially
                         initially, yes.

                     Q   And it is probably true to say, is not, Mr. Wardrobe, that in
                         those circumstances yours and everybody else's objective was
                         to try and help those who could be helped? - A. That is
                         correct.
                    D
                     Q. Paper came a very long second? -       I am afraid that is
                        correct.

                     Q. I am not in any sense criticising you for it.  I am just
                        trying to establish the facts so that we know.  The upshot of
                        that is that documentation for at least some of the patients
                        either does not exist or is not adequate.  Is that right? - A.
                    E That is correct, yes.
                     Q, Now, we will come to the individuals who have died in a
                        moment, but you I think, having initially had to help with the
                        actual resuscitation of individuals, but as soon as some more
                        doctors came down from various parts of the hospital you in
                        fact cast yourself in a different role, did not you? - A. That
                        is correct, yes.
                    F
                     Q. And what was that role? - A. My role in the major incident
                        plan is to stand at the ambulance receiving door and see every
                        patient as they come through that door, and to try and
                        categorise those patients into those that require immediate
                        care to safe life, those who have obviously serious injuries
                        and require admission, those who have got minor injuries but
                        require treatment to the minor injuries area, and those who
                        are dead.

                    Q. And the technical word for that is     ’triage", is not it? -
                       A. That is correct, yes.

                    Q. And really the objective is to sort out those patients for
                       whom the limited number of doctors/nurses have got to be aimed
                H      at? - A. Yes.



J. L. Harpham Ltd                                     21
                                                                 J. WARDROBE


                          With the hope of doing the most good? - A. Yes.
                    A°'
                     Q. And people who have only got a minor injury, and that might
                        mean a broken arm, would have to wait? - A. Yes.

                     Q. Painful or not. - A. Yes.

                     Q. If there is a life threatening situation? - A. Absolutely.

                    %     1 think part of the major incident planning is that people
                          should get tagged with different coloured labels? - A. That is
                          correct.

                     Q. And they are given Majex numbers, I think is what you call it?
                        - A. That is correct.

                    ©.    In fact, the different coloured labels were never used.    You
                          just used white labels, I think? - A. Yes.

                     Q. And would I be right in saying that in the end everybody did
                        get a Majex number? - A. Eventually, some time after the
                        event.

                     Q. They may not have got them straight away, but they did in the
                    D   end finish up with numbers? - A. Yes.

                     Q. So it is possible to identify the people who died, and I think
                        excluding Adam Spearritt and Lee Nicol, there were 11.  Is
                        that right? - A. That is correct, yes.

                     Q. By their Majex numbers? - A. Yes.

                          Have you got a copy of your statement? - A. Yes, I have.

                     Q    Before we come to that I just wanted to dispose of one other
                          matter.  The people who dealt with the numbering once the
                          system worked are medical records officers? - A. That is
                          correct, yes.

                          It is their task.   They are not medics? - A. No.

                     Q    They are admin people, but it is their task to do the
                          labelling and the administration so one knows who is who and
                          where they are? - A. Yes.

                     Q. And of course, they had to deal with all the live ones as well
                        as all the people who had died? - A. That is correct, yes.

                     Q    If we turn to your statement and in particular I think it is
                          your statement of the 6th.  I want to go through one or two of
                          these because I have a few problems with some of the
                          information and I want to be clear in my own mind.   Majex No.
                          2 is Lee Nicol? - A. Yes.

                 Q. And he is a lad who actually went up to the intensive care
                H unit? - A. That is correct.


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                     22
                                                                   J. WARDROBE


                     lC   . And there are notes about him, proper hospital notes and
                            records? - A. Yes.

                          . So we will leave him.   Philip Hammond, who is No. 8, is that
                            right? - A. Yes.

                          . He was at the hospital because he had a Majex number? - A.
                            Yes .
                    Bc    . But there is no documentary evidence as to what happened? - A.
                            That is correct.

                      q. Except that there are some ECG electrode marks on him? - A.
                         The post mortem report did state there were three ECG
                         electrodes attached to his chest.

                    c       And you can attempt to help me with this by trying to explain
                            how that could have happened.  Could you tell me what your
                            best guess, shall we say, is? - A. In the initial part of the
                            incident I was sending people who came in with a cardiac
                            arrest, patients undergoing mouth to mouth resuscitation and
                            external cardiac massage, I sent them to the resuscitation
                            room initially to see whether they could have a chance of
                            being brought round, to start the heart going.  The fact that
                    D       the only post mortem evidence were three ECG electrodes, I
                            think possibly he was sent to the resuscitation room but the
                            ECG showed no cardiac activity, and because of the great
                            pressure on the resuscitation beds at that time he would be
                            sent to the mortuary.

                        (p. To the mortuary, yes.   Then No. 9 is Barry Bennett, I believe?
                            - A. Yes.
                    E
                      ($. And again, it is exactly the same, there is a needle mark but
                          no record in the hospital? - A. No record in the notes, no.

                      <j). Victoria Hicks, No. 20. - A. Yes.

                      <$. There is obviously post mortem evidence that something was
                          attempted for this young lady? - A. Yes.

                      G. And there is in fact, I believe, quite a lot of medical
                         evidence that people tried? - A. Yes.

                      0. Are there actually any properly written up notes in respect of
                         this girl? - A. There are no properly written up notes, but I
                         know from other people that she was in the resuscitation room
                         and had intensive resuscitation attempts.

                      <J). So although the notes are defective you are satisfied from the
                           information you have been given by the doctors that attempts
                           were made.  We will find out later quite a lot of attempts
                           were made. - A. Yes.

                      (J). No. 21 is Stephen Harrison? - A. Yes.
                    H <&.   And as far as you can find there is absolutely nothing, either


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                        23
                                                               J. WARDROBE


                        post mortem or in the hospital records.   Is that right? - A.
                        No.
                     d). I beg your pardon.  There is a medical record.   I misread it.
                         - A. There is no definite evidence in medical records, sir,
                         but from the post mortem report it would appear that Mr.
                         Harrison received intensive resuscitation efforts.

                    go. Let us just get this right, because I have confused myself.
                        There is post mortem evidence of intensive therapeutic
                        efforts? - A. Yes.

                     <6. Is there a medical record as well? - A. And there is evidence
                         in medical records, yes.

                     <fc. When you say "medical record", are you saying it is actually
                          in the notes? - A. In the notes, yes.

                     Q. So there are proper hospital notes which actually refer to
                        this person by name, so to speak, or at least by number? - A.
                        Yes.
                      O. Adam Spearritt, No. 29, you know I think that attempts were
                         made to help this lad, and he in fact he went all the way up
                    D    to intensive care? - A. Yes.

                      O. And unfortunately arrested there, but I have actually seen his
                         notes.  In fact, I have got them here, and I c an ’t find
                         anything in them, and yet you seem to say that there is
                         evidence in the medical notes.  Can you just with regard to
                         that? - A. There is nothing in the medical notes but there is
                         the hospital major incident list which notes all the patients
                    E    who were admitted on that day, and that list clearly states
                         that he went to the intensive care unit.

                     <5. I see.  When you are saying there is definite evidence in the
                         medical notes you are basing it on the fact somebody has made
                         a record in your register, so to speak, what happened to him?
                         - A. Yes.

                      3. But you could not from that register say precisely what was
                         done? - A. No.

                      3. What about No. 30, Gary Jones? Is the position the same
                         there? - A. No, there is evidence in the hospital notes and
                         from the post mortem record that Mr. Jones received intensive
                         resuscitation efforts.

                      3. So he must have come into the resuscitation unit? - A. Yes.

                        No. 61, Stephen O ’Neill, there is some evidence from post
                        mortem but nothing in your notes? - A. Yes.

                      3. Now, the one that gives me a bit of problem with is Paul
                         Brady, No. 62.   I believe there is a statement from a Dr
                    H    Jacobs? - A. Yes



J. L. Harpham Ltd                                    24
                                                                   J. WARDROBE


                             Or Jacob. - A. Jacobs.

                    Q        Who states that he attempted to do certain things but was
                             unsuccessful? - A. Yes.

                    ()       Mr. Jacobs I think is actually a consultant, is not he? - A.
                             He has recently become a consultant, yes.

                             He is a fairly senior doctor anyway? - A. Oh, yes.
                    B
                    <!       But there is nothing in the notes? - A. No.

                    O        And there is nothing on the PM findings either? - A. That is
                             correct, yes.

                    (I.      And I think you said you thought he was triaged as dead? - A.
                             Yes .

                    0.       Is that in fact possible, because if Mr. Jacobs did
                             resuscitation on him, if he had been triaged as dead he would
                             have been diverted to the post mortem room, would not he? - A.
                             That is correct, yes.

                        a.   Whereas if Mr. Jacobs worked on him he must have been diverted
                    D        somewhere else? - A. Yes.

                        o. Can you help me on that?     What do you think actually happened?
                             - A . It is very hard to be sure, given the circumstances.  I
                             know that I did send at least four people to the mortuary in
                             the latter stages of the incident coming in as dead because of
                             the great pressure on the resuscitation area, and I made the
                             statement only with the evidence I had before me - that was
                    E        medical notes - and that given to me, the post mortem reports.
                             Usually if someone has had resuscitation attempts there will
                             be a needle, ECG electrodes, some indication that there has
                             been resuscitation.   I can't explain it.

                    (I.      What I am trying to find out from you is are you saying if Mr.
                             Jacobs did do resuscitation on this young man could he had
                             been triaged as dead? - A. no.

                    Cl. He could not have been, could he? - A. No.

                    Cl       That is really all I am trying to establish.   No. 63 is David
                             Thomas.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

                    <1       And there is no evidence at all about him, and you conclude
                             that this must have been one of the people whom you triaged
                             as dead? - A. Yes.

                    (p. No. 64 is John Gilhooley, and again we have got post mortem
                        evidence but nothing else.  Is that right? - A. Yes.

                    <$. Philip Steele, No. 99, is in the same situation as Paul Brady.
                        Dr. Caulder and Dr. Davidson I think were involved with this
                        man;  not for very long;  but they were involved.  Would
                        accept that that is correct? - A. If they say so, yes.


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                        25
                                                                 J. WARDROBE



                          If they say so, and if they do say that would it be right to
                          say he could not have been triaged as dead? - A. Yes.

                     Cl    Because he would have been in a different part? - A. Yes, the
                           resuscitation unit.

                     (I. No. 119, Arthur Horrocks, I believe Dr. Nidu - do you know Dr
                    g    Nidu, a lady doctor? - A. Yes, I do,

                     Cl. I think had something to do with this gentleman.  Again, if
                         that is so could he have been triaged as dead or not? - A
                         No, if someone underwent a resuscitation attempt he would
                         not have been.

                        (I. He would not have been triaged as dead.  That is not say he
                            was not in fact dead, but you would not have triaged him as
                            such? - A. No.
                        Q. Now, traumatic asphyxia is not something, fortunately, you
                           have many cases of? - A. No.

                        Q. But you had quite a lot on this day? - A. Yes.

                    Dqj. And I think you observed that from reconstructions of what you
                         have seen - what was your observation with regard to people
                         who came in in cardiac arrest, that is what I want to ask? -
                         A. Some people who came in in cardiac arrest we were able to
                         get the heart going, but unfortunately in the three cases we
                         did that none of these patients survived.  The longest that
                         one survived was the young boy, Lee Nicol, who unfortunately
                    „    was brain dead.
                    hi
                           Would it be fair to say that everybody who came in in cardiac
                           arrest in fact died? - A. Yes.

                           We all know about cardiac arrest and heart massage.  Are you
                           saying then that if a person is in cardiac arrest there is not
                           any point in attempting it? - A. No.  There is a great move
                           afoot at the present to encourage people to perform cardiac
                           arrest (sic) because in a patient having a cardiac arrest in
                           the street, for instance, then given the ideal circumstances
                           then there is a reasonable chance of that patient being
                           resuscitated, but it does require a lot of effort and a lot of
                           infrastructure in the community to back that up.

                        O. So what you are saying, it can work in ideal situations? - A
                           In ideal situations it can work, yes.

                      O. Is there any difference between a person who arrests, say,
                         because of myocardial infarct as opposed to somebody who
                         arrests because of traumatic asphyxia as to the chances of
                         resuscitation? - A. I would say that I have no experience
                         personally of resuscitating anyone from traumatic asphyxia who
                         has had a cardiac arrest, but it is a very rate condition.
                    H    But also I know of no case reports in the literature where
                         that has occurred.  I think perhaps the other situation where


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                      26
                                                                                    .T   WARDROBE


                        i       ,           c=imi lar clinical problem would be that of a bad
                         ttnTztd                            air’ into their c h e s t ^ o ^ o t h e r ^
                         reasons. In my           -al® f f the arrest has occurred
                         ^ " h S i ^ a r ^ ^ t l S S   Save died fro, the effects on
                         the brain of the hypoxia.

               Q.
                    B    morl L ? i o S s situation than cardiac arrest on its own? - A.
                         Y es.
                                    THE CORONER:                Mr. Fraser?

                                                     Cross-Examined by MR^— FRASER.:

                             w • f iir i-,\re>r uhat Deriod did this disaster
                                                                            „e plan
                <£ Just very briefly, over what perioa            obvlousiy     know
                         r     o    ^   r    r   "   ^          hospifa! fho?tly after 3.30^        At what time,
                            if at ail, was the                                                      aS £ ” is / a .
                            The disaster plan was not officially
                            aware.
                            It was an ongoing thing in terms of treatment? - A. Yes.
                    D
                    Q. Do you know what time it was put into         :,A ,7The
                       hospital disaster plan was put into effect at 15.27.

                    Q.
                            s.sr.;.s~ ™                                                                  :t ....
                    E-      tRst ltr u M         g o l n e 1 toe *or “ e toh £uil                      hospital
                            was alerted 1 1 that time that a major incident was taking
                            place.
                            And you were called in? - A. I was actually called in prior to
                    Q.
                            that.
                             T annreciate that     Once the decision is made how long does it
                             L k S ^ i S t the Plan into effect? - A. That will depend on
                             rircumstances     In this circumstance we had to try and put
                             the plan into effect at the same time as hJvl£§      treat
                             large numbers of seriously ill patients, which do
                             compound the problem.
                                     • 4- +
                             I appreciate  -h=+- anH
                                          that,  ana hpnce
                                                     nence the
                                                           one learned Coroner's nn
                                                                                  comment
                                                                                    hf=half of
                    Q
                    G        about paperwork coming a poor second, and I think on behalt
                             the families that is -derstandable i n - - m s t a n c e ^ ^

                             in?o e f f e c t ° w i t h   i n    20 minutes of the disaster,
                                                                                          and it was one
                             i S c h hopefully            operated to the bes-‘           ^ces     is
                             available.         Can       you tell me briefly what extra staffing
                             brought in once              the disaster plan is put into eff    _
                             pive us an idea              of the numbers involved? - A. The numbers
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                                         27
                                                                     J . WARDROBE


                           in a very short space of time in the disaster plan, and these
                           very skilled doctors were essential in treating the effects of
                           hypoxia especially in the intensive care unit, and there are
                           not many hospitals have 25 anaesthetists in total.  So we were
                           fortunate in having them, but the numbers who responded to the
                           incident ran into hundreds.

                     c$. I am most grateful to you.     Thank you.
                    B                         Further bv THE CORONER:

                           So within a very short there were an awful lot of people
                           there? - A. Yes, sir.

                     4-    Well, a relatively short time, anyway. - A. Yes.

                    c+.     Can we be a bit more precise.  When did you have 25
                           anaesthetists present, approximately? - A. Approximately
                           within two hours.

                        <t». Within two hours.   So it did take a little while to get  a full
                             complement? - A. Yes.  There would be an initial rush and   then
                             I am not sure when the last anaesthetist arrived.

                    D           THE CORONER:   Is everything clear, members of the Jury?
                           Yes? When we are at the Medico-Legal Centre I w o n ’t have to
                           sit with my back to you.  I am very sorry about that.

                                Ladies and gentlemen, what we are going to do is to rise
                           for a few minutes because we need a break, and then, Prof.
                           Usher, we will listen to you, if we may, and go from your
                           introduction, so to speak, straight into the Inquest.
                    E
                                                (Short Adjournment)

                                THE CORONER:   Members of the Jury, I understand you had
                           difficulty hearing me.  I apologise.  At the Medico-Legal
                           centre it will be easier for all of us, but if you can't hear
                           then - who is the Foreman - then get out and shout.  Do
                           something to attract my attention, because I want you to be
                           able to participate and to hear.

                                Right, Prof. Usher?

                                              PROF. ALAN USHER Sworn

                                                  Bv THE CORONER:

                        O. Good afternoon, Prof. Usher, before we begin I want to tell
                           you one thing.  You have just taken the oath, but in a few
                           minutes I am going to ask you to take another one, because
                           what I am asking you to do now is to talk in general terms,
                           and then I want you to take the oath in respect of the PMs
                           which you dealt with, just so that you know why I am doing
                           that. - A. Yes.
                H <3.      Prof. Usher, you are Alan Usher, that is right? - A. Yes, sir.


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                        28
                                                                                          P R O F . A - USHER



              o A i o u l d you please tell me:your P°“ ^ ° " fa^ dl°lne and Bachelor

                         rassE-rfc* VKSS&sr wserws
                         rr    0r
                         nave held         M position for about 25 yea
                                         that                                                    .   Mldlands’ and            1

                                   • W4-       richer that you are actually as a
               Q         3o it is right, Prof. Ushe »      from being  aHome Office
                    B    professor a University man, apart from being
                         Pathologist? - A. Yes, sir.
                                          arts tntallv unconnected with the
               Q. r r t K r ^ n ^ r ^ p i ? ^ 1^ 1 ?h.t is ri^t.

                         And, indeed, with the Hallamshire except i - o f a ^ a ^ t h a t might
                Q.
                         have the University section as well.
                    c     In fact, you are based at the Medico-Legal Centre?                                       A.   I am.
                Q.

                Q. Prof e s s o r , y o u w e r e c a l l e d out on 15th            ^^^mething
                   less at t h e s a m e t i m e as I wa s         b e ^ ^ e _w ® n*
                          t e r r i b l e had h a p p e n e d at H i l l s b o r o u g h .

                          And I think in fact we met J J J ^ A ^ T h a t b r i g h t 00 ^
                <D Centre if I remember rightly.

                          And I think Prof. Stephen Jones came as well at that time? -
                    Q.
                          A. Indeed.
                          Eventually we made our way to the temporary mortuary? - A.
                    Q.

                    E
                    Q. " L p ^ ^ h f L f d J e d ^ s i m f o r ^ L ^ r o w L r t r d e S r w J t h ^ h f
                           organisation of the pathology? -                          A.   Yes, we did.

                    Q.
                                 tS^be involved^had^to                                                                            -s
                           point No. 1? - A. Yes, that was your decision, sir.
                    F      And also, I think we felt that as far as possible we were
                    Q
                           going to use forensic pathologists?   A. Yes.
                           in fact, how           many forensic pathologists were used? - A.                              I
                    Q
                           think we used four or five,                       sir.
                                                         4   - i0 9 B t » r o u D l e of o t h e r P r o f e s s o r s w h o w e r e
                           J o ? ^ r e n lir p a th o lS L ?                b S t’ o b v io u s ly very s e n io r p eo p le? -
                    <?
                            A. Right.
                            Now you, how many years have you actually                                 been doing
                     Ql
                          ' pathology? - A. Now more than 30.
                                                                 ,       j a i i. Ti'i'hH m o r e 2 7 , 0 0 0 “Odd C o r o n e r s
                          . I think in fact you have dealt with                              more
                            post mortems in your career? - A. I                              have, actually
                   H
                            so that is a fair number. - A. I am getting the hang of it
                     O.

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                                             29
                                              PROF. A. USHER



0.   Amongst these you have dealt with over   700murder
     investigations, I believe? - A. Yes.

O. And very many traumatic asphyxial cases? - A. Yes, I have seen
   at least 40 to 50.

(5. So although it is not an everyday occurrence, it is not
    totally strange to you? - A. No.

Q.   As a pathologist? - A. Yes.

Q.   When we went to the gymnasium at theground at Hillsborough,
     did you form any impression as to the facilities which were
     available there as a temporary mortuary? - A. Yes, I formed
     the impression they were excellent.  It was very fortunate
     there was such a huge room available and that it could be
     divided off into compartments, one of which was the mortuary,
     and it was possible to lay out virtually all of the bodies
     still with room to walk between them, perhaps unusual in a
     sudden disaster.

Q. And also it was possible to divide it off so one could section
   part of the building from reception areas? - A. Yes.

O. And although it is not terribly relevant, you I think were
   there when the decision was taken with regard to the
   photography of the deceased? - A. Yes.  We were very fortunate
   in that unlike some disasters the deceased were not in fact
   badly disfigured, and so it was possible to use Polaroid
   photographs, which meant it spared the relatives the very
   painful business of walking through the actual mortuary and
   looking at the people.  The photographs were just exhibited
   outside with the appropriate number.

O. Because obviously, are you saying that to walk and look at
   bodies can be a very distressing experience? - A. Indeed.

5. Before we get down to PMs in particular and so on, having
   dealt with identifications at the gymnasium the bodies were
   then moved to the Medico-Legal Centre? - A. Yes.

3. I think you were actually here when the Medico-Legal Centre
   wasbuilt, were not you? - A. Yes, I was.

3.    And in fact you had a part to play   in that? - A.   I played a
     little part in that, yes, sir.

3.    Just from a mortuary point of view, what sort of facilities
     are they? - A. I don't think there are better facilities in
     the United Kingdom, and I think that is a generally accepted
     view.  By coincidence, when we were planning the place we
     said, "Let's pretend there is going to be an incident
     involving 100 dead people” . We were thinking of an
     aeroplane crash, actually, but in fact the place was
     planned to deal with that and I think it did pretty well.



                                   30
                                                                  PROF. A. USHER


                      Cl    In fact, of course, the problem was that there were already
                            deceased people within the building? - A. Yes.

                      Cl    So we did not have quite as much space as - it was not empty,
                            in other words? - A. No.

                      Cl. Which did create a few problems for us. - A. Yes.

                            But I am right in thinking that there is a room which we know
                    B :C>
                            as the Special PM room which is in fact chillable? - A. Yes.

                      0. And that was done? - A. Yes, it was.

                      Cl    Prof. Usher, what I want to do was, I wanted to go through one
                            or two of the terms which we use in post mortems.

                                 THE CORONER:   This, ladies and gentlemen, forgive me, is
                            a short course in pathology.  What I am going to do is to ask
                            Prof. Usher to explain some of the words which are used,
                            because you will hear them over and over again, and it may
                            easier if you have had them explained at the beginning, just
                            as words:

                      o.    If I start off by saying, can you help by a word that occurs
                    D       very often is "petechia" and "haemorrhage".  Could you just
                            explain what the word "petechia" means and what the word
                            "haemorrhage" for that matter means in that context? - A. Yes.
                            I could do it perhaps better if I said that petechial
                            haemorrhages are signs of asphyxia and then define asphyxia.

                            Yes, if you would. - A. Asphyxia is a process which takes
                            place when there is some mechanical interference with normal
                    E       breathing.   The causes of the interference might be external,
                            as when a pillow is put across the face.   That is called
                            suffocation.   It may be hands or a ligature round the neck
                            which is called strangling.   It may be the inhalation of some
                            foreign body into the throat, which is called choking.    Or it
                            may be, and this is relevant in this case, the fact the
                            person's chest is simply not allowed to move in and out as it
                            does in the normal course of respiration.   If that happens
                            these people are asphyxiated in all the examples I have given.

                                 In traumatic asphyxia the picture is usually fairly
                            typical.  When respiration stops oxygen cannot be given into
                            the blood from the lungs and the haemoglobin which is present
                            in the little red cells and which is used to carry oxygen from
                            the lungs to the tissues where it is needed, these little
                            packets of haemoglobin give up their oxygen and then turn into
                            what is called reduced haemoglobin, which is a bluish colour,
                            and this gives a bluish cast to the face and often elsewhere
                            in the body to a person who is being asphyxiated.

                                   When this happens the heart begins to fail and there is
                            back pressure on the very small blood vessels called
                            capillaries.  So the pressure in the fine vessels of the skin
                H           and elsewhere in the body increases, and the cell walls which
                            are only one cell thick, are not getting oxygen either, and so


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                       31
                                                                 PROF. A. USHER


                           these fine vessels burst, and little bursts of red cells pass
                           through the wall into the tissues.  If this happens in the
                           skin they can be seen as little pin-point haemorrhages in the
                           skin.  They are not entirely specific for asphyxia, but it
                           would be difficult to diagnose asphyxia if there were not such
                           petechiae.  Larger haemorrhages which are formed in exactly
                           the same way are call ecchymoses.

                                So that the general picture of a person who has died from
                    B      asphyxia is of bluish cyanosis, as it is called, bluish
                           appearance about the face and elsewhere, and the presence of
                           petechiae somewhere in the body, frequently in the eyes,
                           frequently in the lax skin of both the eyelids, frequently
                           internally on the surfaces of the lung and on the heart
                           itself, and sometimes elsewhere.  The picture that we saw in
                           general in the people who died at Hillsborough was an
                    C      asphyxial picture, and it was due to the fact that at some
                           time they must have been packed so close that they were unable
                           to move their chests and thus asphyxiated.

                                If the asphyxia is prolonged it begins to affect other
                           organs and in particular the brain.  The brain is very
                           sensitive to oxygen lack, and so after four or five minutes of
                           asphyxia then damage occurs to the brain.  The more prolonged
                    D      the asphyxia is the more damage there is to the brain, and
                           eventually the vital centres in the brain are damaged and then
                           the person is technically dead.

                        o. How long does it take for a person who is asphyxiated to (a)
                           lose consciousness, and (b) get to the stage where irreparable
                           damage has been done? - A. Well, once the chest becomes
                           absolutely and finally fixed in the situation I imagine as we
                    E      had it at Hillsborough - there were moments of intermittent
                           fixation of the chest in many of the cases - but once the
                           chest becomes finally fixed then it is a matter of minutes,
                           between four and six minutes usually, before the person dies,
                           but it is a very short time mercifully before they lose
                           consciousness.  They may lose consciousness in 10 to 15
                           seconds.

                           So in other words, once asphyxia actually takes hold properly,
                           shall we say, then the loss of consciousness is very quick? -
                           A. Yes.

                        O. And death between four and six minutes,   of that order? - A.
                           Yes, that is the usual.

                    G<>-   If a person is active and struggling, does it make any
                           difference? - A. They use oxygen.  They use what oxygen they
                           have up more rapidly, of course.  It is also true to say that
                           if someone has a disease say of the chest or the lungs or the
                           heart, where they are already hampered with regard to their
                           use of oxygen, then of course they will stand asphyxia very
                           badly, and they may die in a much shorter time than that.

                Ho         Now, in some cases we will hear in these PMs there was what is
                           known as coning.  In other words, there was an enlargement, a


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                      32
                                           PROF. A. USHER


     swelling of the brain and in others there was not.  If we deal
     with the cases where there is coning, that is a very serious
     situation, is not it? - A. Yes, it is.  It is unfortunately a
     non-specific situation.  If you insult the brain in more or
     less any way it reacts by swelling.  If you cause it to be
     shaken around inside the head or if you fail to supply it with
     oxygen, it reacts by swelling, and since the skull is a closed
     boney box with only one outlet and that outlet is where the
     spinal cord leaves it at the base, then it tends to push the
     brain down into that cone.  Unfortunately, the part of the
     brain that is pushed down is the part that contains the vital
     centres for respiration and for the regulation of heart beat
     and blood pressure.  So if that happens then it is likely to
     cause death.

(p. But it is not anabsolute requirement for asphyxial death?      -
    A . O h , n o , by no means.

<). Because it is at the cellular level I think you are saying     the
    damage is done? - A. Yes.

O. Which is microscopic,   I believe, if you like? - A. Yes.

O.    You were talking about the very short period when a person
     actually becomes asphyxiated before he loses consciousness.       -
     A. Yes.

O. What is the position if as I think you have also said there
   are intermittent episodes of asphyxia, shortish periods,
   compression and then relaxation and then compression and
   relaxation and then final compression? Does that make any
   difference? - A. In the intervals when they are able to
   breathe properly then they to some extent replenish their
   tissue oxygen stores, but of course once the pressure is on
   again then the same process operates.

Q. Operates again.  So if a person has been squashed, if I can
   say that, and the pressure is taken off him before he loses
   consciousness, and there is no further pressure on him, then
   he ought to be able to breathe and recover? - A. Yes.

<5. If he breathes and then a further episode of pressure is put
    on then the effect of that additional pressure will depend on
    how much oxygen he has managed to take in in the interval? -
    A. In the interval, yes.

O. And of course, the shorter the interval.... - A. Exactly, sir.

0. We know in some cases - in fact in many cases - there is some
   reference to vomiting? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you deal with the whole question of vomiting in traumatic
   asphyxial deaths and what it signifies? - A. Well, in any
   asphyxial death, as a terminal event, right at the end, there
   is often vomiting, and for that reason many pathologists when
   reporting such cases simply say, and I do this myself, if
   there is vomiting I simply say, "Traumatic asphyxia", and I


                                 33
                                                                  PROF. A. USHER


                          take it that the vomiting is part of the last phase of that
                          death.  It is true to say that it is particularly liable to
                          happen in traumatic asphyxia because the airways are free,
                          which they are not if the person is being strangled, and of
                          course, compression is being exerted on the abdomen as well
                          with a tendency to force material up.  So you would expect to
                          get vomiting in cases of traumatic asphyxia.

                          And you would say it is probably part of the terminal events?
                          - A. Yes, it is just part of the act of dying.

                     Q.   In some cases one inhales? - A. Yes.

                          If one inhales any vomit, if there had been nomouth to  mouth
                          resuscitation presumably that would mean it was breathed in? -
                          A . Ye s .

                          A gasp must have been made? - A. Yes.

                     C . If there is artificial respiration does itmake any
                         difference, do you think? Can it be blown in?- A. Itcould
                         be if the mouth had not been cleared of vomit first.  In that
                         case the kiss of life becomes, of course, the kiss of death,
                         because you are forcing the material down into the airways.
                    D It is also fair to say it has been shown, principally by the
                         South Africans, that material in the stomach can be, after
                         death, forced up into the nasal fount and even down the
                         bronchi.

                     Cl. How does it get down after that, because that c a n ’t be
                         inhaled? Are you saying a gravity mechanism, or what? - A.
                         Yes, that is what is thought to be the answer.
                    E
                     (J. So it is not entirely explained how that happens? - A. That is
                         right.

                     o    So the mere presence of stomach content in the lungs does not
                          necessarily mean it was inhaled before death, is what you are
                          saying? - A. That is right.

                     Ci. But in many cases it may be, of course? - A. Yes.

                          And inhalation is a very serious matter, is not it, because it
                          irritates the linings? - A. Yes, that is right.

                          I think you prepared a report for Lord Justice Taylor, and one
                          of the questions which are dealt with in that, I think, was
                          the question of eye haemorrhages and the effects of people
                          lying or standing? - A. Yes.

                     O. Can you just summarise your conclusions on that? - A. Yes.    I
                          think it was put forward that you could differentiate between
                          people who died standing up and people who died lying down
                          because the people who died standing up did not have eye
                          haemorrhages and the people who died lying down down did, and
                H         that in my view is completely wrong.



J. L. Harpham Ltd                                     34
                                                                  PROF. A. USHER


                          You can't draw any conclusions from eye haemorrhages? - A. No

                          You can get those whichever way you are? - A. Indeed.

                               THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser, any questions on the general
                          points?

                                          Cross-Examined bv MR. FRASER:
                    B      Prof. Usher, there is only one question, and that is that you
                           have graphically described the effect of crushing.   One only
                           has to note when one is shallow breathing to realise how
                           little movement is needed of the chest and one imagines the
                           effect of stopping that must be intense pressure.  You then
                           described traumatic asphyxia for us in laymen's terms for
                           which I can assure you your attitude is appreciated.   Can you,
                           for the benefit of the families perhaps confirm that the
                           description which they sometimes heard of the effect of
                           traumatic asphyxia as being a little like going to sleep
                           rather quickly and without a great deal, if any, pain, almost
                           a rapid onset of sleep? - A. It is not an experience, of
                           course, I have had, sir.

                        (J). I appreciate that. - A. But it is true that it is chronicled
                    D        that these people become unconscious extremely quickly.  I
                             don't think I can say more than that.

                        (J). Professor, I am asked to place on formal record the thanks of
                              the people behind me for the simple and sympathetic way you
                              have given your evidence.   Thank you for that.

                                THE CORONER:   Did you follow that? You will be hearing
                    E      more about some of these words as you go along.

                                Now, that concludes what I call the generic bit of these
                           Inquests, and we are now going to turn to Inquest No. 1:


                        <j). Was there anything else you wanted to say, Prof. Usher? - A.
                             No, sir, I don't think so.

                                THE CORONER:    Are we all happy to carry on?   Yes, Mr.
                           Fraser?

                                HR. FRASER:   Sir, before you start, I am conscious of
                           the time.  I am also aware that you have agreed that the Jury
                           should see the ground in the morning.    I wonder, sir, whether
                           it is still your hope to start your d a y ’s Inquests tomorrow at
                           9.30? I appreciate even the best laid plans of mice and men
                           often gang to gley, and I wonder whether if tomorrow's
                           timetable might be rearranged slightly to take perhaps a
                           family who would not be attending first so that if there is
                           any time lost in the Jury's attendance at the ground it might
                           be made up at that stage? I do not have the benefit of
                           knowing who will not be here tomorrow, sir.     You may have.  I
                    H      make the practical suggestion in an effort not to disrupt
                           tomorrow too much.


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                       35
     THE CORONER:    Can I just refresh my memory on our
timetable, if I may? We have got Colin Wafer, and I believe
the family are here?

     MR. FRASER:   They are, sir.

     THE CORONER:   So I would want to deal with that Inquest
today because it would be a terrible shame, I hope you would
agree, not to deal with it.  The second Inquest is Mr.
O'Neill, and they are not attending, I believe.  That is
right, is not it?

     HR. FRASER:   I understand so, yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:    So what I propose to do, bearing in mind
we have all had a hard day, is let us take Colin Wafer today.
We will start tomorrow at 10 with out Inquests proper.   It is
Simon Bell's family.   Are they here, Mr. Fraser, do you know?

     MR. FRASER:   I know somebody is present in Court who has
an interest on behalf of the Bell family.  Mr. Alexander, I
understand, is present, and may be he can assist you direct.
I understand the family are coming over from Liverpool. They
are in fact here already, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Bell, will it be in order if we start
at 10 tomorrow as far as you are concerned? We will have to
push everybody on by half-an-hour. As it happens, we have two
families at the tail end who are not attending tomorrow as
well as far as we know at this stage.  I think it is easier
than trying to fit the non-attenders in in the morning, to fit
them in in the evening.

     HR. FRASER:   I appreciate that, sir.  I merely made the
suggestion in an attempt to face the reality of
rearrangements.

      THE CORONER:   I think you are right.  I think we are
being optimistic if we think we can get there and back and get
started at 9.30.   Arrangements for viewing as agreed, quarter-
to-9, but hearings 10 o'clock.   We will deal with Colin
Wafer's Inquest this evening and we will adjourn Stephen
O'Neill's Inquest until tomorrow, if possible, and fit it in
then.   That is a possibility.  If by chance we are back before
10 then we might do Mr. O'Neill's Inquest first thing
tomorrow morning.   We will do it like that.

     Prof. Usher, would you sit down for a couple of minutes.
I will call you back because there are one or two other things
I need to do.

        (The Preliminary Proceedings then concluded
      and there followed the Inquest into the death of
          Colin Wafer. (See separate transcript))




                            36
