   HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)
                                                       69
        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

             ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                      Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B .MED.Sex, B M , B S , MRCGP

             (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                        At

                 The Town Hall,
                   Sheffield.

                        On

                13th March, 1991




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, L td .,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Quefen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          INDEX TO THANSCRIPT


                                                Page


     D.G. DUCKENFIELD Recalled

         Cross-Examined    by Mr. King (Cont)    1
         Cross-Examined    by Mrs. McBrien      54
         Further by The    Coroner              88
         Cross-Examined    by Mr. Isaacs        92

PROCEDURAL MATTERS                               99




                      f
           SIXTY NINTH D A Y 1S PROCEEDINGS

            WEDNESDAY,   13th MARCH 1991

         DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD Recalled

       Cross-Examined by MR. KING (Continued)

Last night, Mr. Duckenfield, I had suggested to you
that the system being employed as regards the filling
of the Leppings Lane terraces, being employed by the
Police, relied on good fortune, if overcrowding was to
be prevented, and nothing else, and I think you
disagreed with me? - A. Yes, sir.

Just one final point on that:  did you know that in
1988 when, of course, the semi-final had also been
played by reference to this system of finding your own
level, that in 1988 the tunnel had been closed off
apparently to prevent people getting into the centre
pens which had become full? - A. No, sir.

Can I go straightaway now to that time on 15th April
1989, when you were in the Control Box and you received
the first message from Mr. Marshall for gates to be
opened?  You knew, I assume, what gates he was
referring to? - A. The gates at the Leppings Lane end,
sir.

How did you know that? - A. Because Mr. Marshall was at
the Leppings Lane end.

So you were quite satisfied in your mind that you had
made proper enquiry as to the gates to which he was
referring?  You knew to what he was referring? - A. The
circumstances, sir, were that Superintendent Murray had
sent resources to that end and when the message came,
"Open the gates", for the first time, I remember
immediately looking to my left to the video monitor,
which was on the left hand side high up on the wall.

Yes, and seeing what? - A. At that stage, looking at
it, I saw what I believed to be gate C to burst open
and fans enter the Ground.

The decision, therefore, which you were being asked to
make was in relation to gates, is that right? - A. Yes,
sir.

Did you therefore think there was more than one gate
involved? - A. At that stage, sir, the only thoughts in
my mind were, that, taking it stage by stage, on the
first occasion he said words to the effect, "Open the
gates", and I recall looking at the video monitor and
                                      D. G. DUCKENFIELD

the impression was that the gate had burst open and
fans had entered, and at that stage there was a mounted
Officer who retrieved the situation and closed the
gate.

When the further message came for the gates to be
opened, again you knew it was in the plural, gates? -
A. Yes, sir.

And again you would know that those were the gates
which led onto the concourse at the Leppings Lane end?
- A. Yes, sir.  Can I qualify that?

Certainly. - A. I say gates.  The only reason I am
questioning that in my mind, at some stage later, as
you will know, and I am not wishing to jump the
sequence, gate A was mentioned and someone raised a
question as to where that was, but in general terms
gates onto the Leppings Lane end.

You, indeed, told us that you were expecting people to
go onto the concourse if the gates were opened, because
that was a process of thought which you went through? -
A. Yes, sir.

You knew, didn't you, that in the middle of the
concourse, somewhere in the middle of the concourse,
was the tunnel which gained entry onto the centre pens
of the terraces, you knew that much? - A. I knew where
the tunnel was, sir.

And you would know that was roughly in the middle of
the concourse? - A. Yes, sir.

You told us that you did not know precisely the
relationship of the particular gate you might have been
looking at, for example gate C, to the tunnel, that is
what you told us? - A. Yes, sir.

But what you would know and you could not ignore would
be that you could not exclude, could you, that anybody
going through those gates, whichever gates they were,
it would lead them into the middle of the concourse?
That was obvious, that it could be the case, couldn't
it? - A. Opening the gates would lead to the concourse.

And if there are three gates involved, a number of
gates, and you don't know which one leads where, it
doesn t really matter, all you can say to yourself is,
if those gates are opened people are going to end up in
the concourse, isn't it? - A. I said yesterday, sir, if
I opened the gates people will go on the concourse.
                                      D. G. DUCKENFIELD

You knew there was a large crowd outside the gates you
could see? - A. Yes, sir.

You knew that the effect of opening the gate you could
see, because it was focussed, the camera, wasn't it, on
what we know as gate C, yes? - A. I am sorry, sir?

The camera you could look at when you were making your
decision as to whether to open the gates was actually
focussed on the gate which we know to be gate C? - A.
Yes, sir.

You would know that the effect of opening that gate was
to introduce a large number of people onto the
concourse? - A. Yes, sir.

You also would know, wouldn't you, just by looking at
the terraces around that time, that there was certainly
no room for a large number of people in the centre
pens, just by looking at it, wouldn't you? - A. Sir,
the centre pens would be approaching --- they were
filling and approaching full.

Just let me show you a photograph, which is C509.   I
know that is looking at it from the opposite end from
where you were and I accept that, but as regards the
centre pens you could not suggest, could you, that
round about 10-to-3, when you were making your decision
whether to open the gates, that it was clear and
obvious just by looking at the terrace that the centre
pens could not possibly have room for a large number of
further people, that is right, isn't it? - A. Looking
at this, sir, and as you have so rightly stated, this
photograph is not taken from the position that I
occupied, I think we have to bear that in mind, that I
was in the Control Box, I was standing towards the back
of that Control Box, and as a result my view from that
Control Box across those terraces was not necessarily
as good as this photograph suggests, but having said
that, looking at this photograph that you have shown me
there appears to me to be room on those terraces at
that stage.  If you look at the word "Fly" behind the
goal, and walk up from the word "Fly", behind that
Policeman, it is my view, leading up to that carrot or
banana, that on this very small photograph there is
space.




            /Q. You are not suggesting
                                             D. G. DUCKENFIELD

You are not suggesting anybody looking at the terrace
at around 10-to 3 would have said to themselves,
"There is room for a large number of people of the
sort of size which you could see outside the gate the
camera was focused on, there was room in the centre
pens for that number of people"?   You could not have
thought that? - A. Sir, we shall disagree, and let me
point out, and it is much easier by pointing on the
photograph on the screen, there is room on the
terrace.  May I stand up?

        THE CORONER:   Please do.     What is the number?

        MR. KING:   C509,   sir.

     THE WITNESS:  Mr. King, to take your point, I
3 aidthe word "Fly" - there is room in here.  We
accept undoubtedly there is room there.  We look
there, there is room here, there is room here, and it
is my view - have you got the time that you say this
photograph was taken? (I n d i cating)

     MR. KING:  Yes, 14.52, Mr. Duckenfield. - A. It
is my view, Mr. King, that at 14.52 there was room on
those terraces.

Mr. Duckenfield you did not, with respect, if that is
your answer, hear my question.   It is my fault.
Anybody looking at the terrace at that time around
that time would say, "There is no room in the centre
pens" - not on the whole terrace but in the centre
pens - "for the sort of people, the size of people who
you could see outside the gate which was about to be
opened"? - A.  Let me deal with two points, one of
which I hope I can come back to.   I am uncertain, but
if someone can advise me as to what pen it is where it
says "Fly".

        MR. GRIFFITHS:      That is Pen 4, sir.

        THE WITNESS:     Right.     Pen 4 is a centre pen, Mr.
King.

     MR. KING:  It is. - A. Right.  It is my view that
there is room in that pen.  Now let me take it a stage
further and take you back.  I believe that your point
was ~ if you could repeat the question again for me,
then there is no misunderstanding between the two of
us .
Certainly.    My question goes in these stages.  First
of all, you knew before the order for the gates to be
opened w a 3 made that there was a large crowd outside
the gates? - A. I agree.
                                      D. G. DUCKENFIELD

You knew that the consequence of opening the gates was
to introduce that large crowd onto the concourse? - A.
I did.

And they would be introduced in one mass;  they would
not be introduced through turnstiles, and you knew
that? - A. Yes.

My next question was this.     Was it not obvious to
anybody who bothered to look at the terrace at that
stage that there was no room on the centre pens for
that large number of people - I am not talking about
ones and twos, but that large crowd which you were
going to introduce through the gate? - A. Mr. King,
let me go back to the purpose of opening that gate.
Let us just start with this premise, that there is
room on that terrace for those people outside because,
as I understand it, evidence has been put before this
Inquest, not in my presence, but there are no more
people on that terrace eventually than should have
been.     Now there is room on that terrace now.  Let us
take it in stages, as you say, and let us go back.
When I wa3 asked to open those gates, when someone
says to you, "There's a large mass outside", as you
have, and that they are going to go onto that
concourse, and that the consequences of not opening
those gates are that people are going to die, and
someone tells you that, Mr. King, when you look at the
concourse, you look at the situation and you make a
decision to save lives and that is of paramount
i mp o rtance.

Do you not, as a matter of paramount importance ask
yourself the question, "Where are all these people
going to go when I've introduced them onto the
concourse?" - A. Mr. King, let me define the situation
as best I can once more.  I wa3 in the Control Box at
the time that it was that the message came through -
"If you don't open the gates then someone is going to
get killed".  Just contemplate that message coming
over a radio into a Control Box - "If you don't open
the gates someone is going to get killed".
Contemplate what effect that has on someone when you
are standing there.  Contemplate what goes through
one's mind.

So what you are telling us, Mr. Duckenfield, is that
you did not turn your mind at all when you made the
decision to open the gates as to what was going to
happen, where those people were going to go to once
they reached the concourse, that is what it comes down
to? - A. Not at all, Mr. King, you are over­
simplifying the matter.  The point really is this,
that I was faced with a decision of the magnitude that
                                     D. G. DUCKENFIELD

it is my view that no senior Police Officer had ever
faced before in his life.  It was a decision that was
an earth-shattering decision.  It was a decision that
I hope nobody in their life has to make ever again,
and it was a decision that my training, my experience
and everything else never fitted me for.   That
decision was so horrendous, and when somebody says to
you, "You need to save lives", you look at the
concourse and you do what you only can do.

Mr. Duckenfield, did you ask yourself the question,
before you gave the order to open the gates, where the
people were going to go, this large crowd of people,
when you had introduced them into the ground? - A. Mr.
K i n g ---

Just answer that question first and then by all means
go on.  Did you ask yourself that question? - A. I
asked myself the question and the answer that came to
me was that they were going to go onto the concourse.

Did you ask yourself the question what was going to
happen to them after they had reached the concourse? -
A. Mr. King, I knew that in due course they would go
in many directions and find somewhere in that area for
themselves.  But just let us look at this sensibly and
logically in a sequence.  It may be extremely
difficult in the cold light and the peace and the
tranquillity of this Court room, with all the time in
the world for people to sit and think and contemplate.
What I am saying to you is this.  It was iny view that
they would go onto the concourse, and in due course
they would find places to go, but I would say this to
you.  Is it really likely that people who have come
through a gate are going to do other than recover
themselves in that concourse?

You had a large crowd outside, did you not? - A. Yes,
I did.

What estimate did you make of the crowd outside? - A.
Mr. King, it is difficult to estimate crowds.

Of course it is, but what sort of numbers did you
think you were dealing with? - A. Mr. King, I don't
wish to get into numbers.  You have seen the video, so
have I .

If you accept that, is not this the position, that
your failure to consider what was going to happen to
those people, where they were going to go, after they
had reached the concourse was - and I put it as
bluntly as this - a blunder of the first magnitude?
                                        D. G. DUCKENFIELD

     THE CORONER:  Stop - you consider your position.
This is clearly an incriminating question and you can
decide to answer it or not as you wish.

     THE WITNESS:  Mr. King, I think it fair to say
that in the terms that you have put that question I
reject that particular terminology.  Would you like to
address me again with the same question?




                      /Q.   MR. KING:   Were you
                                           D. G. DUCKENFIELD

      MR. KING:      Were you not ignoring the ODvious risk
that if you introduced such a large number of people into
the concourse, the obvious risk that a large number of
people would make their way down the tunnel into the
centre pens, which were on any view already such that
there was no room for such a large number of people? - A.
Mr. K i n g , it was not obvious to me that those people were
at risk.

Mr. Duckenfield, leave aside 509 for the moment, the
photograph.   You agreed with me before I showed you the
photograph that the state of the centre pens before you
gave the order for the gates to be opened were - well,
use your words, what did you describe them as? - A.
Perhaps you can refresh me, Mr. King.

You tell me.   You describe to me what you say the state
of the centre pens were just before you gave the order to
open the gates? - A. I would say they were approaching a
fullness.

Let me just accept that for the moment, approaching
fullness.   You therefore would know that those pens
could not take a large number of people further without
an obvious risk of overcrowding and injury...

     MR. ISAACS:   I do apologise for interrupting but we
have not yet established that Mr. Duckenfield actually
saw the pens were in that state.   There is in fact no
evidence to that effect.   We can see what the state was
and it is now Mr. Duckenfield's having looked at the
photographs what the state of those pens were, but it is
an important aspect to know whether Mr. Duckenfield
appreciated this.   We have had evidence from Mr. Murray,
also had a view from the Control Box.   We have heard his
evidence.   However, my learned friend has not
established that yet and it is unfair to go to the next
stage without the one in between.

     THE CORONER:    I think that is true.

     MR. KING:   You told me that around ten to three the
pens, from your point of view, were approaching fullness?
That is what you have said. - A. Sir, you have just shown
me a photograph and I have given you an assessment based
on that photograph.

You must have know, therefore, if they were approaching
fullness that if a large number of people thereafter
entered those centre pens, that there would then be far
too many people in the pen for safety purposes?   That
would be obvious, wouldn't it? - A. It is not obvious,
Mr. King.   My view is this that there was room on the
terrace for people to enter.   Let's leave that situation
                                                       D. G. DUCKENFIELD

there and I can take that matter no further.   I can take
it no further at all.   However, going back a stage
further than that, my primary objective was to save life
and if we look at that statement I have made, and I am
referring to the gates, and when I say this it seems to
minimise all the heartache and the tragedy and suffering
of the others and I have to be careful sometimes when I
use strong terms, but when I opened the gates it was my
intention to save life.   With that major decision I
saved life.   There was nobody killed outside.

At the time you gave the order to open the gates, you did
not - and you have agreed with me - you did not turn your
mind to the risk that the large number of people who
would be entering through that gate would go through on
to the centre pens?   You did not give any thought to
that risk, did you? - A. Mr. King...

Could you just answer that question. - A. My answer is
this:  there was no obvious and serious risk to me.

There was no obvious and serious risk that that large
number of people would enter the centre pens, is that
what you are saying? - A. Mr. King, I cannot take the
matter any further.

I'm sorry...

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, whether you like the
response, is neither here nor there, but you have got...
In the end you have got to accept his reply.

     MR. KING:  Of course, but I am entitled,                sir,   to
investigate the factual basis.

       THE CORONER:            In the end repeating the question...

       MR. KING:            I agree entirely,   sir.    It is an issue.

     THE CORONER:              You might   then get an     answer, but it
is the q u a l i t y . ..

       MR. KING:            Of course:

The factual basis behind your answer is this,
Mr. Duckenfield, I just want to make sure the facts are
right, the facts are that you   knew the gates were about
to be opened on your order?     That is the   fact? -A. Yes,
sir.

The fact is you knew that that gate would enter on to the
concourse? - A. The gates would enter on to the
concourse.   ,
                                              D. G. DUCKENFIELD

The fact is you would know that the entry point for the
centre pens, the tunnel, was in the concourse? - A. Yes.

You could at any time, if you had been in any doubt, have
asked questions to anybody in the Control Box as to which
any particular gate was and where it led to?    You could
have asked all those sort of questions if you had wanted
to? - A. Sir, to answer your question in simple terms, as
I have said to you, at this time in this court room it
seems so very simple indeed.    If you were not at
Hillsborough then you were very fortunate and if you were
not in that Control Box then you were even more
fortunate.   All I can tell you is this, that I was stood
there and let me take you back to yesterday, when you are
at a semi-final and somebody says to you, 'Open the gates
or someone is going to get killed," the pressures are
tremendous.   When a colleague turns to you and says,
"Mr. Duckenfield, are you going to open those gates? ' you
do what you can.    The people were going to go into the
concourse and I was going to save lives.    Mr. King, time
was of the essence.    I can add no more and I cannot take
the matter any further.

Mr. Duckenfield, as regards time, between the first
request for the opening of the gates by Mr. Marshall and
your decision following Mr. Murray's request to you
whether you were going to order the gates to be opened,
was a period of five minutes? - A. That is an interesting
comment, Mr. King, and I will give you my view of that
situation.  When I first heard that there was five
minutes, I have got to admit I was shocked and amazed,
because as you have probably heard throughout these
Inquests, times do not feature.    When you are in a
crisis events follow and events flow.      I remember the
first request to open the   gates and it has been suggested
to me that that was about   2.48.   I am sure somebody will
correct me if I am wrong.

        THE CORONER:   I think it was 2.47.

        MR. ISAACS:    I think the gate actually opened at
2.48.

        THE CORONER:   He said the request.

     MR. KING:   The request was at 2.47.- A. Th a n k you,
sir.   The request was at   2.47, and if you recall, I
remember turning and looking at the video to my left and
seeing what I thought was the gate burst open.      I
remember seeing the mounted Officer retrieve that
situation and as far as I was concerned at that stage
that matter seemed to be resolved.
                f
                                          D. G. DUCKfiN'FIELD

Now let me stop there and check the times because there
is a timescale in all this.   We have just heard, and I
have been advised, that the request came at 2.47.    The
opening was at 2.48 and can we say that probably the
recovery was at 2.49, probably...

     MR. ISAACS:  Sir, in fact we have it.   The Chief
Superintendent does not know this but we have it at
2.48.31 of the Gate C closing on that first occasion.




       THE WITNESS:   So about 2.49-ish
                                               D. G. DUCKENFIELP


    THE WITNESS:   So about 2.49~ish I must have turned
away and thought, "Well, the matter has been resolved".
So at somewhere in the region of 2.49 I have a belief,
and bearing in min d I have no concept of time, at 2.49,
the matter in my view was resolved and didn't require
an opening of the gates.   Now m y next recollection is
almost immediately I thought that the request came from
Superintendent Marshall again to open the gates.

       Now I understand that other Police Officers, I
think Superintendent Murray, thought the request was
made on more than one occasion.      It may have b een I do
not know but I recalled the next request to open the
gates and, as I said to you, that was a request that
was of such consequence that, as I said yesterday, it
seems as though the w o r l d had stopped.  I was stood
there being asked to make a decision, a decision which
w o u ld destroy the plans we had got, the plans that we
wouldn't allow people in who were drunk, we wouldn't
allow people in who probably were carrying offensive
weapons, we wouldn't allow in ticketless fans and what
have you.      Those thought processes were going through
m y m i n d and I looked at the concourse and saw there was
room.

        I thought things through and, of course, then
Superintendent Murray interjected and, shall we say
for want of a better w o r d at the moment, chivvied m e to
make a decision and I h a d to make a decision.     Can I
say that he then pass ed that message to open the gates
and if we take the pace of events as I have just
related them, as I have just told you the story, then I
wo u l d suggest to you that the time between when I was
asked the second time to open the gates, the message
was p a ssed and the gate was actually o p ened was about
2.52.      It was never five minutes.  On the first
occasion an incident happened and the matter was
resolved.      On the second occasion it came again and I
w o u l d suggest to you that at the very, very outside it
was three minutes and I have been talking to you for
that length of time it took.

Let me just accept it for one moment.    In those three
minutes it is a fact that you did not turn your m i n d at
all to the consequences of what was going to happen to
the people after they h a d reached the concourse? - A.
Sir, I have said it before and I cannot add.

So be it.  You did not give any information before
ordering the opening of the gates to Mr. Green w o o d who
was the Ground Commander on the ground level, did
you? - A. No, kir.
                                                                    13
                                                  D . G . DUCKENE J.5LD


Q. You did not at any stage even after the gates h a d been
   opened cause information to b e sent to Mr. Greenwood,
   did you? - A. Not to Mr. Greenwood, sir.   Can I add
   that the radio was on talk through?   I don't disagree,
   as I have said, that I didn't send a particular message
   but you have to understand, and let me draw y our min d
   back, that the radio that day was on talk through.
   Everybody could hear the message.   Others - and this is
   no disrespect to Mr. Greenwood - heard the message.     A
   lot of people heard the message but I certainly did not
   pass a direct message to Mr. Greenwood.

Q. Purely hearing the message, open the gates, was not
   communicating you were about to allow in a large number
   of people on to the ground, was it? - A. I disagree
   there, sir.

Q. You did not cause at all any warning in advance to be
   given to anybody representing the Club that you were
   about to introduce this large number of people in
   through the gates, did you? - A. I have a view, sir,
   that Superintendent Murray tried to get in touch with
   M r . Lock.

Q. But that was not for the purpose of the opening of the
   gates.  That was at an earlier stage when there was
   concern about the turnstiles, was it not? - A. Sir, I
   can't speak specifically for Mr. Murray.

Q. Speak for yourself then, Mr. Duckenfield.   You did not
   yourself cause or think about causing any message to be
   sent to the Club or their representatives about what
   was happening, did you? - A. Sir, I thought I h a d made
   it abundantly clear what I was involved w ith at the
   time, what my attention was drawn to and where m y mind
   was directed and I did not, I agree, send a m essage to
   the Club but I was extremely busy.

Q. You did not cause any message to be sent to anybody at
   the concourse level serials to expect this large crowd
   of people to come through the gates, did you? - A. Let
   me stop you there, sir, and just take what you have
   said.   In the concourse I cannot give you specifics at
   this moment but let us accept that there should have
   bee n three Sergeants and thirty men.  You have just
   said to me that I didn't send a specific message to
   anybody in that concourse that I was going to open the
   gates and allow people in, is that right?

Q. That is correct. - A. I must have sent a mes sa g e into
   that concourse that I was about to open the gates
   because h o w w^re the gates opened?
                                              D. G. DUCKENFIELD


For the purpose of warning people that a large crowd of
people were going to come in and organising some sort
of reception for those people.   You took no steps to
organise any sort of reception for those people at all,
did you? - A. Mr. King, if those people were in the
concourse, as we presume, and if we accept - not if.   I
accept and you accept that I pass e d a message to the
Police Officers in the concourse to open the gates.
Those Police Officers must by the time I p assed the
m essage have known what the situation was outside.

Those Officers wo u l d not have a clue as to w hat the
state of the terraces were, wo ul d they? - A. Mr. King,
you have asked me about what message I passed.

Indeed. - A. An d I have given you an answer that the
people who were in the concourse, that is the Police
Officers, wo u ld know the situation outside the gates.
They would know the gates were going to be opened
because we passed a message and they w o u l d do their
level best when those people entered.

But they would not   know what the state of the terraces
were in respect of   which way they should direct people
to go, would they?   - A. Mr. King, I can't accurately
tell you what they   knew.

They were not in a position to m onitor the terraces,
were they? - A. Mr. King, I can't answer that question.

Just tell me, how do you say anybody w h o is a serial on
the concourse wo ul d know which part of the terraces
were full and which part of the terraces h a d space in
them? - A. Sir, you are asking me to speculate.    I can
only say in general terms and I feel that I have said
sufficient about the matter in that respect.

The only place where they would be control in terms of
knowledge as to where there was space for this large
number of people who were about to be introduced was in
the Control Box where you were and that is right, is it
not? - A. I am sorry, sir, but can you just take that a
little more slowly for me please?

It was not difficult.   - A. No, sir, but on occasions...

The only place where anybody would have b o t h knowledge
that a large number of people were about to be
introduced into the ground together with k nowledge of
where there was space and where there was not, the only
place where thpse two pieces of knowledge came
together, was in the Control Box where you w ere in
overall command.  That is right, is it not? - A. No, I
                                                     D. G. DUCKENFTKT.n


    disagree.  Other people had that knowledge.       Other
    people were looking around the ground.

Q. Oh, Mr. Duckenfield, do you really seriously say that
   other people looking round the ground k ne w that you
   were about to introduce a large number of people into
   the ground? - A. Sir, if the radio is on talk through
   and everybody hears that message then it is difficult
   to presume but it is my view that others heard the
   message and wou l d be aware.

Q. The only people who were in a position to deal with the
   people coming in through those gates, if you did not
   send other people there to m eet them, w o u l d be the
   people on the concourse.  That is right, is it not? -
   A. The only people to meet them wo ul d be the Police
   Officers but let me stop you there.    Let us look at
   this from a totally different angle.    You are placing
   the total responsibility of this - and I am not moving
   the responsibility but just look at it from another
   angle - on the Police Service in that concourse and in
   doing that I am not moving any responsibility towards
   any other party.  Let us look at the role of the fans.
   Don't the fans have a role in this situation when they
   come through that gate?

Q. Mr. Duckenfield, are you suggesting that the people who
   you introduced through that gate w o u ld have advance
   knowledge before they went down a tunnel that the
   centre pens were full? Are you suggesting that? - A.
   W hat I am saying to you is this, Mr. King, that people
   w ho have just been in a crush outside gates, on coming
   into a concourse will be, I am sure, relieved to enter
   a large open area.     Having entered that large open area
   they wo u ld gather themselves, do w hat they will, and I
   don't know whether people, as has been said before,
   wo u l d go to the toilets or buy a programme or something
   of that order, but I think we have to look at the
   situation in that the fans have a role to pla y and that
   when the fans came in from there they wo u l d act, I
   wo u l d hope, reasonably and responsibly.

Q. Could you try answering my question, Mr. Duckenfield?
   How do you say that the fans entering that concourse in
   the large numbers at ten to three, ten minutes or so
   before kick-off, eight minutes before kick-off, w o u l d
   know, be expected to know, what the state of the centre
   pens were w h i c h w ere at the b o t t om of the tunnel? How
   w ou l d they be expected to know this? - A. We can work
   on the presumption probably that fans m a y know, or if
   they go down tjhere they may see that they are full and
   come b a c k .   1
                                               D. G. DUCKENFIELD


Mr. Duckenfield, you are dealing with hundreds of
people being introduced into a concourse through a gate
at eight minutes to three, eight minutes before kick-
off, and you are seriously saying that that was a
reasonable and responsible attitude for you to take?
Are you? - A. Mr. King, to you at this time you m ay put
the situation about reasonableness and responsibility.
What I am trying to portray to you is this; that we may
never reach agreement.  I acted I believe reasonably
and responsibly and I did my best on the day.

Mr. Duckenfield, let me move on to after you have
opened the gates, ordered the gates to be opened at
2.52.  You could see the large number of people coming
in, could you not, on the video?

      MR. ISAACS:  Sir, with respect, my learned friend
falls into an error which has already been fallen into
on a number of occasions.   We kno w the gate actually
opened at 2.52 and 6 seconds.   That does not mean to
say at 2.52 the order was given to open the gate.    It
must as a matter of common sense have been before that
time.   Some time, let us say, at 2.51 if you assume
that there was time between the order, the giving of
the order, the passing through, and then the opening of
the gates.   It is very important in the context of some
of the questions my learned friend has asked.




                               /Q. MR. KING.
                                         D. G. DUCKENFIELD

     MR. KING:   Mr. Duckenfield, I was asking as to
what you could see after the order had been given, all
right?

     THE CORONER:   Sorry, are you actually asking
after the order had been given or after the gate had
been opened?

     MR. KING:   After the order had been given,    sir,
and after the gate had been opened, yes:

Those two events.   - A. I recall seeing people coining
through gate C.

And you would be able to see those very pictures which
in fact we have still, because they were videoed, of
people coming through gate C? - A. Yes, sir.

Those people came through in a stream over a period of
five minutes, didn't they, thereafter? - A.
Thereabouts.  I don't know the timescale.

It was a number of minutes, wasn't it? - A. Sir, I
don't disagree with you.   I said I don't know the
timescale of five minutes.

Did you then say to yourself, at least say this much to
yourself, "I had better see what is happening on the
terraces given this large number of people coming in"?
- A . Sir, my recollection is I was looking --- I think,
sir, at that stage there was another distraction.

After the gates had been opened did you not put into
your mind that there would be a connection between the
entering of the gates and the condition of the Leppings
Lane Terrace? - A. Sir, I have just said I recall to
mind, if you will bear with me a moment while I just
collect my thoughts on this, I have a view that as soon
as gate C --- I am sorry, I have a view as soon as the
gates were opened there was another distraction, and
that distraction was that someone came over the radio
and said, "If you don't open gate A it is going in
anyway".  Now, I don't think I knew where gate A was
actually, but someone then passed the comment that that
was the gate by the North Stand, and I think the
presumption was that when they said open the gates,
that meant every gate, so on a personal note I was
distracted because of the message coming in there and
my mind being taken over by that event.

Let me deal with that event.   I will come back to my
other question after I have dealt with it, in view of
your answer. ' That event was a request for gate A to be
opened because again there were people in danger of
                                           D. G. DUCKENFIELD

being injured, right? - A.   I am sorry,   sir,   I did not
quite catch what you said.

The gist of the message was that gate A had to be
opened otherwise people were going to be injured,
something like that? - A. Yes.  The inference was the
gate wass going in because of the crowd pressure.   It
is a concertina gate and it was forcing it inwards.

Tell me, why in respect of gate A did you turn your
mind to where people were going to go after they
reached the concourse, because you did, didn't you,
because you sent a serial onto the Stand to await them?
- A. Whilst that can be identified as an individual
action which seems to tie in with the opening of the
gate, I can't accurately describe.  Resources by that
time were being directed.

But Mr. Duckenfield you directed these resources,
didn't you?  You directed them to the North Stand? - A.
Sir, you are asking me specific questions on events
which were in a crisis, which are now almost two years
ago, and it is very difficult on occasions.

Mr. Duckenfield, if you want help I can show you, not
your Taylor statement which I know and I accept I am
not going to ask you any questions about, but I can
refresh your memory, if you like, about what you put in
writing before the Taylor Inquiry started, not long
after the event, when you no doubt had it much more
clear in your mind.  Do you need to have your memory
refreshed as to what you did when you received the
request for gate A to be opened? - A. Sir, my
instructions are that in respect of that statement,
that was part of the Taylor and West Midlands Inquiry
and as such it is part of the Taylor Inquiry, and my
advice from Mr. Isaacs is not to answer questions on
that matter.

So be it; you don't have to.  It is the fact though, I
think you have already given evidence to this effect,
that serials were sent to the North Stand? - A. Serials
were sent onto the perimeter track.

Yes.   - A. And to the Leppings Lane end and North Stand.

For what purpose were they sent? - A. To deal with any
situation that may arise at the North Stand end because
of the fans coming in.

In other words, a consideration was given when the
request for gate A to be opened came as to where the
people who were going to come through that gate were
going to go, because the thought process would be, they
                                       D. G. DUCKENFIELD

are going to go to the North Stand and there may be
problems? - A. It may well have been that people who
went onto the North Stand were ticketless fans.

I am not disputing the wisdom of doing what was done.
What I am trying to investigate is why thought was
given, when it was asked for gate A to be opened to,
"Where are these people going to go when I let them
in?", and thought was not given similarly and on the
earlier occasion when the other gates were opened? - A.
Sir, that is very difficult to answer.   There are many
things in life where you often ask yourself, "I wonder
why? ' All I can say is that, as I have said before,
the magnitude of the decision at the time the gates
were opened in one respect was such, and someone may
have triggered my mind or something may have triggered
my mind, I don't know.   I speculate, sir.  It is
difficult.   I do not have a ready answer and you must
accept that.

The purpose of the serial which was sent, if I can put
it this way, as a reception committee on the North
Stand and to watch the perimeter track, was to look out
for problems of law and order? - A. I don't know that,
sir.

What was the problem which you were anticipating which
required the sending of these serials to the North
Stand and the perimeter track?  What was the problem
you were then anticipating? - A. I anticipated that the
influx of people may come onto the track via the North
Stand.

And what was the problem you were anticipating,
therefore?  Why did you need the serials on the North
Stand? - A. Purely because people had gone through gate
A onto that area.

And you were concerned that they might be without
tickets for that area? - A. Yes, sir, that was one of
the causes, yes.

So it wasn't a safety matter you had in mind it was a
law and order problem?   People who were there who
should not be there, people climbing over onto the
perimeter track, that is right, isn t it? - A. Sir, can
I take you back to --- you are saying it is law and
order and it is not safety.   If people walk into the
North Stand and sit on the steps or on the gangways it
is a safety problem.   I think we have argued this times
many, as to how we believe in the Police Service that
safety and law and order go hand in glove.
                                       D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Mr. Duckenfield, can I suggest to you that if it was
obvious, as I suggest it must have been in the light of
your evidence, that when it was asked for gate A to be
opened, that consideration was to be given, as it was,
to where the people were going to go when you let them
through, that it should equally have been obvious that
when the earlier request came through in relation to
other gates, that the question where were the people
going to go into the Ground after the concourse, was an
obvious one which unfortunately you just ignored? - A.
It was not obvious to me, sir.

Let me now go to where I started this little section
because I was asking you about what you were able to
see once the gates were opened, that is, after the
gates were opened at 2.52, and I was asking you about
whether or not you could see on the video people
entering.  You told me that your mind was deflected by
the problem with gate A but let me go on after that,
after gate A had been opened.  Did you ever say to
yourself even then, where are all the people going who
have been allowed in through the gates? - A. It was my
view they were going into the concourse.

But looking at the camera, because you must have looked
at some stage and seen the people entering over the
five minute period, did it never enter your head during
that period, after the gates had been opened as to
where they were going? - A. Sir, my view was that that
terrace was safe to a capacity and allowing people in
who had just faced a crisis ....

When you saw people coming over the top, I think that
was your first note that there was something wrong at
the Leppings Lane Terrace, is that right?  Have I got
that right?  What was the first thing you noted about
the Leppings Lane Terrace after 10-to-3 which gave you
cause for concern?  What was the first thing you saw? -
A. Are we now inside the Ground at the time when people
start coming over the perimeter fence onto the
perimeter track?

My question was, what was the first thing you saw
     - A. Can you take me to a location, please?

Mr. Duckenfield, this is the question:  you are in the
Control Box, all right?  You have already given orders
for gates to be opened.  That was given so that those
gates were opened at 2.52? - A. Yes.

You have allowed in a large number of people onto the
concourse, you have given orders for gate A to be
opened.  Wheii was the first time after that you noticed
anything wrong, anything unusual with the Leppings Lane
                                                                        21

                                                          D. G. DUCKENFIELD

    Terrace? - A. When a Police Officer was standing by a
    gate, and it is either gate 3 or 4, probably gate 4,
    when he was standing by that gate and people were
    coming onto the pitch.
B
         THE CORONER:   Mr. King, can I stop you because
    you are moving on and it is probably a good time to
    pause.

         MR. KING:        Yes,    sir.

         THE CORONER:          Can we stop then until about 12-
    minutes -past- 11 ?

                          (Short A d j o u r n m en t )




D




F




G




H
                                         D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Mr. Duckenfield, you have told us that the first thing
you say you noticed from the Control Box after a large
crowd had been introduced through Cate C, and then
Gate A opened, the first thing you noticed as regards
the Leppings Lane terraces of any note was you said
people being let out of a gate by a Policeman? - A.
Yes sir.

Had you, in fact, prior to that been observing the
Leppings Lane terraces? - A. I had looked around the
ground generally, sir, and I had not seen anything
that I considered untoward.

But you had just, had you not, introduced a large
number of people into the concourse area at the back
of the Leppings Lane terraces? - A. Yes sir.

Would it not be obvious from that that you should at
least look at the Leppings Lane terraces to see what
the effect would be of this large number of people
suddenly in one mass being allowed into the concourse?

     THE CORONER: I will just remind you that you do
not have to answer questions which may tend to
incriminate you.

     THE WITNESS:      Sir, as a Police Officer in the
Control Room I looked around generally and also looked
in all the a r e a s .

     MR. KING:  Were you not concerned for the
Leppings Lane terraces in particular, given this
momentous event, this so-called unprecedented event
which you have just introduced, namely the opening of
the gates and the large number of people en masse
coming through into the concourse? - A. Sir, there was
room for people on the terrace.

Did you not see a surge, which I think is put at 2.54
I think, to time it for you if that is of any
assistance.

     MR. ISAACS:     Does my learned friend mean Hr.
Builas's?

     MR. KING:     No, no.   For once my learned friend is
not right.

     MR. ISAACS: I only asked a question.  I was not
making a statement, with respect to my learned friend.
        f
     THE CORONER:    I was wondering which one you were
thinking of.
                                                                         23

                                                       D. G. DUCKENFIELD


               nn         K I^G:   °f course I am dealing with the period
B              hLp          firstu ^lme which Mr. Duckenfield claims to
    1          thlf p ?     ®°^ethln3 of interest.   So I am dealing, so
                    e ^ ^ b o d y is m  the clear as to what I am dealing
               with, with the period between 2.52 and 3 o'clock.
         Q.    You have told us, Mr. Duckenfield, in the Control Box
               having introduced these people into the concourse
                hrough the gates, you did not observe anythin® of
               note on the terraces until you saw this happening with
                                  ® Policeman.  Did you not see, and in
                        1? getting on for 2.56, a strong surge from
                   tunnel into Pens 3 and 4? - A. As I have said, I
               saw nothing untoward until the gate opened onto the
               perimeter track.

         Q.    You had the vision from the Control Box, which we have
               all been to, through the windows? - A. Yes.

         Q.    You also were able to see the video cameras, the
D              cameras which were showing the terrace? - A. Yes.

         Q.    They have a zoom facility, do they not, as far as the
               Leppings Lane terrace goes? - A. Yes, they do.

         Q.    You still say that in that period between 2.52 and 3
               o clock you never noticed even this huge sur®e into
               the terrace? - A. Let me just direct you to where I
               was and what I was doing.    Yes, I was in the Control
               jSo x and I was standing towards  the back of that
               control Box and when you stand    in the back of that
               Control Box and look across you have a view.     As you
               rightly say you have the other    facilities, but I did
               not see anything untoward on those terraces from my
               position, from my viewing position and from the anple
               at which I was in the Control Box.

        Q. The   issue, Mr. Duckenfield, is whether in fact  you
            were looKing and watching what  was going tohappen in
             ne light of what you had done a few minutes earlier
            in introducing people into the concourse.    Can I ask
            you again, those people who you introduced into the
            concourse, which part of the ground did you think they
            would end up in? - A. There are three gates where
            those people entered.

        Q.    Yes. - A. Gate C.

        Q.    Yes. - A. Gate B.

        Q.    Yes. - A. And Gate A.

        Q.    Yes.  You did not know actually the numbers of the
              gates at the time, did you? - A. No, that is perfectly
              correct.                                             J
                                                                 24
                                                 D. G. DUCKENFIELD

 Q.    Did you know the position of the gates at the time’ -
       J;/   1S d i f? lcV 1,: J*° jud se with so much having passed
       and so much having been said.         I knew there were
       concertina gates there.

 Q*       we are dealing now with my question now in this
       five minutes or so after you have opened the gates, or
       caused the gates to be opened, and my question was
       where did you think those people would end up, which
       part of tne ground generally for the moment? - A. I
       had no idea where they would end up, but let us
       examine.  The concourse is a large area, and from that
       - and I say now with hindsight - there are many
       avenues off that concourse in the ground.

Q.    Mr. Duckenfield, I do not want you to deal with
      hindsight because that is unfair to you and, believe
      it or not, I do not want to be unfair to you.   I want
      to know where you thought those people would end up
      generally  which part of the ground generally, who you
      had introduced into the concourse area through the
      gates? - A. I thought that generally in due course
      they would end up on the terrace where there was
      space.

      So at least we have got that much, that you had in
      your mind that they would end up on the terrace? - A.
      Yes.

Q.    You knew that there was a large number of people
      involved who were being introduced? - A. Yes.

Q.    Apart from the tunnel, which you knew about as a means
      o entry - you did know the tunnel was a means of
      entry into the terrace? - A. Yes.

Q.    You knew that that tunnel had on top of it in large
      »c5t8j ^ ’ because y° u had walked round the ground,
       Standing , did you not? - A. I can't be categoric
      about that, sir.                                °

Q.    On this limited walk round the ground which you told
      ^  a5°Ut,. a?? rt ^rom noticing the tunnel, which you
      aid do, which other means of entry onto the terrace
      had you noted on this walk round the ground which you
      tell us was not as detailed as perhaps I thought it
      was, but clearly it was not?    What other entries had
      you actually noticed on this walk round the ground as
      a means of access onto the terrace? - A. If we
      consider Gate C, then it is difficult to describe, but
      by the sofcth end of the West Terrace there is a large
      opening there for fans to go round onto the terrace,
      which would lead them into Pen 1.
                                       D. G. DUCK5NFIELD

You did not know anything, you have told us, between
Gate C, the relationship between Gate C and any
particular part of the concourse, did you? - A. No.   I
am describing the situation to you in the Court room
now and drawing reference.  I am not saying that I
knew the relationship.  Can I go back to where you
were asking me a question as to where people could °o
onto the terrace.                                   °

I want you to answer that not by reference to what you
now know, but by reference to what you had learned on
your walk round the ground, because on your walk round
the ground you clearly had learned, because you could
see it, that there was a means of access to the
terrace through the centre tunnel, that is ri^ht. is
it not?

     THE CORONER:  Mr. King, I had understood your
question that you were not asking him what the
relationship between the gates and the entries were;
you were asking him did he know where other entry
points were, and my understanding of his reply - and I
may have misunderstood him ~ was that he was trying to
describe to you another entry point and he was doing
it by reference to what we now know, not by reference
to a relationship which he then recognised.
Is that what you were trying to do, Mr. Duckenfield? -
A. Yes sir.

      MR. KING:  I am sorry, it is my fault, sir, and
let me go back then and take it carefully.
I want to know what you had learned as tothe means    of
entry onto the terraces on this relatively short
visit, or visits, to the ground prior to 15th April
1989.   You clearly had learnt about, and knew about,
the means of entry through the tunnel, had you not? -
A. Yes.

You would agree with me that that on any view in the
concourse is a clear and obvious route onto the
terraces,  it is clearly to be seen, is it not, if you
are on the concourse? - A. Can I go back, sir?

Could you just answer that question? - A. You asked me
first about the routes onto the terrace and we haven't
got to that.

I am doing it in stages, Mr. Duckenfield.  Please bear
with me the stages I am going through. - A. Can you
ask me again what you said, please?

Yes.  irom your visit round the ground, or visits, you
agreed with me that you learned that there was a means
                                          D. G. DUCKENFIET.D


 -V^Yes    ° nt° the terrace throu§h the tunnel - right?

 Just let me deal with the tunnel for the moment.   The
 tunnel - and you would know this and see this from
 your visit to the ground - was clearly to be seen when
 you are on the concourse, was it not? - A. Yes sir.

 You would not disagree, it is not controversial if I
 nnL ^    1° anyhody on the course is an obvious route
 onto tne terrace, you would agree with that? - A. Yes.

ihich other routes did you     learn about on that visit
and tell me how you learnt     about them, onto the
 errace. - A. The routes I     learned about were the
entry at the southern side     of the West Terrace ---

Can we just have that pointed out,     please.   - A. That
route there.

How did you learn about it?  How did it come to your
attention? - A. Sir, it is not a thing at the moment I
can sort of bring to mind.  It is something that I
icnow of.

How would you learn about it on this short visit to
the ground which you have described which on any view
was not a particularly detailed visit from what I
understand it?

        MR. ISAACS:   He did not say it was short, with
re s p e ct .

     MR. KING:    All right.
How long was the visit we are talking about? - A. Mr.
      ^e *"'s l°°k at my experience and give me time to
think through as to this situation.    I recall from
probably time past that there is a route there because
Police horses sometimes stood there.

Let me take it through this way.  Did you learn of
that route when walking round the ground? - A. I think
the answer to that is I knew of that route when I was
walking round the ground.

Did you see anything walking round the ground which
directed your attention to that route? - A. As an
individual, if I know where it is, then I probably
wouldn't look for signs.

Tell us a^ain how you knew about it then? - A. I have
just said, from my previous knowledge of seeing
mounted Officers stood there on previous occasions.
                                        D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Which previous occasions are we talking about, how
long ago prior to 15th April? - A. Most certainly from
the days in 1930.                               y

You are talking about nearly 10 years previously? - A.
I am sure that is about the first time, but I can't be
specific.

Did you feel that you were confident that you knew
about that entry, and you obviously sound as if   you
were confident you knew about that means of entrv? -
A. Yes.

Did you, therefore, know that the only means of
direction, visible direction, was a very small sign
saying "Standing", which is high up on a stanchion
away to the right as you enter onto the concourse at
that area? - A. I don't think at the time I
appreciated that.

One thing is certain:  your walk round   the ground
would not have led you, if you had had   no prior
knowledge, to know about that means of   entry onto the
terraces, would it? - A. I am sorry, I   am not so sure
I understand what you said there, sir.

     THE CORONER:   Nor am I.

     MR. KING:  If you had had no prior knowledge of
the means of entry round the West Stand prior to your
visit - and you say you did - was there anything you
can remember about what you saw on the ground which
would have drawn it to your attention, that means of
entry? - A. It is difficult, sir, being shall ve 3ay a
football supporter and visiting grounds.  You tend as
you come through a turnstile to be observant, not so
much for signs but wanting to look where to go.  I go
back to the presumption that there aren't signs
everywhere people want to go and you look and make
your own enquiries and follow a path.

As regards the other means of entry onto the terraces,
which were the other means of entry apart from the
tunnel and this route round via the South Stand area
did you know about on 15th April? - A. There was a gap
in that newly-erected wall that cuts across the
concourse and there is an entry on the north side of
the West Terrace into the pens there.


         ?
                           /Q. You would know ....
                                           D. G. DUCKENFIELD

• You would know that was not an obvious means of entry to
  anyone coming on to the concourse?   There was no way
  anybody just being there would know that was a means of
  entry, would they?

      MR. CATCHPOLE:  I am not sure that is a proper
 question, particularly in the light of the evidence given
 by Dr. Nicholson as to the ratio of people in the
 Leppings Lane terrace as opposed to overall entry.
 Equally, in relation to the evidence given by Mr. Murray
 yesterday about the fact the North West terrace was
 filling up at roughly the same rate as the centre pens.
 It depends whether you are asking this Officer whether he
 thought it was, or whether he is asking this Officer it
 was obvious to a hypothetical supporter, which is not a
 proper question.

      MR. KING:   With respect, sir, I am not dealing with
 arguments about what the evidence indicates.     We can all
 argue about what the evidence indicates.    I am asking
 this witness about what he knew in his mind on the 15th
 of April as regards the means of entry.    That is
 certainly what I have been asking about.

      MR. CATCHPOLE:   Certainly if that is the question I
 have no objection and I apologise.

      MR. ISAACS:    Sir, may I just intervene to try and
 help here.   My learned friend Mr. Catchpole's
 intervention is one I would wish to make but I am
 conscious I do not want to be seen to be getting up all
 the time.   I am concerned that once again although ray
 learned friend says he is asking Mr. Duckenfield about
 what was obvious to him at the time, the questions do not
 come out that way at all.    The questions are being
 framed in a way to ask, "Would it not be obvious...?"
 Obvious to whom, I ask rhetorically.    That is not, as I
 understand it, what Mr. Duckenfield is being asked
 questions about.    If those matters are to be asked in
 this way:  "Was it not obvious to you that...?" then we
 are getting somewhere.    Otherwise, and again I use the
 phrase advisedly, it is another bouncing off exercise,
 which is not right.

      MR. KING:   With respect, I am investigating the
 behaviour of Mr. Duckenfield between 2.55 and three
 o'clock after he has introduced a large number of people,
 which he agrees, through gates on to the concourse.   I
 am investigating what he did to monitor the terraces
 during that period and what his state of knowledge was as
 to the means of entry on to the terraces.   That is what
 I have been investigating, sir.
                                          D. G. DUCKENFIELD

     I have established through the witness that he knew
there was an obvious means of entry on to the terraces
through the tunnel and I have established that through
him, that he knew that.   I have also established through
him that he knew of the entry round the sides of the
South Stand from prior knowledge himself of the ground.
I now want to investigate the means of entry via the
other route.   He has told me he knew there was a means
of entry through a gate.   What I want to investigate is
whether that is through prior knowledge or whether that
is through something which was obviously to be seen on
his visit round the ground or from some other source.
That is what I am entitled to investigate, his source of
knowledge.   It is important.

     THE CORONER:   I think you are entitled to
investigate as to whether or not he knew what the entries
were and where he would locate them.

     HR. KING:   Yes.   I am also entitled to investigate
his state of knowledge as to how those means of entrances
were presented at the ground.

     THE CORONER:   He has already given us substantial
answers on that, as to what he had noticed with regard to
signing, which is what I think you are saying?

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am entitled to investigate what
he knew as to how it was presented at the ground.

     THE CORONER:   You do not need to go over the ground
several times, though.

     MR. KING:   I agree.   With respect,   sir, I am only
arriving at this point now.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, but it is a point which I have
already established with him.

     MR. KING:   Of course, but I am entitled,   sir,   to
investigate his answer.

     THE CORONER:   If you dispute it.

     MR. KING:   Sir, exactly, if I dispute what his
state of knowledge was.   I want to investigate what his
state of knowledge was as to the presentation of that
means of entry.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, are   you suggesting...   My
recollection of Mr. Duckenfield's   answer is that he did
not know that the signing or lack   of it had not impinged
upon his consciousness.   Are you   going to try and
persuade him to say that it had?
                                         D. G. DUCKENFIELD

     MR. KING:   Not at all.   What I am trying to
discover is that from his walk round the ground, because
it is a useful piece of evidence,   his walk round the
ground, what he was able to see.     We know from his walk
round the ground he was able to see the tunnel as a means
of entry.   We know from his walk round the ground, and I
have not done the gap in the wall yet, we know from his
walk round the ground that his means of entry into the
South Stand was one which did not impinge on him from his
walk round the ground because he knew about it already.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, he said that.   It might be
helpful if you asked him to describe his walk around the
ground because I think that might help us a little bit
more as to what actually happened.

     MR. KING:   Mr. Duckenfield,   you tell us about the
walk round the ground. - A. Sir, that   is difficult.  I
had a walk round the ground.   I can answer the question
quite simply, and may I take you back to the point about
the south entrance?   I said I knew about that south
entrance from some years ago, but taking it in stage, I
was aware there was an entrance round the south side of
the West Terrace, I was aware of the tunnel, I was aware
of the wall with the gap in it, I was aware there was an
entrance on to the north side of the West Terrace and I
was aware there was a raised section where fans would go
and had found it as popular as the central pens.

Let me just ask you this one question:  were you aware
from your walk round the ground of any means of
direction, going round the ground, when one is in the
concourse area, that if you go through the gap in the
wall you would get to the terrace by another route? - A.
It is difficult when you know the route because you tend
not to look for indications.

All right, I won't take that any further with you.   Let
me go back to the 15th of April where you are in the
position of having introduced this large number of people
into the concourse.   What you do know, and you must know
this much, is that the tunnel was a wide open tunnel on
the concourse giving access to the terrace?   You knew
that much? - A. I knew the tunnel gave access to the
terrace.

It was a wide open tunnel on the concourse clearly to be
seen?   You knew that? - A. Yes, I knew there was a
tunnel.

Did you not at any stage in the light of your knowledge
that the people were going to end up on the terraces, you
knew that? - A. I knew that people were going to go to
all parts of the terrace.   There is just another point
                                          D. G. DUCKENFIELD

there.   There is also the West Stand that we seem to
have forgotten about.   When Gate B was opened then the
fans who were outside with tickets for the seated section
- we seemed to have concentrated far too much, Mr. King,
upon the terrace, but there are other places.

Mr. Duckenfield, you told me when I was pressing you
before where you thought generally the people would end
up, you said, "Generally on the terrace," that is the
answer you gave me, but you want to add into that, and I
accept, the West Stand? - A. Yes.

You must, however, have wanted to see what the effect
would be on the terrace, and the West Stand if you will,
of the introduction of so many people in such large
numbers so shortly before kick-off into the concourse,
when you knew, and you told us you knew, that you thought
they were going to end up generally in this area? - A. I
would look at the terrace, but as I said earlier, I did
not see anything significant until the Policeman opened
the gate.

This is your evidence:  from the Control Box you did not
see the strong surge which I have described to you in the
centre pens? - A. I did not see a strong surge.

Your evidence yesterday was you did   not even notice a
marked disparity between the centre   pens and the side
pens?   That was your answer to the   learned Coroner. - A.
Sir, disparity I saw earlier in the   day.

The question from the learned Coroner was, "Had you
noticed any marked disparity between the centre pens and
the wings?    When you very fairly asked the learned
Coroner the time to which the learned Coroner was
referring to, the learned Coroner indicated he was
speaking after the gate had been opened.    Your answer to
him was. "No, I saw normality."    That was your answer? -
A. That s right.

I am just clarifying that, therefore.   You did not see
any marked disparity at all? - A. I saw normality but
let's just qualify that by saying that you have shown me
a photograph where there was space, and that can also be
normality.

Can I show you a photograph we have all looked at many
times, but I am dealing now with the period between your
causing the gates to be opened at 2.52 and your noticing
people coming through a gate helped by a Police Officer.
Can I show you 326A please? - A. Yes, sir.

Did you at anjf stage, up until the time you say you saw
these people coming out through a gate, from your vantage
                                             D. G. DUCKENFIELD

point did you see anything which showed a marked
disparity of the sort which we can see on 326.A? - A. No,
sir, I don't recall it.   Just let me qualify that.    My
position was in the Control Box.    I was looking at that
from a different angle.    I am not an expert on matters
such as this and I would have to look again when there
was a crowd, but I would say I could not see what is
portrayed in the foreground of this picture.

At the end of the day neither you nor I have to assess
whether that is right or wrong, but that is your
evidence? - A. No, sir.   What I am saying is this, it is
not whether that is right or wrong, what I am saying is
that from my position in the Control Box my view of the
West Terrace at that time was totally different to that
photograph.   The angle I was standing at on the raised
platform looking through that window would give me, I
suggest, a totally different view of that terrace than
the one you are pointing out here.

Of course you would be having a view looking from the
different angle, but you have a good view across the
whole of the terrace, don't you?    We have all been in
this Box.   You have a good view across the whole of the
terrace, don't you? - A. Let me just raise one point.
Was there a crowd in that West Terrace when you were
standing there?

No, Mr. Duckenfield. - A. Well, then, Mr. King, I would
suggest to you that my perception of what the situation
was on the day of the semi-final with a crowd on that
terrace is accurate;  accurate as regards my perception.

You had the facility of these cameras which could take
you all the way the whole length of the terraces, did you
not? - A. I had a camera operator in that Control Room.
In general terms, and I cannot say to what extent they
extend, we had a facility to look at that terrace.

Did you have a good view of pen 6 from that Control Box?
-A. From my view personally or from a camera?

From the   Control Box did you have a good    view of pen   6?   -
A. I had   a view of the terrace.

Were you satisfied before the game began that you were in
a position to be able to monitor and look at the state of
the Leppings Lane terraces, before the game began? - A.
Before the game began I could monitor all parts of the
ground.



       Q. Were you satisfied in your mind
                                               D. G. DUCKENFTEI.P


Were you satisfied in your min d that in the Control Box
you w o u l d be in a position to monitor the state of the
crowd in each of the pens in the centre terraces? - A.
We could look at the terrace but there were Officers in
better positions to monitor the state of the crowd on
that terrace.

Were you concerned that because of your position in the
Control Box there was an area of the terrace which
really was one which was outside your view? - A. At the
time I was in the Control Box it appeared that the
terrace was in my view.

Mr. Duckenfield, I will not take it any further than
this; that looking at 326A, the emptiness of pen 6 is
so clear and obvious that even if you were looking from
the other angle you, in the Control Box, must have been
able to see that marked emptiness in pen 6?  It is
beyond belief that you thought there were not those
gaps in pen 6? - A. Sir, I find it amazing that you can
suggest that from this particular picture, you can
suggest to me what view I had on that day.

Did you have any v iew of pen 6 on that day? - A.    I had
views of the whole terrace.

What was your perception if you were looking at this
terrace at the time I am referring to, that is to say
between 2.52 and 3 o'clock.  What was your perception
of pen 6? - A. I cannot give you an accurate answer as
to what my perception was of pen 6 save to say that
there appeared normality.

You wo u l d agree with me that that photograph of pen 6,
and I accept that you say you did not see it, is not
normality, would you not? - A. It is unusual.

It is not normality, is it, Mr. Duckenfield? - A. No,
on a Semi Final you wo u l d expect people to be there.

A fter you have introduced into the concourse area a
large number of people en masse to see the state of the
centre pens and the marked emptiness of pen 6 on one
side and indeed emptiness on the other side by your
Control Box, that would give an obvious indication,
w o u ld it not, that something h a d gone horribly wrong
wit h those people coming on to the terraces?       That
w o u ld be obvious, would it not? - A. My v i e w from the
Control Box was such that nothing was obvious.

It w o u l d also appear that you were not even
anticipating that by introducing this large number of
pe ople into the concourse that they might m ake their
                                                 D. G. DUCKENFTEI.n


way into the centre pens.  You did not even think about
that, did you? - A. I have said that there are several
avenues into the ground.

I appreciate that but did it even enter your m i n d that
one route they might take, this large crowd of people,
would be down the tunnel into the centre pens?     Did
that even cross your m ind as a possibility? - A. They
were going to take all routes, Mr. King.

Did it cross your min d as a possibility then that they
might go down the centre tunnel? - A. They would use
all routes, Mr. King, and I can add nothing further.

So that would include the centre tunnel? - A. It would.

When did you connect in your min d the opening of the
gates and the introduction of the large number of
people into the concourse with the problem which was
developing on the Leppings Lane terraces.   When did you
make that connection? - A. That is a difficult answer
and I can't honestly give you an answer at this stage.
What happened was that the gate opened and we were into
another series of events.

Do you recall a message going out from the Control Box
to ask people to come to the Leppings Lane end because
of a pitch invasion? - A. I don't remember it but let
me just qualify that.  Someone may have said it, I
don't know.  I don't know what message was conveyed at
that time in that respect.  I can't say yes or no.

Did you consider you were dealing initially wit h a
pitch invasion? - A. I didn't k now what we had got at
the outset.

Did you think, therefore, you were dealing wit h a pitch
invasion? - A. That was a possibility.

Did any other possibility cross your mi n d other than a
pitch invasion? - A. It is difficult sat here today
when so much has gone through your m in d to say exactly
what went through your min d at that time.   My accurate
recollection is that fans were coming on to the pitch
and I d i d n 't know w h y .

A t that stage you are telling us you m ade no connection
in your mi n d as to what had h a p pened shortly before
2.52, this unprecedented introduction of a large group
of p e ople through gates into the concourse area b e h i n d
the terraces?    You made no connection at that stage, is
that what you fare telling us? - A. I have told you that
I h a d seen nothing on that terrace of the events you
                                                                                 35
                                                                  D. G. DUCKEWFTEI.D


     have described to cause me concern and w hen I saw that
     gate open I wondered what the situation was.

          MR. PAYNE:    I have kept count.                 That is six times
     we have h a d that same answer.

Q.        MR. KING:  When thereafter do you say, h ow long
     after, did you say to yourself, "There is a connection
     between my unprecedented decision to open the gates and
     the introduction of people into the concourse and what
     is happening at the Leppings Lane terrace"?

          THE CORONER:  In fairness he did actually answer
     that three minutes ago.

Q.         MR. KING:   Can I show you the document 517A and B
     please?   This is a log which my learned friend, Mr.
     Payne, very kindly introduced into the evidence.     It is
     a log of radio messages passing through the Operations
     R oom outside the ground and the Ambulance Service.    Mr.
     Duckenfield, just acquaint yourself w ith it for a
     moment.   This is a log, as I have described, of
     messages passing through a PC Rook of the South
     Yorkshire Police Operations Roo m and the Ambulance
     Service.    It is in two pages.

          THE CORONER:  Just help the Jury, Mr. Griffiths,
     as they cannot find their copies.

          MR. KING:  Unfortunately it will not make sense
     for me to continue until the Jury have c o p i e s .

          THE CORONER:     We will have some more copies made.

          MR. KING:  Sir, no doubt it is all down to my so-
     called manner of cross-examination.  I note it is five
     to twelve which is the hour that Mr. Catchpole says we
     should break.

           THE CORONER:  Why do we not rise? Mr. King, I am
     relieved to see that your estimate of time is as b a d as
     mine.   That is a great comfort to me.

          MR. KING:  Sir, I will aim certainly to finish
     before the lunch adjournment.  I think that is perhaps
     being more realistic than I was yesterday.

                          (Short A d j o u r n m e n t )

          THE CORONER:    What C number was this document
     again please?

          MR.   ISAACS:   Sir, C.517A and B.
                                                                 36
                                                  D. G. DUCKENFIELD



Q-         MR. KING:   Mr. Duckenfield, before I turn to this
     document, there is just one matter I want to clarify as
     regards a point you raised just before the short
     adjournment.    You were saying about your v iew from the
     Control Box and I was asking you questions about your
     v iew from the Control Box of pen 6.   It is right, is it
     not, that if you had had any difficulties in your min d
     as regards pen 6 with your own eyes you did have the
     facility to have the camera zoom in on pen 6, did you
     not? - A. I am not being evasive, sir.    I don't k now
     the technical capabilities and extent of those cameras.

Q. You h a d cameras which if you w anted the operator to
   help your eyes you could ask the operator saying,
   "Look, I have got difficulty seeing the whole of the
   terrace.    Could you please take the camera in on pen
   6?"   You could have asked him that, could you not? - A.
   I could have asked h i m that.   What I am saying is that
   I do not kno w the extent to which a vie w can be
   obtained from a camera on to pen 6.

Q. Have you ever seen the cameras operating on the
   terrace? - A. I saw the cameras operating on that day.

Q. I am not asking you hypothetical questions.  You were
   actually in the Control Box with the screens, wer e you
   not? - A. That is perfectly true but two years ago I
   didn't anticipate I would have to think of specifics
   and I have no wish to be difficult, sir.  All I am
   saying is that I will accept there are cameras that
   look on that terrace.

Q. I just want to accept if you will, and you m a y not,
   that you in the Control Box, if you are trying to
   monitor the terrace and you have any difficulties about
   seeing a particular part you can ask for the cameras to
   go in on to it.  You have that facility, do you not? -
   A. You have that facility.

Q. Let me n o w go to the question which I was asking you
   just before the adjournment, namely the first time you
   mad e a connection between your decision to open the
   gates and let people into the concourse and troubles on
   the terrace.    I was directing you to this log which was
   517A and B and it is a log from the South Yorkshire
   Police Operations Room, PC Rook, to the Ambulance
   Service. - A. Yes.

Q. Do you see a message going out at 1508, w h i c h is to be
   seen on p a g e 2 of this little bundle, 517B, at 1508.14?
   - A. Yes.       f
                                                                      37
                                                       D. G. DUCKENFTEI.n


    Q. Could you just read that out to us? - A. It says:

             "A lot injured, apparently one of the gates,
B            has they've been pushing and pushing and
             shoving I understand and one of the gates has,
             they've collapsed the gates and there's."

    Q. Right.  As a matter of fact no spectator collapsed any
       gate, did they, on 15th April 1989?  That is correct,
       is it not? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. As a fact that which we know to be gate C was opened on
       your authority and instruction.   That is right, is it
       not? - A. On the second occasion?

    Q. On the second occasion, yes.     - A. Yes.

    Q. It was on the second occasion that the large number of
       people came through, was it not? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. As regards gate A, although you say you received a
       m essage that there was a danger of it being collapsed
       if you did not do something about it, you actually gave
       the order to open the gate, did you not? - A. I had
       already given the order "Open the gates" earlier.

    Q. But you repeated your order to open gate A as a
       specific gate.  You actually gave an order, "Open gate
       A" did you not? - A. I am uncertain in that the order
       was given to open the gates and I d o n 't accurately
       recollect whether anybody referred it to me when the
       message came over.  It was accepted it should have been
       opened.

    Q. All I am trying to establish is that as regards the
       gate you actually knew about, that is gate C w h i c h you
       could see on your camera w hich was opened at 2.52, and
       as regards gate A, those gates had b een opened on
       Police authority, h ad they not? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q.   They had not been collapsed,   had they? - A. No,   sir.

    Q.    Can you give any explanation yourself as to h o w at
         eight minutes past three a message was going out to the
         A mbulance Service, first of all, connecting injuries
         and the need for ambulance w ith the gates?     I am only
         asking you now about the connection be t w ee n the
         injuries and the gates for the moment, not the pre c i s e
         detail but just the connection between the injuries and
         the gates.   Can you explain why that wen t out at eight
         minutes past three? - A. I cannot understand that, sir.




H
                                             D. G. PUCKEWPTRT.D


Within the Control Box you had a means of communication
with the South Yorkshire Police Operations Room, did
you not? - A. Yes, sir.

Did you know that a request for ambulances was going
out? - A. Yes, I think we have jumped a little in time
scale.

Yes, we have. - A. And we have missed the events that
took place.  I have no wish to go over ground but I
think I should draw your attention to some stage;   I am
sorry, that is probably a wrong choice of word there.
At a stage where I saw people on the pitch and I called
for operational support there were simultaneous
messages about many things going off.

Yes, I accept all that.  I want to know whether at
eight minutes past three you had any knowledge of this
message and you say not? - A. Not at all, no.

At eight minutes past three had you made a connection
between the gates, whatever happened with the gates,
and what was happening on the Leppings Lane terraces? -
A. No, sir, but I would like to qualify that.   The
sequence of events is that people came on to the
perimeter track.   The next thing that happened was that
it was necessary to implement operation support and the
major incident plan and at that stage I had not
connected the two.




                            /Q. You cannot give us any.
                                        D. G. DUCKENFIELD

You cannot give us any clue as to how the connection
was made in this message from the South Yorkshire
Police Room to the Ambulance Service at that hour? - A.
No idea at all.

Because within the Ground the only people who had
knowledge that the gates had been opened on Police
authority was within the Control Box, that is right,
isn't it?

     THE CORONER:   No.

     THE WITNESS:   No,   that can't be right,   sir.

     MR. KING:   I just want to investigate who knew,
therefore - I may be wrong and I apologise if I am -
who knew that the gates had been opened on the orders
of the Control Box?  You obviously knew and those in
your Control Box knew? - A. Yes.

You are quite right, the serials who opened the gates
would know? - A. Yes.

The request for the ambulances was being sent through
via your Control Room, wasn't it? - A. I am hesitating
saying yes.  I don't recall the message.  The messages
I recall were that there was a message about an
ambulance, and I remember somebody countermanding that
and saying, "You don't want an ambulance, you want a
fleet of ambulances".

You say you have no knowledge of this message or how
this message went out at 8-minutes-past-3? - A. Yes,
sir.

Was there ever a time during the afternoon when you
gave an explanation as to what had happened on the
Leppings Lane Terrace, connected with the collapse of
the gates or the storming of the gates or something
like that? - A. I spoke with many people that
afternoon, sir.  Can you be more specific?

Certainly.  We know and you know that the gates were
opened on the authority of the Police, we have been
through that? - A. On the second occasion?

On the second occasion.  We know that there were
crushings and injuries and deaths at the Leppings Lane
Terraces? - A. I am not so sure that I knew of deaths.

Sorry, I am not taking a particular point there.  There
came a time when you knew of injuries and problems on
the Leppings ^Lane Terraces? - A. Yes, sir.
                                        D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Was there ever a time when anybody asked you as   to what
had happened, how this had come about?

     THE CORONER:   This is an incriminating question
and you don't have to answer it. - A. There were many
people that afternoon who came to see me in the Control
Box.

        MR. KING: At any stage in the afternoon when you
were asked for an explanation as to how it had
happened, did you at any stage give an answer which
would indicate that what had happened was that in some
way gates had been collapsed or stormed by the fans
t he m selves.

      THE CORONER:   This is incriminating as well, of
course. - A. The way I would answer that is this, Mr.
King.   After the disaster had occurred it is fair to
say I saw many people.   Many people came to see me and
asked me various things, and some of the most
significant factors on that day, and there is no
inference to be drawn from that, but some of the most
significant factors will remain with me for evermore,
but with regard to details or shall I say conversations
which at the time seemed inconsequential, because I was
heavily involved in a hive of activity, a frenetic
Control Box, and desperately trying to get the job done


Mr. Duckenfield .... - A.   I now wish to take the matter
no further.

You may not wish to take it any further, Mr.
Duckenfield, but I am going to until I am stopped ask
you to give a fair and square answer to this question.
Did you at any stage in the afternoon, when asked for
an explanation as to what had happened, give an answer
to the effect that what had happened was that gates or
the gates had been stormed, broken down or collapsed by
the conduct of the fans.

     THE CORONER:   This is an incriminating question;
you don't have to answer it.

     MR. KING:   Is the answer, if you do choose to
answer it, yes, no, can't remember? - A. I heard Mr.
Jackson give his evidence the other day when he was
asked about this and he can't recollect who said what
and to whom in that Control Box.

Is the answer yes, no or can't remember? - A. I would
say to you this, that with the passage of time I am
uncertain a s ? to the clarity of conversations at
                                              D. G. DUCKENFIELD

particular times on the day and I wish to take the
matter no further.

Mr. Duckenfield, do I deduce from that you are saying
there is a possibility you may have said and given an
explanation that what had happened for the cause of the
problems at Leppings Lane was that the gates had been
stormed or broken or collapsed by the conduct of the
fans.

         THE CORONER:          Mr. King, I have understood Mr.
D u c k e n f i e l d 's answer.  I am fully aware of the line of
questioning.             It is exceedingly doubtful whether, in
fact, it advances the question of how somebody died.
You may put the question; I will re-warn Mr.
Duckenfield; you will have to accept his answer.
Either he does not answer or you have to accept it but
we are not going to go over the ground ....

     MR. ICING:  Can I say, sir, because you raised it
to me, that the reason why it is relevant as to how
people ....

     MR. ISAACS:    I am sorry, sir, if my learned
friend wishes to deal with this, let's deal with it
where it should be dealt with, not in the presence of
the Jury at this time, if my learned friend wishes to
have an argument about it.  He does not need to explain
to you, we already know why he is advancing this
particular line and I have already said to you it is
wholly irrelevant, you have made certain decisions
about it.

     MR. KING:   If my learned friend is going to take
an opportunity to give a speech that is wholly
irrelevant then, sir, it does not lie in his mouth if
an argument is being raised through him as to relevance
of questions for me to answer it.

     THE CORONER:   Just a minute.  What I said was
that I have allowed you to ask the question; I am going
to re-warn Mr. Duckenfield of his rights:

Which are that     you do not have to answer.  I consider
the question to    be one which may tend to incriminate
you; you do not    have to answer it if you don't wish to;
you may answer     it if you do want to.

     THE CORONER:   Then if need be, we will ask the
Jury to leave and argue it out, but that is my present
ruling.

      MR. KINd:     So be it,    sir.
                                      D. G. DUCKENFIELD

My question to you is this, Mr. Duckenfield.   Did you
at any stage in the afternoon when asked for an
explanation as to how the problems had arisen at the
Leppings Lane end, give an explanation which was to the
effect that what had happened was in some way
spectators had broken down, stormed or collapsed the
gates.  You gave an answer and I then asked you this
supplemental, is it yes, no or can't remember.   You
then gave an answer and then I asked you this question:
do you accept there is a possibility that you may have
given that answer, and that was where we had reached.

     THE CORONER:   And I remind you and won't repeat
it all again. - A. The only answer I can give, sir, is
that two years after the event I am uncertain of
certain conversations and I wish to say no more about
the matter.

     MR. KING:   One thing is certain, Mr. Duckenfield,
isn't it, that you would know all along that the cause
and the reason for the problems in the Leppings Lane
end wasn't that spectators had collapsed gates, but
that spectators had been introduced through the gates
on Police instructions?

     THE CORONER:   I am not objecting to the principle
of the question but I just think it isn't phrased
correctly.  What you are saying is that the entry ---
are you asking him whether he knew ....

     MR. KING:   The entry,   yes.

     THE CORONER:   That the entry through the gates
was on Police authority?

     MR. KING:   And I am not now talking of the 100 or
so, the small number who came through at 2.48 I am
talking about the large number who came through at 2.52
and whenever the other gates were open, sir.

     THE WITNESS:   I am sorry, Mr. King, can you
repeat that again?  Because of the dialogue I lost the
train of what your first one was.

     MR. KING:   Mr. Duckenfield, I will move on.  Mr.
Duckenfield, did there ever come a time in the
afternoon when you connected your decision to opening
the gates and allowing a large number of people into
the concourse with the problems at the Leppings Lane
end? - A. Mr. King, there must have been a time but I
can't tell you when.

Leaving asid4 when that was, what would it be, what
facts would there be in addition to what you already
                                         D. G. DUCKENFIELD

knew by 3 o'clock, what other facts did you learn which
gave you that connection? - A. I find some difficulty
in this in that we have a situation that is progressing
at a pace, that is a rescue operation.  It is
progressing at a pace and the sole objective is to do
what we can for the people who are injured, and
obviously the people who are dead.  To be precise
during an afternoon of activity which was quite
shocking and horrific about when I connected the two, I
am sorry, I am not being evasive I just can't tell you.

It is not for me to judge whether you are being
evasive, Mr. Duckenfield, but what I can .... - A . I
think there is an understanding, there has to be an
understanding, Mr. King, that - and I choose my words
carefully - there has to be an understanding that we
were under some difficulties.   I say that and I take
nothing away from the bereaved; in anything I say I
fully respect the families of the bereaved and the
injured.  But there were occasions when we didn't, I am
sure I didn't stop my mind and do things because I was
moving on apace.

But a statement to the effect that the cause was that
the fans had collapsed the gate, or they had broken in
or stormed, would be to attribute the cause to the
behaviour of the fans, wouldn't it? - A. Mr. King, you
are returning to a matter that I was warned about a
short time ago and I have given you an answer in
respect of that matter that I consider to be
satisfactory and I have no wish to take the matter
further.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, and I think we should leave it
because it is a decision for the Jury.

     MR.   KING:   Absolutely,   sir, and I am moving on:

Mr. Duckenfield, at any time between 3 o'clock and
15.06 when you saw that the game was being stopped
through the agency of Mr. Greenwood, at any time
through that period had you connected the opening of
the gates on your authority and what was happening,
through that period? - A. No, sir.

At that period had you through the cameras looked at
the front of the Leppings Lane Terraces, centre pens,
where you could see and must have been able to see an
ever increasing problem? - A. I didn't see an ever
increasing problem, sir, but as I say I am talking from
a personal point of view.

Well let me Show you for that period the series of
photographs which begins at 326A, starting at 14.59 and
A                                                                44
                                                D. G. DUCKENFIELD

    going right through to 6-minu t es - p a s t -3 , when the game
    was stopped.  It starts at 326A, then it is 327, then
    it is 328, 329 and I suspect that is where it stops? -
    A. I have got 326A in front of me.




c



D




E




F




                  /Q. Mr. Duckenfield    ....



                  f
                                                  D. G. DUCKENFIELD

   ,*, D u c k c n f i c l d , that is at 14.59. Now tarn,   if you
 will, to 15.01, which is 327. - A. Yss.

 You can see that the position compared with 326A has
 gone on apace in terms of the numbers who have come
 over onto the perimeter track? - A. Yes.

 Turn   the page again to 328, where you see that it has
 gone   on apace again by 3 minutes past 3. Still the
 game   is going on, and even more people have come o v e r 7
 - A.   Yes sir.

I pause there.  In all those photographs, do we see
anybody who has actually run onto the playing area? -
A. Not in that photograph, sir.

Then at the next photograph, 329 - my photograph is a
very poor one but it looks as if it is 5 minutes past
and I may be wrong.

        MR. GRIFFITHS:     It is 15.05,    sir.

        THE WITNESS:     Is that 329,    sir?

     MR. KING:  Yes,       15.05 - right? You now have a
very obvious serious       development, do you not? - A. Yes
sir.

Indead, if tnere is another one in the sequence ~ I
have one but I don't know whether it is - is there a
330, 15.06? - A. There is a 330.

During that developing period you first of all tell us
that at no time you connected the opening of the gates
on your authority, the introduction of the large
number of people and what was happening, that is what
you have told us? — A. I was standing there looking at
the situation.                                    °

That is what you have told us.  That is what you are
asking us to believe.  Now during that period ---
A. - Mr. King, you said "asking us to believe".   That
is accurate.

As has been pointed out quite fairly, it is probably
an improper comment by me because it is not for me
whether I believe it or not, I accept that.   Did you
at any time during that period cause the cameras to go
onto and view the Leppings Lane terraces at the centre
pens where the trouble was developing in the way it
can be sefen on those photographs? - A. It might have
been done by the Control Room staff, but I did not
give a specific instruction because I was looking with
my eyes at the scene.
A
                                                                         45
                                                          D. G. DUCKENFTET.D

         Q.
               w«,nJ°U w o u l d 0want to *now exactly what was happening,
                ould you not? - A. I agree with you, Mr. King.
B
         Q.    You could not find out what was happening, you are
               saying, with your own eyes? - A. I was looking.

     Q.
                   l° U      n °o See What was happening, that is what
               L . have told us. - A. I could see people coining onto
               the pitch.  If you recall, and I take you back to
               yesterday's evidence, Chief Inspector McRobbie was
               sent onto the pitch, Superintendent Murray went down
               onto the pitch and other O f f i c e r s were there. They
               were my eyes and ears.

               Of c o u r s e , but you yourself did not know durin* that
               p e n o d what was going on, did you, you could not work
               it out? - A. I could not work it out, I was waiting
               for information.

     Q.       And you made no connection with the opening of the
D             gates.   It was obvious, was it not, that all you had
              to do to get a better view personally was to get the
              cameras right on top of the centre pens, you had that
              facility, you had the zoom facility? - A. Mr. Kin*, I
              have said it wasn't obvious to me.                °

     Q.        Did you at any time during that period before the ?ame
              was stopped see signs of distress, agony, crushing^
               ^     1 t what you will, on the faces of those in the
               front third of the centre pens? - A. Mr. King, I want
               to give you an accurate answer, and I will do, but I
              am mindful of the grief and suffering and I have to
              choose my words very carefully.      I was in the Control
              Box over presumably 100 yards away and I was looking
              at those pens and, as I understand it, the people were
              crushed against those fences who were stood up.      Now
              in my position I could not see from the Control Box
              anything untoward.     Now I need to qualify that because
                 don t want it to be taken incorrectly or as an
              uncaring attitude, or as someone who can be
              misunderstood.     When I looked out of the Control Box
              from the distance where I was away from it, and
                ooking at those pens, I could not see people's faces,
              I could not see obvious distress and I could not see
              tne difficulties.     Now that is not to say it was not
              there, but from my position I did not see it.

    Q.        You give us that evidence with the knowledge of
              somebody who knew all along at that time that you had
              opened the gates and introduced a large number of
              people intb the concourse, and somebody who had the
              facility of the cameras?

                   THE CORONER:   No,   I think that is


H
                                           D. G. DUCKENFIET.D

      MR. KING:  So be it, sir.
 Mr. Duckenfield, would this be unfair, and if it is
 unfair say so, that your explanation for your state of
 ignorance on the day as to what was happening is
 basically you saw nothing and you heard nothing which
 drew your attention to what was the cause of the
 Leppings Lane problem?

      TH il CORONER: No,   I think that is an improper
 question.

     MR. KING:   So be it.
Can I now move back in time just to clarify one or two
matters before the gates and the request for the »ates
were opened.   At 2.30 in the afternoon you were
concerned enough about what you could see on the
terraces and tne stands to ask the question of Mr.
Murray, "Are we going to get them all in?" - A. I*
don't think I said, "concerned enough".   I think what
I said was I looked at the terrace and I looked at the
crowd outside and made a comment, "Are we goin» to »et
them all in?"                                  °    °

   * 3S exactly around that time that you thought, at
2.30, that Mr. Marshall had asked for the closure of
Leppings Lane? - A. Yes sir.

It was exactly around that time that you asked Mr.
Murray to remind you of the circumstances in which a
kick-off would be delayed? - A. Yes.

Was there not a connection, therefore, between all
those three events in your mind, that is to say
closure of Leppings Lane, problem outside apparently,
 Are we going to get them all in, Mr. Murray?          Remind
me of when we will delay kick-off"?          They were all
connected, were they not? - A. Let me take you back to
what I said yesterday.          After the disaster it is
difficult to put thoughts in a sequence and 2.30
flagged up in my mind as a particular time, and I
think, if I remind you of what I said yesterday, that
        that there was a heightening of importance to
 .e <pp?v e r s a t i-ons that took place around 2.30, and the
        C a n C e .°f        time and those conversations that
I did not think, shall we say, warranted the focussing
that is being placed upon that time and the events
that there has been.

I just want to investigate very shortly a matter which
does puzzle me, that you have got the reply as to when
kicic-off would be delayed, but if there was an
identifiable problem, and you gave examples, did you
not, fog on the motorway and so on? - A. Yes sir.
                                                             48

                                             D. G. DUCKENF TRT.n

 Q.    Which would prevent a large number of fans arriving
       you would consider a delay, as opposed to - and this
       is how it was put - the fans who had been brought fo
       the area within a reasonable time but had chosen not
       to enter tne ground as soon as possible.   That was the
       dichotomy wnich was being put to you as part of the
       agreement of which you were being reminded.   That is
       your evidence, is it not? - A. Yes, but I think you
       are taking it far too detailed and looking at every
       word.  The general impression I tried to *ive was a
       balanced one, always bearing in mind that°our options
       are open.                                       ^

Q.     But the reason why people are late outside the ground,
       if there is a situation where to relieve their anxiety
       you need to delay kick-off, the reason why they are
       there is totally irrelevant, is it not? - A. I am not
       so sure I have fully understood your point there, sir.

Q.    If you have a situation where you have a large crowd
      outside the ground - right? - A. Yes.

Q.    And you are concerned as to whether or not they can
      get in - right? - A. Yes.

Q.    And you are concerned as to the fact that there may be
      problems, that is to say the anxiety of the crowd is
      causing pushing and shoving and there are requests for
      serials to come and assist, mounted Police to assist.
      so we have got that situation outside, the reason ---
      A.  What time have we jumped to now because that
      situation is a long time after 2.30?

      I am not interested actually in the timing at the
      moment;  I am interested in this policy as to what was
      the policy and why the reason was relevant.  How could
      the reason why fans were late be relevant to why you
      should delay kick-off? - A. Mr. King, you examine
      every situation on its merits, and at 2.30 I looked at
      a situation, I asked questions and with the advice of
      my colleagues, which I accepted, it was not necessary
      at that stage in our view to delay kick-off.

      But what was it about what you could see at 2.30 which
      even gave rise to your question, "When should we delay
      kick-off?"? - A. Mr. King, I have told you on several
      occasions that it was a casual conversation, a memory
      refreshing exercise, and I have said you have
      heightened the importance of the events at 2.30 that
      m my view they do not deserve.

      Let me go to 2.40, 10 minutes later.  At 2.40, this is
      before the radio goes down so I want to deal with that
      period between 2.30 and 2.40, there had been messages
                                                               49
                                                 D. G. DUCKENFIELD

      received, had there not, requesting mounted Police
      assistance? - A. There had been requests for extra
      assistance, yes.

      There had been messages asking for tannoy messages to
      be put out on the Leppings Lane asking for people not
      to push, or to go back, or something like that? - A.
      There were messages, sir.   I can't be specific about
      timings, but I won't disagree with you.

      You sent a serial down, we know Inspector Delaney, I
      tnink it was, who was sent down to see if he could
      assist as well, and Inspector Bennett had asked for
      assistance, this was before your radio went down? - A.
      I don't know the specific time.

           THE CORONER: Inspector Bennett was later, I
      think, not in the period that you have selected.

           MR. KING:   I am sorry,   sir.   If you tell me that,
      I accept it.

           THE CORONER:   I am almost certain.

          MR. KING:    Sir, can I just check something?

          THE CORONER: Yes.

          MR. KING:    You are quite right,   sir, it is my
     fault.

          THii CORONER: It is simply because you selected
     tne period, that was all.

          MR. KING:   Yes, indeed.   You are quite rignt,
     sir, because Inspector Bennett came shortly before the
     message to open the gate, quite right.
Q.   I am dealing with the period to 2.40, and by 2.40 you
     had had   the following. You had had the request for
     the Leppings Lane to be closed, had you not, that is
     certainly the case? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   You had had the request for further mounted
     assistance, that is certainly the case? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   You had   had the sending of the reserve serial and you
     had had   the request for the tannoy message to the
     crowd? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   You were in a position watching through the cameras,
     the video,* to see the position outside the turnstiles
     at the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes sir.
                                         D. G. DUCKENFTET.n

We know from your recollection that at some stage
w          request    H r - Marshall to open the Sates
before then, you recall a request by PC Buxton for the
               delT d?    Th3t 18 yOUr r®collection, that
it *as before the request for opening the mates’ - A
I tnink I have said that about that time I can recall
ilennr c,e a r l y !_but the chronological sequence of them
say    c l e a r > lf y°u understand what I am trying to
                                                           51
                                            D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Q. Certainly what was clear in your mind originally was that
   the request for "Delay kick-off,” was before Mr, Marshall
   came through with his request for "Open the gates"?
   That was your recollection? - A. The difficulty I am
   facing is this, that what I believed on the day and
   shortly afterwards in terms of sequence of events from
   2.40 onwards, was proved to be slightly inaccurate in
   that in the crisis that developed I flagged up various
   events in my mind in the days or weeks afterwards.    The
   problem is that you recall things, and they get jumbled.

Q. So be it.    Let me forget about PC Buxton.   Let me just
   deal then with up to 2.40, whether or not PC Buxton has
   asked for it to be delayed and you have this situation
   where ten minutes previously you had asked for the
   agreement as to when it was that kick-off would be
   delayed.   Ten minutes later, did it turn your mind at
   that stage with the deteriorating situation, that you
   should consider at that stage delaying kick-off? - A. At
   2.40 when the radio went down thoughts of many things
   were stopped.    The disruption was such that everybody
   had to move out of the way, and this has been said by
   many witnesses, the disruption was such that thought
   processes, actions, etc. were disrupted.

Q. Mr. Duckenfield, before the radio went down, after 2.30
   but before the radio went down at any stage did you
   consider delaying the kick-off? - A. The way I can reply
   to you is this, Mr. King:   I had it in my mind that I
   thought very seriously about delaying the kick-off.    I
   had a view at one stage that that was as the players ran
   out on the pitch.    My perception of that was that it was
   somewhere around the time the request came for the gate
   to be opened.   The difficulty with that belief is that I
   subsequently learned many weeks afterwards that the
   players did not run out on to the pitch until
   approximately five minutes to three.    Therefore, to
   answer your question, yes I seriously considered delaying
   kick-off at a point.    When I thought it was is at
   variance with official records, if I actually saw people
   run on to the pitch and I am not so sure I did.

Q. Would this be unfair, Mr. Duckenfield, that the reason
   you did not in fact delay kick-off was because in fact
   you applied in your mind what was a relatively rigid
   agreement that if the reason for why people were late in
   your mind was that it was their own choice and therefore
   you would not delay kick-off?   Is that unfair? - A. That
   is totally unfair, sir.

Q. It might be born - that approach - from your inexperience
   of policing the football matches, I don't know?    Do you
   think that is rtotally unfair? - A. I think what you are
   suggesting is totally unfair.
                                        D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Finally, Mr, Duckenfield, do you think your inexperience
of policing football matches on the 15th of April, 1989,
in any way adversely affected the decisions you made? -
A, The crucial decisions that had to be made on that day
were made by a Police Officer who, when told of a major
decision to open gates, which was totally unprecedented,
when that Police Officer was faced with that decision he
was up to that decision.   On that day I tried my best in
all circumstances and once realising the seriousness of
the situation at the Leppings Lane end then that Police
Officer was up to the job to call Operation Support, and
that is the situation.

That Officer may have been up to the job,
Mr. Duckenfield.   Do you regard yourself as having been
up to the job when you did not give any thought when you
gave the order for the gates to be opened as to where the
people would go, that large crowd, after they had entered
the concourse? - A. Mr. King, I have told you repeatedly,
with respect.

I know.  The final point, Mr. Duckenfield, the message
which you expected people to hear on talk-through, "Open
the gates," would not tell anybody as to what gates were
being referred to, would it? - A. Having received a
request from Mr. Marshall at the Leppings Lane end where
they were fully acquainted with the situation, and the
request to open the gates and our passing of the message
to open the gates, then those at that end knew exactly
what the situation was.

Do you seriously believe that? - A. That is my view.

Your message on talk-through of "Open the gates," would
not give any clue in the message as to what was the state
of the Leppings Lane terraces, would it, in the message?
- A. In the message, Mr. King, taking the bare words that
you have used, it would not give a view.

That message, the bare message, would not in its words
give any instruction or direction to anybody to close off
anything, to close off any means of access or divert
anybody, would it? - A. I disagree with you strongly.

It would not in the words give any instruction to close
off the tunnel, would it? - A. Mr. King, we have been
over this ground before and I will say it again, the
decision to open the gates was totally unprecedented.
The atmosphere at that end - we have no need to describe
it, everybody knows.   The Police Officers there knew the
situation.  Everybody knew the situation.   The decision
was given to open the gates and those Police Officers
there knew what was going to happen and I can take the
matter no further.
                                                 D. G. DUCKENFIELD

They did not know, and could not know, the state of the
Leppings Lane terraces?    They were on the wrong side of
it. - A. Mr. King I have nothing to add.

     MR. KING:      Thank you.

     THE   CORONER:     Mr. Catchpole?

     MR.   CATCHPOLE:      Ihave no questions.

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, you will be a little
bit longer than that, I take it?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:       Yes.

     THE CORONER:       Miss Addleraan?

     MISS ADDLEMAN:       No questions,   sir.

     THE CORONER:       Mr. Russell?

     MR. RUSSELL:       I have no questions.

     THE CORONER:   I do not think it is worth starting
before lunch but there is just one thing which the jury
have mentioned to me.    In fact they have mentioned it
twice, and that is what about the video evidence of the
terraces.   I have had the videos looked at and there is
actually next to nothing on the videos because, of
course, not everything was recorded.    That does not mean
to say they weren't possibly scenes, but there is, I
understand, a little tiny bit which is actually on the
compilation which you have seen.    There is another
little bit which starts at 15.03 and goes on for a few
minutes.

     What we have done is that we have clipped it, if
that is the right word, and we will show it to you, but
it is very poor quality and I do not think it is going to
help us very much.   As far as I can tell there isn't
much recorded.   Does that help?

     Right, two o'clock.  Mr. Duckenfield you will
remember you are still on oath.

                 (Luncheon adjour nment)
                                               D. G. DUCKENFTET.D


              Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Duckenfield, I believed you worked closely with
Superintendent Marshall on public order situations for
about three years before you were promoted.   Is that
right? - A. Yes, I was the Deputy Divisional Commander
at West Bar Police Station and he was the Commander of
the Subdivisional Station.  He was the Superintendent
at the Police Station beneath me at West Bar.

You had not policed a football match at Hillsborough
for about ten years.  That is right, is it not? - A.
Yes, I was a Chief Inspector there in 1980.

When you returned in 1989 Leppings Lane terrace was
different, wasn't it? - A. Yes, I understand that in my
absence they had fitted the radial fences.

Did you notice anything different with the perimeter
fence or not? - A. No, I am sorry, Mrs. McBrien, I
can't be specific about that.

You did notice the radial fences.  Did you enquire why
these radial fences had been constructed? - A. I can't
recall the detail of that entering into any
c onver s a t i o n .

You did not think it might have some bearing on the way
the terrace would be controlled in any way.   It would
not matter if it was an open terrace or it h ad radial
fences.   It would make no difference, is that what you
are saying? - A. I am trying to think back and be
helpful.   I can't say categorically what flashed up in
m y mind about that.

You were not told about the 1981 crushing that had
taken place there I presume? - A. No, that as I
understand it had been dealt with as you rightly say in
1981.

If I tell you now that was the reason for the radial
fences being installed, it was b ecause of that
incident, you would not disagree with that. - A. I see.

So you just accepted the system of 'find your own
l e v e l '. Did you fully understand what that meant if
you were not sure of why the radial fences h a d been
installed?      Did you really understand the system? - A.
I am trying to think back and m y recollection is that
at some stage and the direct conversation was about
Semi Final day, that the system was 'find your own
l e v e l '.     '
                                            D. G. DUCKENFTET.D


What did that mean to you? - A. That the fans would
enter on to what was regarded as a safe terrace with a
safe capacity of 10,100 people and choose their own
viewing area.

Did you understand the tunnel and the radial gates, the
tunnel doors and the radial gates would be in the
locked open position for that system to operate at Semi
Final matches? - A. I am sorry, you are asking me two
questions, Mrs. McBrien, forgive me.

I am sorry, I will take one at a time then. - A. Would
you please? Thank you.

Did you understand that the tunnel doors leading to the
terrace would be in the locked open position at a Semi
Final match when the ground was being used? - A. My
understanding would be that those doors would be open
in the tunnel.

Also the radial gates at the top of the radial fences,
did you understand that they also would be in the
locked open position at a Semi Final match? - A. Yes,
fastened back on to the wall.

So fans were able to use the whole circuit, so to
speak, in that they could go right around and have this
freedom of movement. - A. Yes.

You were aware that the system h ad worke d
satisfactorily for the 1987 and the 1988 Semi Finals,
weren't you? - A. Yes.

There seemed to be nothing to draw to your attention
that was seriously wrong with that system, is that
right? - A. Not at all.

There is one matter relating to that which I would like
to ask you about.  Do you think it is important to keep
the gangways leading to those radial gates, as you come
down the tunnel and the radial gates are at the back,
do you think it would be important to keep them clear?

     THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I do not want to start
interrupting you at such an early stage but we have
talked about the gangways several times and there
aren't any gangways.  Maybe I might help you.  You see,
if you ask, should the gangways be kept open, the
answer must be, if he knows the position, no, because
there aren't any.  If you were to ask him, should there
have been an open gangway at the back, I think I would
just about accept that question.
                                             D. G. DUCKENFTET.n


     MR. KING:  Sir, she could use the word access.
Should the access to that point be whatever.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, access.   I would be happy with
that as well.

     MR. KING:  Whatever is meant by that, it is the
means of getting from A to B.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  Could I call them lateral gangways
transversing the terrace?

     THE CORONER:  I would not use the word 'gangway'
at all if I were you because if you do the answer has
got to be no.

    MRS. McBRIEN:  Why I used that particular word is
that I have read it so often in information I have got.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  We may have had this before but
the word was used rather loosely at the Taylor Inquiry
until evidence was given by I think Dr. Eastwood and
then the Sheffield City Council that there were no
gangways in the technical term on that terrace at which
point the terminology was tightened up.  So the Taylor
Inquiry is littered with reference to gangways when in
fact they were not talking about gangways as we know
them.




                                     /THE CORONER.
                                                             57
                                            D. G. DUCKENFIELD

          THE CORONER:   Because we happen to know the
     answer we don't want to fall into the same trap.

          MRS. McBRIEN:   That is where I have seen it.  I
     have even got the page down, I think, where I have read
     it.

          THE CORONER:   I think Mr. King's word is better
     than mine - use the word access.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Do you think that it is important
     to keep the access route leading to the radial gates
     clear at the back of the pens, to enable fans to move
     from side to side easily? - A. There is a problem with
     that, Mrs. McBrien, in that now with hindsight and
     having seen so many changes, obviously that flags up in
     my mind in an ideal world it would be preferable for
     those gates to be clear.

Q. Yes, but in fact don't you think that any access
   points, entrance or exit points, need to be in the
   control of somebody inside the Stadium?  They are
   importance places, aren't they, to direct people? - A.
   Yes, I think that now as we have moved on we must look
   very seriously at the safety aspect and consider the
   situation.  I am obviously generalising because I can't
   think of a specific ground at the moment, or what have
   you, but obviously now safety is paramount.

Q. I remember one witness saying that at another ground
   there were radial fences with radial gates, and they
   were under Police control, so that system was being
   used somewhere else in that way.  I know now that there
   are no radial fences at Hillsborough so that problem
   has been alleviated.  Now, still on this I am afraid,
   when the Club's engineer, Dr. Eastwood, constructed the
   radial fences at Hillsborough it was agreed at the
   Working Party meeting that the radial gates would be
   under Police control on the terrace.  Were you ever
   aware of that condition? - A. No, I think that at the
   time that was probably discussed, as opposed to
   whatever else might have happened, agreed to or what
   have you, I wasn t there, and I am sorry I can't help
   you with regard to that.

Q. Did you hear about it later?  I know you would not be
   at that meeting or it would not be anything to do with
   you then, but have you heard about it since?

          THE CORONER:    We are only interested in whether
     he knew about it before 15th April '89.   He obviously
     knows about jit now, everybody knows about it now.
                                         D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Did you know about that before 15th April, 1989? - A.
No, sir, that was the dilemma.  I have learned about it
since but I did not know it at the time.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Had there been control     ....

     MR. PAYNE:    I do apologise to Mrs. McBrien for
interrupting, but it is important that a
misapprehension, or a mis-statement does not pass so
that it then becomes established as if it were a fact.
I have looked up the memorandum that Mrs. McBrien is
referring to and we have, in fact, had evidence about
that from two sources, one from Dr. Eastwood and the
other from Mr. Mole, who was also present and is
mentioned as one of those listed at the top of the
minute.  Dr. Eastwood gave his evidence about it.   When
Mr. Mole gave evidence about it he said that the
reference to control was particularly related to the
introduction of the new gangway, pen 5, that was being
put in at the time, and that is the context in which
that point is mentioned so it is important that that is
seen in perspective.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   With respect to my learned friend
that is not actually quite right, because the original
memo of 1981 which I am sure you will remember, the
original stipulation was - there were four
stipulations, I think - and it was that they should be
under Police control, so it is all radial gates if you
take the two memos together, so Mrs. McBrien is right.

     THE CORONER:   I think the real issue is what does
the word control mean and that, of course, is a matter
of evidence and for the Jury to decide.  I think Mr.
Payne, that is right actually, there is an earlier
reference in '81 to control.  Have you found the
minute?  I can't locate it without searching through
all my stuff.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   It is C386 if anyone wants to
look it up, and it is the memo of 11th September, 1981.
It is simply that I think Mrs. McBrien was actually
right but in truth the debate is about what it meant.
It is the bottom of the first page.

     THE CORONER:    Yes,   (iii), and that is   '81.

     MR. PAYNE:   That is right.  The minute that I was
referring to is C475 which is 7th August, 1985.  That
is where the word control is used in the context that I
was referring to, that Mr. Mole gave evidence about.

     THE CORbNER:   Yes.   You were  using the word
control anyway.   So long as you stick to the word
                                        D. G. DUCKENFIELD

control, so long as you don't say what it means, I
think that is okay.  The Jury will make up their mind
what it means, if anything.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I used   to use the word manned but
you corrected me and I have   learnt my lesson:

If there was Police control at the radial gates, or if
there would have been, they would have been able to
monitor the numbers going into the pens and monitor the
behaviour of the fans, wouldn't they?

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, you can't say that.
I think you can rephrase the question.  If you say that
you are really saying if it was manned, you are playing
with words.  You may ask this Officer, not that it will
do you any good because it is purely hypothetical, ask
him whether he was aware whether Police Officers were
stationed at those gates.  I think that is the way to
tackle this.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Mr. Duckenfield, were you aware of
Police Officers being at those radial gates on 15th
April, 1989? - A. No, Mrs. McBrien.

And they were not on the terrace at all, were they, as
far as you were aware? - A. As far as I am aware.

Did you think that changes needed to be made to the
1989 Operational Order or did you accept it just as it
was, completely? - A. I think the situation was, Mrs.
McBrien, that having taken over I was assured that it
was a tried and tested plan, and that it had worked
very well indeed on the two previous occasions and
there was no need to change it, because the view was
that it had worked before and it would work again.   I
just made minor adjustments in general terms, as I
mentioned yesterday, but matters just about seating
arrangements and minor issues of that order.

So you were not aware that improvements were being made
annually to it?  We have been told that was actually
happening. - A. I am sorry if I misled you.  I think in
general policing terms, whilst I am saying to you that
the plan had not changed, over a number of years any
plan progresses and evolves and minor amendments are
made, but substantially the plan was the same.

Had you studied the Green Guide from cover to cover and
really understood it?

     THE CORONER:    He has answered that question and
said he had itat, I think it would be fair to say.
                                      D. G. DUCKENFIELD

     MRS.   McBRIEN:   I am sorry:

Did you feel that you could rely on the support and
advice of your Superintendents that day? - A . I am
sorry, Mrs. McBrien, I am having difficulty sometimes
hearing you.  Would you mind repeating the question,
please?




            /Q. Did you feel
                                         D. G. DUCKENFIKT.n

 ofdv?n- ^0el ^°U c°uld r e l y on the support and advice
 °t you. .superintendents that day? - A. I did.

 And also other senior Officers? - A. Yes.

 When you took over as Commander, did you feel that vm,
 were capable of making major decision! entirely
 independently of what they might say?  Sometimes it is
 unpopular to stand up against other people's id«as
     sometimes a leader has to do it, do you a g r e e ? ’

      THE CORONER: That may be an incriminating
 queotion.  It is up to you to decide whether you
 answer.                                      y

      . M - WITNESS: As a Chief Superintendent, Mrs.
 ilcBrien, I have to make decisions over and above those
 that are made by Superintendents on occasions.

      MRS. M c B R I E N : You would have to make the
 ultimate decision, would you not? - A. Very much so.

 So the responsibility was lying fairly and squarely
 with you? - A. Yes.

If you had any doubts about a decision that you were
about to make, would you consider asking the advice of
  e Assistant Chief Constable, Mr. Jackson, who was
          t* day? " A ‘ 1 think in 311 decisions, Mrs.
McBrien, whoever you are and wherever you are, if you
need advice and guidance then you seek it from
whatever source is available from both up and not
iorgetting down the line.

So on that day did you feel you needed to ask Mr.
JacKson's advice? - A. Can I ask you if there was a
specific point in time that you were thinking of?

 I am thinking of the two major decisions that you made
 on that day, the closing of Leppings Lane and the
opening of the gates.     Those were major decisions and
 they were ones that you may have doubts about, and
when in doubt it is best, as you say, to seek advice
trom somebody more superior to yourself, is it not? -
  11           w ith it     two separate ways.   First of
         ln doubt, then I accept what you say, that you
should see* advice.     Taking the first point about the -
closure of Leppings Lane at 2.30, I didn't consider
tiat as a major decision that was for me to make.        It
was my view, and I think I am correct in suggesting
this, that? when the evidence came from possibly
Superintendent Murray it was a matter that was dealt
with by Superintendent Marshall asking for Leopings
Lane to be closed and one which was not g o i n ^ t o be
                                                    P. G. DUCKENFTET.n


              bf^ausf 11 seemed a matter that Mr.
 Vh        c ould ma<9 a d e c i s i o n upo n w i t h o u t   ref e r r i n g
     -o anyone else, and I think that is how it came
 across to me in the circumstances on the day.   Now
 going on to your second question, and please correct
 me if I am wrong, I think you asked me if I ought to
 have referred the decision of opening the gates to Mr
 Jackson, is that right?                    o te* co nr.

 Yes. - A. The simple answer to that is that Mr
 JacKson was at that time in the Directors' b o x ’of the
 bouth Stand and it was a decision that in his absence
 as overall Commander of the match, I took.               *

ifould you have been able to contact him if you had
wanted to that day? He was in the ground, was he not,
he was not somewhere else? - A. In theory, yes, I
could have contacted him, but in practise, in view of
  ® .urgency of the situation and because of my
position, I did not have the opportunity but made the
command decision myself.

How would you have contacted him if you had wanted to
do that. - A. There is a Policeman at the tunnel
entrance on the perimeter track.   I must confess that
l don t ,<now if there is a telephone in the Director's
box, but generally speaking Mr. Jackson has a bleep
with him, so that by that means we would have to
telephone Force Headquarters and having telephoned
Force Headquarters they would do whatever they do to
sort of warn him with a bleep, and that would be the
way round it, but there was a delay factor involved.

You did take five minutes, I believe, to make the
decision, or thereabouts, five minutes or in that
region.

     THE CORONER: Mr. Duckenfield dealt with that at
great length with Mr. King as to how long.

      MR. KING:    He put it at three minutes, sir.

     THE CORONER: Yes, the maximum he said was three
minutes in his judgment.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  Do you think you would have had
time to get in touch with Mr. Jackson? - A. I do not
wish to go over difficult ground again because of
certain people, and I am conscious of that, but when
you are asked for a decision of that magnitude, when
the urgendy is introduced into it, then you cannot
afford to waste time.  I am not suggesting that
seeding guidance is wasting time, but I hone I have
conveyed to you what the situation was.
                                                                                          63

                                                                 D. G. DUCKENFTET.f)


            X       I?e                      sure “   is the corr e c t d e c i s i o n
            you are macing, do you not, or you hone it is? - A
B
            a t StheC^ j eilf - the situation is w ith decisions'you look
            fL       f         ° n 33 you see it at the time with all
            and in f°rpatl?-n avajlable to you as an individual -
            fnrf- •! ?i>S        j information available to you as an
            individual - and then you have to make up your mind
            and I am sure that, shall we say, throughout lif** iA
            f »?!!!;   S eople have c? make decisions, and some will
            a0ree and some will disagree.

            I think you said you had looked at the Safetv
            Certif icate, had you not? - A. Yes.
     Q.    You had realised the importance of a safe capacity for
           that ground, nad you not? - A. Yes.
     Q.    Were you aware that for that match there had been an
           allocation of 54,000 tickets? - A. Yes.
D    Q.    If that were so, would you agree that there was no
           more room xor anybody else, otherwise it would be
           creaking the safety limit, would it not? - A. Yes.
    Q.     This accurate figure could only be achieved by
                    t C°Unt °nly ’ could it not? - A. Can I just
           taxe that stage by stage?    On that particular day
              i t t were lssued for specific areas and as a result
           ot that no more tickets were issued for a specific
           area than were allocated on the Safety Certificate, so
           tnat was the situation.

                    turnstiles 77 to 88 were normally used fo-
          the North Stand, were they not? - A. Can I just
          c arify that?  Are they the Penistone Road turnstiles?

          Y? s - . \ A V My understanding was that there was a
          straight divide across the ground, that Liverpool
          supporters would enter through Leppings Lane in their
          entirety as a generalisation for the tickets
          allocated.

    Q.    On that day you understood that turnstiles 77 to 88
          were not to be used at all, that is right, is it not?
          v r r a i l t l ’ A3 * * *    ° n?mbers»      McBrien.  There was a
          Liverpool                    ~ nobody usins those if theY are from



                            t
                                                       /Q.     But were you
                                        D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Were you aware that fans were diverted to Leppings Lane
by the Police?   The ones who would normally be going in
through those turnstiles were diverted to Leppings Lane
and they were going to add to the numbers already there?
Were you aware of that? - A. Can I just clarify that?    I
may have misunderstood.   Are you saying that some fans
who had tickets for turnstiles 77 and 78 at the Penistone
Road end for the North Stand were being diverted to the
Leppings Lane end?

This is information that I have had at some stage...

     THE CORONER:   We haven't had it, Mrs. McBrien.
However, you may ask him whether he knows.   If the
answer is no, then...   If the answer is yes, then we
will see.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   I have come across it at some stage.
- A. I will answer the question - I didn't know.

There was a request from Superintendent Marshall to close
Leppings Lane to traffic at 2.17, is that right? - A. I
will not disagree on the closure of Leppings Lane.    Can
I remind you that Mr. Murray and I disagree about the
time but the closure of Leppings Lane I will accept.

Whatever the time was, you did not comply with that
request immediately, did you?    Is that right? - A. No.
Can I explain?   It was a request that I was aware of,
being in the Control Room.    It was not a decision 1^
became involved in because that was a matter of routine^
that would be dealt with by Superintendent Murray and his
Control Room staff.   To that extent my recollection is
that because it was a request from Superintendent
Marshall it was carried out straight away.

When I asked Superintendent Murray about this I asked him
if he could have advised you, so it seemed to me that you
were going to make the decision on that, not him? - A.
Well, can I make it clear?   My understanding of the
situation on the day, and of the subsequent evidence, is
that Superintendent Marshall asked for the closure of
Leppings Lane.   That message came into the Control Box
and it was of the type that would be acceded to by the
Control Room staff without reference to
Superintendent Murray or myself.   Now you asked me a
supplementary question on that, did you not?

No, I do not think so, apart from the one relating to
Superintendent Murray. - A. The situation is, if I have
been helpful, is as I have described.

Perhaps if we,go into this in a little detail then.   You
said yesterday when you heard the request, "What's he
                                           D. G. DUCKENFIELD

asking that for?" or something on those lines? - A.
That's right.

So you thought that was unusual, is that right? - A.
Well, it was unusual in this respect in that I did not
think it probably warranted it because I saw a bus
passing and I think the way I described it, or if I
didn't yesterday, this was the way I thought about it,
"Why does he want Leppings Lane closing when traffic is
passing?"

Did you wonder if he could be serious about such a
request? - A. Well, the situation is that
Superintendent Marshall, being a very experienced
Officer, was out on the ground, as it were, standing in
Leppings Lane and I had delegated responsibilities to
Superintendents and he obviously knew what the situation
was and asked for a course of action.

As you say you did not see anything unusual then and
strangely enough, and said this yesterday as well, that
Superintendent Marshall said when he gave his evidence
that there was nothing unusual happening at the time.
He said the numbers arriving were about what he would
expect and the behaviour of the fans at that time of the
day was very satisfactory, there were no problems, no
obvious problems that he could see.

       THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, what is the question?

       MRS. MCBRIEN:   I am trying to lead on to it, if I
may.

       THE CORONER:    Just ask it.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:    Superintendent Murray also said when
he looked on the monitor that he could see no problems
and to close Leppings Lane before a match, that was not
part of the Operational Order, was it? - A. No, but if I
can draw attention to what I think I said yesterday, that
no Operational Order can cater for every eventuality and
that is why senior Officers like Superintendent Marshall
were given specific roles to make their own decisions
about their own area.

Do you think it is wise to make any big changes to the
Operational Order, or is it wise to keep quite strictly
to the Order?

     THE CORONER:   No, I do not think that is going to
help us, Mrs. McBrien.

     MRS. MCBR^EN:   Well, the closing of Leppings Lane,
it was not a contingency plan either, was it? - A. There
                                         D. G. DUCKENFIELD

wasn't a specific contingency plan for the closure of
Leppings Lane but probably I can highlight points that
have been made before.   It has been put to me and other
Officers that there are no specific contingency plans for
certain eventualities and the closure of Leppings Lane is
an example of how we do not have a contingency plan, but
not having one then we act reasonably and responsibly and
close Leppings Lane.

Would you agree that the closing of it would be an
obstruction of the highway?   To close a road off surely
is an obstruction to traffic using it, isn't it?

     THE CORONER:    No, Mrs. McBrien.  You do not need
to answer that question.   We know the Lane was closed.
We know that Superintendent Marshall asked for it.   We
know that Mr. Duckenfield knew of it.   We do not need to
know whether it was an obstruction to the highway or not.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:    Or whether it was an
inconvenience...

     THE CORONER:   No, we don't need to know any of
that, not from Mr. Duckenfield.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:    What do you think the effect would
be of closing it?    Have you any idea about what it might
do?

     THE CORONER:    To whom?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   To the flow of the fans? - A. As I
understood it, the closure of Leppings Lane was purely to
vehicular traffic.   I think I am right in that it was
never actually closed in totality.   I think the
directive was given to close it, but I have a
recollection that probably buses were allowed to pass
occasionally.

Yes, I believe they were up to a certain time.   We have
seen photographs of buses being allowed through.   I am
trying to establish the different way people would be
coming down.   If the traffic was moving on the road they
would be confined mainly to the pavement.   If the
traffic was taken away they would have the whole width of
the pavement and the road in which to move down so it
would appear that masses would develop instead of a line
of people?   That is the effect I see straight away. - A.
I can understand what you are saying but on the day my
view of Leppings Lane was limited to the view on the
monitor and I am afraid I cannot take it any further
about that situation.
                                                              67
                                            D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Q. When you were looking at the monitor from the Control Box
   did you notice that large crowds had developed outside
   the turnstile area at about 2.30? - A. I find some
   difficulty, Mrs. McBrien, whilst trying to be helpful,
   about large crowds.   Yes, there were crowds, but the
   very numbers suggested that we were anticipating 8,000
   people per hour to get to Leppings Lane, so yes, there
   would be crowds.

Q. At that time, or about that time, did you look at the
   pens - I am not sure if you said this this morning or
   not.   Did you have a view of the Leppings Lane terrace,
   or choose to look at it at about that time? - A. I think
   I said I would be continually looking around the ground.

Q. Did you call for any tannoy messages to be given out
   inside the ground at that time?   When you looked at the
   terrace did anything come to your mind so that you would
   have to do something to get an even distribution of fans
   across the terrace? - A. Nothing comes to mind
   specifically that anything flagged up in my mind that
   there was something dramatically unusual about the
   terrace.

Q. Not at 2.30, but you did not give out messages
   encouraging people to spread out? - A. I think at some
   stage in the afternoon I made a passing comment to
   someone about - like other things - "Don't forget to ask
   people to move forward and spread out."

Q. You do not know when that was? - A. No, I am sorry.    It
   was part of the sort of conversations that exist in a^
   Control Box from time to time over matters, and sometimes
   people make comments such as I did.

Q. You say there were no tannoy messages? - A. No.  I think
   I said that tannoy messages would be given of a general
   nature, but in terms of giving you specific detail, with
   the passage of time I am in some difficulty.

Q. Could I refer to the Taylor...?    No, I can't.

        THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien, because Mr. Isaacs
   has already indicated that he will not answer the
   questions and I think that is probably right, at least he
   is privileged not to answer.

        MRS. MCBRIEN:   That was quite an important question
   I had.   I will leave it.

        MR. KING:    Sir, just to be fair to Mrs. McBrien.
   I took the policy decision I did.     In fact unless the
   question is po.tentially incriminating he does not have
   the privilege 'and one does not know what part of the
                                             D. G. DUCKENFIELD

transcript Mrs. McBrien is referring to.   She should not
be misled by me, not by you, sir, into believing that no
part of the transcript can be used because it may not be
an incriminating question she is asking.

     THE CORONER:   I think that is true.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, I think the question was whether
the transcript as a whole should or should not be put
and, of course, the observation I made at the outset was
in relation to my advice to Mr. Duckenfield that if it
was put to him,  Is this what you said?" he would, as a
matter of course, say, "I am not going to answer that
question."   To that extent it does not really matter
what is put, he will give that answer, on the assumption
that you take the view that the warning could properly be
given.

     THE CORONER: I think the point Mr. King   is making
is there may be things in the transcript which are not
incriminating, or not even tending to incriminate,
however broadly you construe it.

     MR. ISAACS:   That may well be right.   The
difficulty then, of course, is not what is actually put,
and in fact it is undoubtedly right.   There is a good
deal of what is in the transcript that...   In fact my
submission would be that none of it is incriminating, but
it is a policy decision I have taken so far as
Mr. Duckenfield is concerned and I have given him that
advice.   The decision starts, though, with a refusal to
answer any question relating to the accuracy, or
otherwise, of the transcript itself and one does not get
past there.




            MR. KING:    Well,   sir,   I am only trying..
                                             D. G. DUCKENFIELD


     MR. KING:  I am only trying to help Mrs. McBrien.
That cannot be right as a proposition of law, sir,
unless one takes as a proposition of law that the
question whether you accept a given part of the
transcript, and it would have to be identified which
part we are referring to, is a potentially
incriminating question.  As you know, sir, there are
two rules of evidence.  One is the privilege and the
other is where a witness is on Oath before you, sir, he
is obliged to answer proper relevant questions and he
cannot refuse to answer them unless they come within
the privilege.  There is that balance and Mrs. McBrien
is entitled, therefore, to put to you the part she
wants to put and you, sir, could make a ruling.

     THE CORONER:  Yes, I think you are right.  Mrs.
McBrien, can you tell me which page you want me to look
at?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Page 14.

     THE CORONER:  Which day? Can you give your page
to Mr. Griffiths and I will look and find it? Yes, it
is Thursday, 25th May.  Which letters are you
interested in so that I can have a look?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   The ones referring to the tannoy
messages.

     THE CORONER:  Yes, but it has got A, B, C, D, E,
F, G down the margin.

     MR. KING:   I suspect it is letter C, sir.

     THE CORONER:  I think that you can look at this.
It is between B and C, page 14.

     MR. ISAACS:  Sir, in my submission, if he is going
to be asked whether that is accurate then he should be
given a warning.

        THE CORONER: Yes, but I am just letting him look
at it at the moment.    I have not yet got as far as
th a t .

I think it is appropriate to give you the warning on
this particular passage.  It depends how far one
goes. - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:  Mrs. McBrien, shall I ask the first
question because it will be easier?  I am just
assisting you.*
                                            D. G. DUCKENFIELD


Subject to that warning that you do not have to answer
a question which may tend to incriminate you and, in
the case of the transcript, that goes not only to the
subject matter but also as to whether or not it is an
accurate record of what was said.  You have read the
passage at C on page 14 of Thursday, 25th May, morning
session.  The first question, subject to the warning,
is that an accurate representation of the exchange
which took place between you and the questioner at that
Inquiry? - A. Sir, as I understand it, based on the
advice of my legal adviser and based on your guidance
just now I choose to claim my privilege in this case.

     THE CORONER:  Mrs. McBrien, you heard that and
there is no point in asking the next question.  I
accept that because in principle I think that is right.
People should be allowed to exercise their privilege.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I realised it was an incriminating
question myself.   In fact, it was quite incriminating.

When you looked at the monitor, you said you were
constantly looking at it, is that right? - A. No, I
think that I was constantly looking at everything there
was to look at.

So you could have been looking at it at about 2.45, is
that right, or thereabouts? - A. Yes, I would be
glancing at it from time to time.  Can I be specific,
Mrs. McBrien?  Is it the Leppings Lane one that we are
looking at?

Yes, I am sorry.  Let us say it was 2.45 that you had a
look at the monitor and you saw the people outside.
Let me get this right;  did you think you could
possibly get all the people in that you saw there at
2.45, that you could get them in by three o'clock? - A.
I can't say, Mrs. McBrien.  I can't say accurately what
I was thinking about that time.  I was then into the
midst of the difficult situation and assessing many
things.

That was very important, wasn't it, whether the numbers
could get in by three o'clock? That would be
important.  That is something you would have to
consider really, wouldn't it? - A. At 2.45 I certainly
was considering many things.  As I have said earlier
today, I have described the position as it was at 2.45
and I was considering many things.

You would no doubt have some idea of the rate of flow
through the turnstiles at that time? - A. I didn't have
                                            D. G. DUCKENFIELD


specific knowledge of the rate of flow of people
through the turnstiles at that time.

Just by looking at the numbers, would that mean
anything to you, and the time that you had left? - A. I
cannot say specifically that I looked at it and made an
assessment because of other matters I was dealing with.

So obviously you would not consider the possibility of
delaying the kick-off at that time, would you? - A. I
think the answer is I did consider delaying the kick-
off at some stage about that time and when I say about
that time I am uncertain as I highlighted this morning.

That was a decision you could have taken at any time? -
A. The decision to delay kick-off can be taken at any
time.

Could I ask why you didn't? - A. I think I referred to
this earlier in that when I was considering it as a
very serious option, it was when a, shall I use the
word, crisis was developing for want of a better word
at the moment.  I looked through the window, and I
think I described this yesterday, and I saw a half
circle of what I thought were press photographers at
the tunnel and I was then considering the situation and
as I looked to my right something triggered off in my
mind that the players had come out on to the pitch or
were coming out on to the pitch and I subsequently
found out that that probably wasn't right with my time
sequence and if I go back to what I said yesterday, was
that whilst you can always delay kick-off there are
considerations to make.  Those considerations I think I
went through were that if the players are on the pitch,
whilst it is not the ultimate end to delaying a kick-
off it does present you with other problems that I
highlighted yesterday.  That is why at that stage I
decided that weighing up the problems that would ensue
from delaying kick-off in the ground - and I hope you
will forgive me by not highlighting every one as I did
yesterday - as opposed to being able to concentrate on
one end of the ground at Leppings Lane.  That is why I
decided not to.

If you decided not to delay the kick-off and let us say
it is still 2.45 and you decided, "No, I am not going
to do that", don't you think the position out there
would automatically get worse as people added to the
crowd outside? - A. I am sorry, would you mind
repeating that again please?

If at 2.45 yoti decided that there was no necessity to
delay the kick-off, do you think the problem you had
                                            D. G. DUCKENFIELD


outside there in Leppings Lane would automatically get
worse if more people added to that crowd and the
pressure would automatically get greater, wouldn't it?
The more people that came along then the greater the
pressure there? - A. We were expecting a flow of people
through those turnstiles, Mrs. McBrien, and numbers do
tend to increase approaching kick-off.

Yes, but you already had a problem there of people
pressing forward.  They were anxious obviously to get
in by a certain time.  They were running out of time
and so they would become anxious, wouldn't they, and
this could become quite a dangerous situation if more
people came along and put more pressure in that area? -
A. It could become a problem.

Do you know if tannoy messages were given out in that
part of the ground to advise people to move back or
something of that nature? - A. I am led to believe they
were but whether that is within my personal knowledge
at the time or whether that is knowledge that has come
to me subsequently but I understand that tannoy
messages were given out.

That would be very difficult to achieve, for people to
actually move back, if they wanted to get in by kick-
off, wouldn't it? It wouldn't achieve much.

     THE CORONER:  I do not think that is a profitable
line and it is nearly three or thereabouts and we will
stop for ten minutes.

                  (Short Adjournment)
                                          D. G. DUCKENFIELD

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Mr. Duckenfield, at 2.47 you
received a most unusual request from Superintendent
Marshall to open the gates, didn't you? - A. Yes.

That was something that you just would not expect at
all? - A. Yes, that is right.

Surely you could not seriously consider complying with
that sort of request, could you?

     THE CORONER:     Put it in a slightly different way.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Because it was such an unusual
request you would need to consider it very carefully,
wouldn't you? - A. I think I made the point yesterday
it was unusual and I had to consider things.

The reason you would have to consider it carefully
would be that it would defeat the objectives of the
whole Operational Order, wouldn't it? - A. Yes, it
would defeat some of our plans.

And that is what the Police were there to do, to carry
out the Operational Order that day?  That was their
duty? - A. Yes, to police the football match as we
intended to do it.

Also to comply with the safety guidelines as laid down
in the Green Guide? - A. I believe overall that
everybody involved in the partnership, as I said, would
be looking to do what they should do in all
circumstances.

And you would also consider the Safety Certificate as
well, wouldn't you, before you ....

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, you are not seriously
suggesting that he would have stopped and said, "Now,
let s get the Green Guide out.  Where's the Safety
Certificate?"  You are not putting that to him, are
you, I hope?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   No, but these things would flash
through your mind before you made a decision, I was
thinking, before you made a decision ....

     THE CORONER:    Well let's ask whether they flashed
through his mind.

Did the text of the Green Guide flash through your mind
when Mr. Marshall's request came to you? - A. No, sir,
but to qualify that, these are guidance documents and
as a r e s u l t / with the request with Mr. Marshall, there
                                      D. G. DUCKENFIELD

was no mental checklist of ACPO Guidelines,   Green
Guide, what have you.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I realise the Green Guide is only
a guide, but the Safety Certificate is a binding
document, isn't it? - A. It is a document which you
must abide by.

So to comply with that request that was being made to
you, it would mean that drunken fans may get in, people
who were in possession of drink may get in, people with
missiles might get in, but most important and one that
would be not obvious to everyone on the surface would
be that ticketless fans would be given access and so
that would present a real safety risk if the safety
capacity was exceeded, wouldn't it? - A. I think I made
the point, Mrs. McBrien, that the difficulties I had
making the decision, and I am not sure that
difficulties is the right word, but shall we say the
things I had to think of whilst making that decision to
open the gates, were those things that you have
mentioned.

Yes, I know you had to make a balanced judgment with
the situation that you saw. - A. Yes.

I do appreciate that but you would nevertheless have to
consider these other very serious things, wouldn't you?
- A. I think, as I said about the difficulty of being
in a command position and in a decision making process,
you look at all the information that is available to
you as an individual at the time and you balance them
up in the time available, and bearing in mind there was
not an awful lot of time.

Whatever steps you may have decided to take outside the
Ground, it was very unlikely that you would be
breaching the Safety Certificate out there, wasn't it?
It only applied to the Ground, the inside of the
Ground, that is where the Safety Certificate did apply?
- A. The Safety Certificate applied to the Ground, I
agree.

There was no risk of breaching the Safety Certificate
by an action you would take outside the Ground, was
there? - A. No.

So from your point of view it was much better to deal
with the situation that you had outside the Ground, do
you agree? - A. If I can take it stage by stage, the
first request to open the gates was looked at and the
matter was resolved and it was left to be dealt with
outside the Ground, but the subsequent situation, Mrs.
                                        D. G. DUCKENFIELD

McBrien, is difficult to assess because of the
knowledge of the events.

But by taking the decision to open the gates you were
creating a free for all, weren't you, whoever was
outside?  The people I mentioned earlier, it was giving
access to them, wasn't it, or it could be giving access
to them? - A. I think I said earlier, over the last
couple of days, there were points to consider and I
considered those points and made a decision.

Would you say there were quite a number of late
arrivals outside at the time, there could be late
arrivals? - A. I am sorry, Mrs. McBrien, I think that
in terms of late arrivals I am not so sure I am
qualified to answer your question there.

Were you aware of a substantial number of ticketless
fans in the area that day?  Not in that immediate area
maybe, but had you had information that there were
ticketless fans around? - A. I can say that not within
my personal knowledge but I was advised that there were
ticketless fans about, but as to numbers and location I
am sorry, I can't help you.

But you would agree that it could be a risk, they could
be in that area, it was a possibility? - A. I find some
difficulty in that one or two ticketless fans, a dozen,
may not be a problem.  It is speculation, Mrs. McBrien,
and whilst ever I may wish to assist I am afraid I
can't.

Before you did make your decision to order the opening
of the gates, this is what you said, I think it must
have been this morning or yesterday, you said that you
thought that the drunks and ticketless fans that might
be there, you looked and you thought you had room and
safety for them on the concourse area, as they could
have been injured outside?  I may have it a little bit
wrong.

     THE CORONER:   Yes,   you have, quite a bit.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   The people who were outside, who
could include those people? - A. I think there are some
specific terms that others may take issue with.  I had
no specific knowledge of drunks although I am sure
there was some evidence in relation to certain aspects
of drink, but I couldn't say that.  All I was giving
you was an example of my thought processes.

But you did ^think about that, didn't you? - A. Yes.
                                       D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Because it was part of the Operational Order, of
course, wasn't it? - A. Taken in general terms, what
you have said to me is what I said yesterday generally.

And you weighed that possibility of them getting into
the Ground against the possibility of people being
injured outside?   They were the issues, weren't they? -
A. The issues were, as you know quite clearly, I was
faced, Mrs. McBrien with one of two decisions, and the
decisions as you well know were either if you don't
open the gates people are going to get killed, so in
view of that information I made a judgment and decided
to open the gates.   My information was that had I not
done that then people would be killed outside.

Yes, I appreciate it was difficult and there could have
been a possibility, I do appreciate that, but these
people obviously just needed space, didn t they?  If
they were in difficulties of being crushed outside, or
wherever people are being crushed, the thing that they
require is space? - A. Yes, and I thought I gave them
that space.

Yes, you said that by opening the gates they would go
into the concourse area, which was a large area where
you thought they would disperse? - A. Yes.

Now, the way I see this, the action could have been
excused, the opening of the gate, if those fans outside
were entering into a large open field, and in those
conditions then I could see the sense of it ....

     THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien, we are not having
speeches or your thoughts as to the excuses or
otherwise, or dissertations on fields or anything else.
You can ask a question.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   The fans were going into a
concourse area though, weren't they? - A. Yes.

Now, that was not the viewing area for the match, was
it? - A. No, it was not.

That was only an area that they were passing through to
go to where they were ultimately going to end up? - A.
Yes, it was.

And so it would mean very little to them.  What they
would want to do was get to their viewing position by
the quickest access route surely, wasn't it? - A. I am
not so sure I can answer that.  I would have thought
that was speculative.  Yes, they do want to get into
the Ground. ’
                                       D. G. DUCKENFIELD

That was what was obvious, the way they were behaving
outside it showed they were very anxious to get in by
kick-off, so they would still be anxious to get to
their viewing spot, even when they came in through the
gate? - A. I don't think I accepted that as a premise.
I think I have answered that earlier today and given my
thoughts on the matter.

Would you agree that if a large crowd comes in all at
once it is far easier to go with the crowd, even if you
are going along a little street in Sheffield it is
easier to keep in the direction those people are going,
rather than try to go to the right, to the left or
turn.  It can be very difficult in a large crowd? - A.
Not wishing to be difficult, it does depend on
circumstances.  People can be carried on with other
people but some people can move away.  It is
speculation, Mrs. McBrien, and I find it difficult.   I
wasn't down there at those gates.




                   /Q.   I am not saying
                                       D. G. DUCKENFIELD

 I am not saying that they were actually carried along*
   am saying it is easier, or I certainly find it
 easier, or I would find it easier to do that, rather
 than move if there is quite a substantial number of
 people.  The turnstile entry, compare that with the
 gate entry:  the turnstile entry would allow for a
 certain rate of flow? - A. Yes.

It would also cater for the dispersal arrangements
within the ground? - A. Yes.

So you would not get that situation   then, there would
be room to manoeuvre, a lot more room? - A. Yes.

And then dispersal, quite naturally people would have
gone to the sides and would have gone down the tunnel,
as you said, but only in those circumstances, would
you not agree? - A. Obviously the turnstile flow is
different to the gate open flow.

It makes a lot of difference, does it not?  I am not
criticising tne people for going inthe same
direction, it would be a natural thing to do, I would
say.

     THE CORONER: Yes, but you have got to ask a
question, Mrs. McBrien.  We are spending quite a lot
of time and I realise you have the right to ask
questions as well, but get to the point, please.

     MRS. McBRIEN: Did you consider there was an
alternative to opening the gate? - A. The way it was
put to me on the day, Mrs. McBrien, was, "If you don't
open the gates       and I don't wish to repeat it, I
am not being difficult, you know, for obvious reasons.
It was put to me that I had little alternative.

Do you thinK that people outside would have behaved
differently if they would have had more time, they
would have been less anxious?  Their mood would be a
bit different?

     THE CORONER: That is an entirely hypothetical
question, Mrs. McBrien, and we have had evidence from
people who were actually there anyway who have
expressed views on that.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  There was space outside, though,
was there not, along the track leading from Leppings
Lane to Penistone Road, by the side of the river,
between tne outside of the ground and the river?
There was a service road there? - A. There is a
service road, yes.
                                             D. G. DUCKENFIELD

That service road could have been utilised for the
Police to regain control and make sure people entered
that ground in a controlled manner?

     THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien,         I do not think that is
an appropriate question either.          In fact, it is not a
question.

      MRS. McBRIEN:  I know we have had this before.
Just after the request to open the gate at 2.47 came,
I believe you said that you thought the gate had bean
forced open? - A. I gave my description this morning,
Mrs. McBrien.   I am probably confused and it might
have been yesterday afternoon, forgive me.   But I
turned and looked and I thought the gate had burst
open.

Did you find later that it was to eject a fan at that
time?

     THE CORONER: I do not think it matters, Mrs.
McBrien.  If it was later it does not matter.

     MRS. M c B R I E N :   It was the first opening,   sir.

     THE CORONER:       I know.    It does not make any
difference.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  To comply with that request, it
was a drastic measure to take, though, was it not? -
A. Yes, it was a drastic measure.

It could lead to potential problems inside the ground?
- A. I think I have answered questions of that nature,
Mrs. McBrien, to the extent that I prefer not to take
it any further.  I have covered that ground before.

     THE CORONER: And it is an incriminating question
and he is quite entitled not to answer it in any case.

     MRS. M c B R I E N : Would you say that the situation
you had outside the turnstiles you were simply
transferring to another spot that was inside the
stadium by opening the gate? - A. All I can refer to,
Mrs. McBrien, are the comments I made earlier, when I
said making decisions is all about balancing things on
the one hand, things on the other.

But did you consider what might happen, or did you
completely ignore the Operational Order?

     THE CORONER: This is an incriminating question
and you do not have to answer that.
                                      D. G. DUCKENFIELD

,.__.THS WITNESS:  Sir, I have no wish to be
 ifficult, but I believe I have covered those points
earlier.                                      ^

 u                  Did you think that only one gate
should be opened, or the three of them? - A. The
request to me was for gates, and the order that I <*ave
and was carried out was "Open the gates" - plural.°

But would you say that when you open a gate, wherever
that gate might be, if there is a large crowd anxious
to get in behind it, tnere might be a danger when that
gate is opened of people just falling and injuring
themselves, that risk? - A. That is fair comment, Mrs.
Mc3rien.  If you open a gate with a crowd behind it,
then people can stumble and fall.

And there could be a more serious possibility of
crushing, could there not? - A. As I have said, Mrs.
McBrien, decisions are about balancing the pros and
cons.

Did you think about any of those thing 3 , crushing or
people falling injuring themselves in that way, and a
pile-up, people falling on top of them as they came
in? - A. During my decision-making process many things
ran through my mind and now some time later, you know,
the specifics - it is difficult to deal with.

About that time were you aware of the state of the
centre pens? - A. I think I covered that earlier
today.

     THi COROWER: Mrs. McBrien, I am not going to let
you go over everything and, in fact, I am going to
hurry you along now a little bit.  I have tried to be
as patient as I can be, but he has dealt with this at
length, both with me and with Mr. King.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  Did you warn stewards and Police
Officers that you were going to open the exit gates?

     THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, were you listening,
with great respect, to the questions and answers which
Mr. King was asking at about 20-to 1, not so long ago,
20-to 1?  Those are the precise questions which he was
asking, not in your words, but that was the sense, and
he has given the answer.  There is no need to reply to
it.  We are not going to repeat questions needlessly.

     MRS.fMcBRIEN:  I am sorry about that.
Could you tell me if Gate B was ever opened, Mr.
Duckenfield? - A. My order was to open gates - plural.
                                      D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Subsequently I understand it was opened.   That is all
I can tell you.

I am afraid some things may have been said, and I am
trying to not make mistakes.  We know you received
four requests in all to open the gates over a period
of about five minutes, I think was it? - A. No, I
think if I can clarify that, my personal recollection
is that there was the first request at 2.47-ish and
then there was the more urgent second request.   I do
know that my colleagues have a different view, I do
not dispute that, we all have are different views.
But my personal view is that there were only two
requests that were focussing in my mind.

You said that the match would take place without any
public disorder, that was what your intention was, was
it not? - A. Yes, that is right.

And that Police Officers would ensure the safety of
the public? - A. If I am correct, is that not the
intention in the Operational Order?

     THE CORONER: Yes,   it is.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  But there was obviously a crowd
problem that day outside the turnstiles, was there
not? - A. I don't disagree with that.

Now you had had quite a bit of experience dealing with
public order situations in the period prior to when
you were promoted in March 1989?   You had had quite a
       experience in that field, had you not? - A. The
definition of "public order" is a very wide-ranging
one, Mrs. McBrien, and there are many aspects to that.
I think I clearly stated in terms of experience in
relation to events of this nature, and I think on the
first day I set out the situation.

Could you have treated the situation outside the
turnstiles as a public order situation? - A. It was
obviously a very difficult situation.  With hindsight
you can always see things rather differently from a
different point of view.  It is my view that the
Officers tried their best under difficult
circumstances.

But if you had treated it as such, do you think the
Police would have then regained control of the
situation, that the Police should never be seen to
lose in a situation like that, should they? - A. I
find it difficult, sir.
                                        D. G. DUCKENFIELD

     THE CORONER: It is not a practical question to
answer.  Let me a3k you, Mrs. McBrien, are you
actually putting to this Officer, because you are
going around it in a circuit, that what he ought to
have done is to have had a baton charge, for example?

     MRS. HcBRIEN:     No.

     THE CORONER:    Or the Riot Police in, is that what
you are asking?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   No, nothing like that.

     THE CORONER: That is the impression I am getting
of the thrust of your questions.  So hone up your
question and tell me exactly what it is you are
asking.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  It was the intention of the Police
to police that match so that there was no disorder.
If disorder occurred, then the Police, it seems, had
lost control.  That is what seems obvious and so if
control is lost it has to be regained by whatever
means the Police have.

     THE CORONER: It is a statement,    Mrs. McBrien.
Move on to your next question.




                              /Q.   MRS. McBRIEN:
                                                                        83
                                                          D. G. DUCKENFIELD

        Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:   We know there was a possibility of
             injuries outside the ground, but that was only a
             possibility, wasn't it?    It was not a reality.   Inside
             the ground there were casualties...
    B             THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, that is neither a
             question nor is it correct.   Move on to your next
             question, or it is only correct with hindsight.

        Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:   Mr. Duckenfield, you thought it was
             reasonably safe to open the gate and let those people in?

                  THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, Mr. Duckenfield has
             given you his reply several times.   Please move on to a
             question which advances these Inquests.

        Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:   When the people who came into the
             concourse area, once they got into that area, if we could
             look at the Green Guide, page 23, paragraph...

                  THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien, he did not look at
             the Green Guide beforehand and he does not have to look
D            at it now.

                  MRS. MCBRIEN:    Sir,    this is a vital point.

                   THE CORONER:   It is not a vital point if he did not
             s ee it.

                  MRS. MCBRIEN:    Is it all right if I sit down for a
             little while?

                  THE CORONER:   No, Mrs. McBrien, we will pause at
             five minutes to four and then you can sit down.   What
             paragraph was it that you were asking him to look at in
             the Green Guide?

                  MRS. MCBRIEN:    I really need to sit down,

                  THE CORONER:    Very     well.   What   paragraph?

                  MR. CATCHPOLE:   It was page 23, and I would imagine
             it was paragraph 54.   The difficulty of it, sir, is it
             is under chapter 6.   It is in relation to egress and it
             is concerned with funnelling effects, about people
             converging on narrow means of access or egress.    It is
             egress time as opposed to entrance time.    Of course, it
             is the reverse situation here, sir.   Perhaps it is not
             even quite on the point of opening gates...

                  MR. KING:    Sir,   to   be fair to Mrs. McBrien, she may
             not have been putting    to   the witness, "Did you read this
             at the time yo,u made your    decision?"   She may be
             referring to His evidence     that he had read and therefore




H
                                                                                   84
                                                                   D. G. DUCKENFIELD

             would know of a certain matter.  I don't know.                 Sir,   I
             am not sure what she was trying to put.

                  THE CORONER:         I know,     that is the difficulty.
             What page was it?
    B
                  MR. CATCHPOLE:   Page 23, paragraph 54.   It
             actually is quite detailed.   It also deals with holding
             capacities as well in relation to reservoir areas.

                  THE CORONER:         Which paragraph is it you are after,
             Mrs. McBrien?

                    MRS. MCBRIEN:       Paragraph 55.

                    THE CORONER:       I want to be as helpful as I can to
             you.

                  MR. MANNING:   Might we give Mrs. McBrien five
             minutes, sir, on the basis that not only does she try and
             do things that...

D                   THE CORONER:      Yes, OK.

                  MR. MANNING:   I was going to say with the caveat
             that part of the frustration, as we probably know, is
             that she really has been for the last twenty minutes
             asking question after question, and it has been covered
             at least twice, and that is the frustration.    I am all
             for allowing her to compose herself because it is very
             distressing and it is probably the last chance she is
             going to have to make a statement or to try to put her
             case, which is what you have been trying to find out,
             what exactly she is trying to put to the Chief
             Superintendent.

                  THE CORONER:   You have persuaded me.               We will have
             a break for ten minutes.

                                    (Short a dj o u r nm e n t )

                    THE CORONER:       Yes, Mrs. McBrien.

        Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:   Mr. Duckenfield, it was up to you to
             do the directing that day, wasn't it?   You had the
             commanding role?   You were in charge? - A. I was the
             overall Police Commander.

        Q. You had an emergency situation there at one stage? - A.
           At the time of 2.40 or 2.52?   Do you mean outside the
           gates?

        Q. Outside the gate you had an emergency situat ion and you
           also had one inside? - A. Yes, I did.




H
                                          D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Did you do anything immediately about the one inside?
As soon as it was realised that something was really
wrong did you act immediately on what you saw? - A. I
acted immediately the request was made.

Do you think the main thing was to get the fans out of
that area?   That was the main consideration - out of the
centre pens? - A. I am sorry, I am confused.   Are you
now asking me about getting the fans out of the centre
pens?

Yes. - A. Yes.   As soon as the situation was realised a
rescue attempt was mounted.

How did you go about doing that? - A. All available
Officers were sent to the Leppings Lane terrace.

Did you put out a tannoy message at that time to let
people in the stadium know what the situation was, to be
helpful to everybody in the stadium? - A. No.  At that
stage there was no tannoy message to say specifically
what the situation was.

So people could be very confused if nobody told them
exactly what was happening, especially the people at the
Nottingham Forest end?   They would not know what was
going on, would they? - A. Well, at the time, I thought
the decision was correct, but I have learned later that,
yes, there was some confusion caused to the Notts. Forest
fans.

There could be confusion even on the other side, could
there not?   People may not be remaining as calm as they
would be if they heard somebody giving that message over
the tannoy system? - A. I think you are right in that
like I have said previously, there are things for a
certain course of action and things against.   In the
heat of the moment, shall we say, or in the enormity of
the situation, it is very difficult to balance and I made
certain judgments which I thought to be correct at the
time.

You agree with me that the main thing was to get the
people out.   Did you immediately send for cutting
equipment to get that perimeter fence down? -A. As soon
as the enormity of the situation was discovered and I
called for Operation Support, I then reeled off a stream
of instructions of various   things and at some stage
somebody mentioned cutting   equipment.   Now I do not know
who that was but that was authorised.

What time was that done?     How soon was it? - A. I am in
some difficulty in giving you an accurate time.     If you
can imagine that as soon as you realise what you have,
                                        D. G. DUCKEfJFIELD

then you start issuing instructions.   In issuing those
instructions Policemen around you have to carry them out
and then relay them to individuals, so I do not know
exactly what time I issued instructions and I am afraid I
cannot tell you exactly what time they were carried out.
My belief is that we did things as quickly as possible.

You were aware that the Fire Brigade would have the
facilities to cut the fence down? -A. Yes.

So it was to the Fire Brigade that you needed to make
your request? - A. Yes, but can I draw a distinction?
At some stage, because there is a Police garage nearby at
Clay Wheels Lane, I had got the impression that someone
made a request for cutting equipment and Clay Wheels Lane
was mentioned.   That was supplementary to possibly the
Fire Brigade.   Probably someone in their wisdom thought
that - I don't know, I am speculating - but that the Fire
Brigade would come quickly with the equipment, but
nevertheless there was a Police garage nearby and "Let's
get their equipment and let's use that as well."

Did cutting equipment arrive at some stage? - A. Now I
personally cannot tell you if cutting equipment arrived.

Whether it did or it did not, there were other means of
getting the people out of those pens, wasn't there, by
getting them out from the back? - A. Yes.   I think there
has been evidence of people assisting to remove people
from the back of the tunnel and also from the pens.

Once you have an emergency situation, the slower the
process of emptying the pens, the more likelihood there
is of more injuries? - A. Yes, I suppose that whilst
people are crushed...   I did not go down there,
Mrs. McBrien, so I find some difficulty, but I agree in
principle that speed in removal of people is essential.

So a tannoy message could have been given out for people
to move out of those centre pens and go out of the tunnel
altogether so that the injured people could be rescued?
That is right, isn't it? -A. I am sorry if I misled you.
It is my belief that tannoy messages were given to ease
back.

But not to that effect, for people to actually move out?
To ease back, they may only go a bit further back on the
terrace.   To go out of the tunnel altogether was what
was needed so that Police Officers and rescuers could go
down to the front of the pens so that they would have
easier access? - A. I have a recollection of two things
in that respect, one of which is Superintendent Greenwood
on the hoardings trying his best to indicate to people to
ease back.   I am sure in my recollection that if I did
                                                              87
                                              D. G. DUCKENFIELD

     not give the instruction, that somebody was doing it on
     the tannoy equipment.   Now I must admit I cannot recall
     exactly what was said, but it is my belief that that sort
     of action was being taken.

Q. You gave no information of a general type to the fans
   from  about five past three until quarter to four, did
   you?     No general announcement was made, was it? - A.
   No, I did not make a general announcement.

Q. When it finally was made at four o'clock I believe the
   fans then did behave extremely well and they left the
   stadium quietly.

          THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, that is outside our
     time   limit and it is not likely to have made any
     difference how the fans behaved at four o'clock. I'm
     sorry.

Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:   At what time did you see the young
     man you described who was hobbling and dragging his leg
     and flopping down by the goalpost?   What time was that?
     - A. I don't know, Mrs. McBrien.   Can I just set the
     scene?   Times that day, I have no concept of times.    It
     may be difficult for people to appreciate that situation,
     but once the situation developed time was marching and I
     had no concept of time.

Q. You had no idea whatsoever when you saw that young man? -
   A. No.   The difficulty I face is that I remember vividly
   certain things, but times, they don't mean anything.   I
   don't mean that...   It is just that in an event of that
   nature time goes on and you are caught up in it.

Q. I just want to put this to you, Mr. Duckenfield.   Taking
   into account all the dangers there were of opening the
   gates and allowing large numbers into the ground,
   unlimited numbers in an uncontrolled way, you were wrong
   to give that order to open the gates?

          THE CORONER:   I just did not hear.  I am not
     stopping you, but I did not hear the last few words.

Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:   You were wrong to give the order in
     that...   Whatever you want to answer to that that is
     what I feel.




             Q. THE CORONER:   This is an


                  f
                                                   D. G. DUCKENFTELD


     THE CORONER:  This is an incriminating point so
you must consider your answer. - A. Can I just clarify
then? Basically you are saying I was wrong to give the
order to open the gates?

     MR. KING:  I think what Mrs. McBrien said was that
it was wrong to allow the people in, a large number of
people, unlimited people, uncontrolled.  Those were her
words, sir.

     THE CORONER:       Let Mrs. McBrien rephrase the
question.

       MR. KING:   I think she has got it written down,
sir.

     THE CORONER:  Just ask the question again so that
we can make sure you have got it how you want it.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  I may have added a bit when I was
saying it but this is what I had written here.

I put to you, Mr. Duckenfield, that taking into account
the dangers in opening the gates and allowing in large
numbers, that is, unlimited numbers into the ground in
an uncontrolled way you were wrong to give the order to
open the gates.  That is what I am putting to you? - A.
Mrs. McBrien, I was faced with the situation that if I
didn't open the gates then people would be killed
outside.

       MRS. McBRIEN:     Thank you.

     THE CORONER: Mr. Isaacs, would you  prefer to go
this afternoon or would you rather start in the
morning?

      MR. ISAACS:  This afternoon, sir.  I have not very
long.   I think we have gone through this now so many
times that there is very little.

     THE CORONER:       I am quite happy.   It is entirely
your choice.

     MR. ISAACS:  I do not know, sir, if you have any
questions from the Jury before I start.

       THE CORONER:     Yes, the Jury have some.

                      Further bv THE CORONER

The first question, and these are points the Jury have
asked me to ask you, why were many of the Officers on
                                               D. G. DUCKENFIELD


duty that day from outside the Sheffield area, eg,
Barnsley and Doncaster? - A. Sir, the Police Force in
South Yorkshire in round figures is almost 3,000 in
total and we needed 800 Police Officers solely to
police the ground-   The only way of achieving that
number is to call on the resources from throughout the
Force area.   You will also bear in mind that we were
limited in expert areas and we called on mounted
Officers I think from Nottingham and Liverpool which
were helpful.

The supplemental to that one is that these away
Officers particularly, how familiar were they with
Hillsborough and with big matches in general? - A. The
way I can describe it is this; that the specific
capabilities of individuals at the lower ranks I am not
aware of but I think Mr. Mole stated that Officers who
were in areas of importance, shall we say, he had
introduced what he called a community policing
programme at the football ground so that the same
Officers with local knowledge would police those areas
on every occasion.  So in general terms the regular men
who policed it regularly were in their regular spots
doing their regular job.

Supplemented by others? - A. Yes, from other areas but
the supplementary being that we recruited Liverpool
mounted Officers to police the Liverpool fans at the
Liverpool end so that there were some relationship and
Notts the same.

Before the 1989 Semi Final were you yourself briefed by
anyone bearing in mind that you had not had much
experience of policing Hillsborough at that point in
time? - A. No, sir.  The only briefings were the
discussions with Mr. Mole.  I am sorry, let me just
clarify that.  The meeting that I attended on the 22nd
March, I think I am right, with Mr. Mole.  I had a
discussion with Mr. Mole in general terms some time
later.

Apart from that no specific briefs? - A. No.

In the briefings, not your briefings, what situations -
I think I will rephrase this question because I think I
know what the Jury are getting at.   In your briefings
or any briefings which you were aware of which were
given to the people, were the conditions, if any,
regarding the delay in kick-off dealt with? - A. No, I
don't think they were, sir.

Is that because the decision of delaying kick-off was a
command decision? - A. Very much so.
                                             D. G. DUCKENFIELD



I will ask this question but I think we actually know
the answer.  Do you know what time elapsed from when
you saw Superintendent Greenwood waving on the fence to
when he actually ran on to the pitch to stop the match
and did you actually see him wave? Perhaps I should
actually ask you that first.  Mr. Murray saw him but
did you see him? - A. The difficulty is, sir, I have a
belief I saw him. At the time in April 1989 your
thoughts are clear but with so much passing I had a
belief I saw him but I most certainly remember seeing a
man running on to the pitch to stop the game.

Have you got any idea of what the time interval was? -
A. No, I am sorry, sir, I can't help you.

     THE CORONER: If I can just turn to you, ladies
and gentlemen, in fact when Mr. Greenwood gave evidence
Mr. Russell took him through a whole load of
photographs and if the photograph is correct where
there is some movement you can work it out to the
second because we know what time the match was stopped.

Had you any previous experience of writing or giving
briefings for football matches? - A. I don't think I
had ever - I had written them - I w o u ldn 't say I had
written them.  I had done them before but it is a long
time ago.  It is something I can't be specific about.
I had done briefings for other matters but of this
nature, of this magnitude, this was the first one.

If you did not notice any injuries until after the
match had stopped which I think is what you have said,
is it not? - A. Yes.

Why had you previously requested operational support?
I am not sure whether the Jury have got this right.   Do
you remember when you requested operational support? -
A. Yes, I do actually, not in terms of time, but I have
a recollection and this might sound strange.  I have
got a recollection of calling operational support by
virtue of what I felt and there was one thought I might
have jumped the gun if you can understand the
expression.  I thought I might have reacted.  I think
it was then simultaneously I thought, "Oh, I have
obviously made the right decision".

Was it before the match had finished or after so far as
you can remember? - A. I can't tell you, sir.  I don't
recall the match starting.

What was it - 'this is not on here but I will ask it -
that sparked the need for operational support and that
                                              D. G. DUCKENFIELD


is an incriminating question by the way?  I do not say
tend but you know what I mean. - A. It is difficult,
sir, isn't it? As a Policeman you look at situations
and you assess them.  I don't know.  Sometimes you do
things because you do them, don't you? That seems a
pretty poor answer in the circumstances but I can't
give you a better answer.

You told us I think in passing that you went to the
Directors' b o x . I asked you did you stay in the
Control Room and you said you stayed.    It was not the
box but the Directors' room.    What time was that can
you remember? - A. The only reason I know is probably
because Superintendent Murray, was it yesterday, said
that he came back to the Control Box about 3.30.     So I
presume I left when everything was running and I was
available to leave which was probably...

In fact that is the question.  Why did you go there if
there was an emergency situation? - A. I didn't.
Basically what happened was that the organisation was
set up and I had a message, and it was some time later
when things were organised, and it wasn't a case of
leaving a situation.  Obviously I left the Control
Box - it is arguable, isn't it - but it wasn't as
critical and Superintendent Murray came back.

Can you give any explanation to the Jury as to Why you
were not able to form an opinion about what was
occurring until after five past three? - A. No, if you
can imagine you are standing in a Control Box looking
out of a window at a situation and you look at
something and a gate opens, a gate opening in itself is
not unusual with the odd fan coming out and then it was
a case of "What's the situation here?" and it was a
progression from that and that is how I saw it.

When you wrote your briefing notes did you show them to
anyone with more experience for their opinion on
them? - A. No, I didn't, sir, actually.

Before the Semi Final took place did you consider
perhaps taking a back seat whilst somebody else with
more experience ran the show on this occasion? - A. My
view was that I had been given an assurance that the
plan was a good one, the team was the best available,
and the ground was safe as I said and so with that
knowledge of a safe ground, a good team and a good plan
that was the situation.

Just one other question I have on the issue of
contingencies J You have mentioned reserve serials and
things of that nature.  What in fact were they there
                                              D. G. DUCKENFIELD


for? - A. There are several reasons really.   For
instance, to give a for instance, we have mentioned
that probably people come from Barnsley or Rotherham
and it may well be at Barnsley or Rotherham they might
have a major incident such as a murder, a rape or
something else, and they just automatically remove from
our operation men from their local area to deal with a
local problem.   As a result, we need a reserve serial
to bring in.   That is one of the situations.  If we
find that there is a need for something on the day,
then we have spare men.   In addition to that when you
have 800 people it is distinctly possible somebody will
go sick with flu, or, not so much on Saturdays, people
can get called away to other jobs, sickness and what
have you.  So things do tend to vary and you need
reserve serials for the most wide-ranging of
eventualities.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.   Mr. Isaacs, would you
start?

     MR. ISAACS:  Sir, on one of the points from the
Jury, there was some evidence from Superintendent
Greenwood about the briefing notes and I think he said
in evidence that the briefing he heard given by Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield was what he would have
expected to hear.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

              Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS

Mr. Duckenfield, may I deal with the matters that I
want to ask you about in two ways, first of all,
dealing with the Operational Order and before the game
and then about the game and I shall deal with them
briefly? First of all, during any meeting or when you
asked any question, during any conversation with any of
the Officers we have heard from or about, Mr. Mole, Mr.
Sewell, Mr. Jackson, anybody else, did anybody suggest
any reason for you think that the Operational Order was
not a tried and tested and safe one? - A. No, sir.

Did anybody give you any reason to suppose that the
Leppings Lane terrace would not be safe for a full
capacity crowd? - A. No, sir.




             r
                                  /Q. Was Mr. Sewell.
                                      D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Was Mr. Sewell an experienced Officer, so far as
Hillsborough Football Ground was concerned? - A. Yes,
sir.

On your walk round the Ground did he give you any
indication that certain parts of the Ground, certain
features, were potential hazards? - A. No, sir.

Did any of the people that I have mentioned earlier, or
anybody else in any sort of capacity to whom you spoke,
suggest that any parts of the Ground were potential
hazards? - A. No, sir.

In particular, did Mr. Sewell ever say anything like
this as you walked round, "By the way, sir, these signs
giving directions are very small, fans may not be able
to find their way"?  Anything like that? - A. Nothing
like that was ever said, sir.

"By the way, sir, when this terrace starts to fill up
it is known to me that people quite often don't see
those gates at the back . Did he say anything like
that? - A. Nothing at all.

Did he say anything like this:  "By the way, sir, in
the event of you having to take an unprecedented,
unforeseen decision in a crisis to open an exit gate,
be warned that exit gate opens onto the tunnel"? - A.
No, sir.

Dealing with your ability to take control of this game,
having regard to your role, as I understand it from the
evidence that you and others have given that it was not
to make minute by minute operational decisions; having
regard to the experience of your team who would be
making those operational decisions; and having regard
to your experience in the Police Force, did you
consider that you were as well acquainted with the
Ground as you were likely to need to be in normal
circumstances? - A. Yes, sir.

Let us move on to the day.  Mr. Duckenfield, we have
heard a lot about monitoring for overcrowding.  You
have told us that you looked round the Ground, but as
overall Commander you did not have a specific role to
that effect, is that right? - A. Yes, sir.

But prior to the crisis developing, as you understood
it, outside the turnstiles when on the evidence your
attention was diverted, was there anything to suggest
to you, from what you saw or from what anybody said,
that the Leppings Lane centre pens were, in fact,
overcrowded to such an extent as to require some
action? - A . ‘No, sir.
                                      D. G. DUCKENFIELD

Did Mr. Murray suggest it? - A. No, sir.

Did you hear any message from Mr. Bullas to that
effect? - A. No, sir.

Did Sergeant Goddard, who we have heard is a reactive,
experienced Officer, did he suggest it? - A. No, sir.

When you looked at the terrace, were the signs on the
terrace completely normal? - A. There was normality,
sir.

During the course of these Inquests, Mr. Duckenfield,
certain people have made comparisons with what happened
in 1988.  You were not there in 1988 so you were not
able to make any direct comparison, but insofar as
there may have been differences between 1988 and 1989,
did anybody draw such differences to your attention? -
A. No, sir.

So far as what was happening outside the Leppings Lane
turnstiles is concerned, did any suggestion come from
Mr. Marshall that delay may be necessary? - A. No, sir.

Was there any suggestion from Mr. Marshall in his
original request as to why he wanted the gate opening?
- A. No, sir.

You have mentioned that the length of time that you had
to make your decision to open the gate between Mr.
Marshall's second request and your decision to open the
gates, prompted by Mr. Murray, was at the most three
minutes? - A. Yes, sir.

Doing the best we can, and I think we all understand
that it is difficult, what is the shortest amount of
time that you think it may have taken? - A. A minute
and a half, I don't know, sir.  Things were so
difficult.

You have been asked as to what may or may not have been
obvious.  What were you concentrating upon at that
time? - A. I was concentrating upon the enormity of
that decision that I found myself in, that I was being
told by a colleague, a very experienced one at that,
that if I did not open those gates that people would be
killed.

When you made that decision to give permission to open
the gates, we have heard that Mr. Marshall virtually
gave an order, Mr. Murray had already made his mind up,
but when you gave that permission what were you seeking
to do? - A. I was seeking to save people's lives.
                                       D. G. DUCKENFIELD

We know that you were not the only Officer in the
Control Box.  Mr. Murray told us a couple of days ago
that he could take consequential decisions.   He told us
he took none; he told us that he did not consider at
the time that there was any risk.   You have told us
your position but there were others there, there was
Sergeant Goddard there, and I am not suggesting to you
for a moment that Sergeant Goddard would have taken any
decision or given any order, of course not, but had he
considered there to be any risk to those in the central
pens by the decision that he could hear being made, do
you think he would have said anything to you, or to Mr.
Murray? - A. Sir, if it had crossed their minds they
would have obviously said something.

Did anybody say anything - Mr. Goddard, Mr. Ryan, Mr.
Bichard? - A. Nobody at all, sir, and I say this, I am
not in a situation of blaming anybody or passing the
buck, that is not my stance, what I am saying is that I
made the decision but possibly the enormity of the
decision enveloped us all.

Dealing with those other people in the Control Box with
you:  Mr. Murray, did you consider him to be a
competent Officer? - A. Mr. Murray was a very competent
Officer, sir.

Sergeant Goddard, experienced? - A. Sergeant Goddard I
have known all my service, an extremely competent, very
experienced Officer.

Mr. Ryan, Mr. Bichard, competent Officers? - A. Two
first class men, you couldn't wish for better.

And all familiar with the Ground? - A. Yes,   sir.

Now, I am thankful to Mr. Payne for this, but he
calculates that this morning you were asked questions
for approximately 100 minutes on 12 minutes of time,
between 14.48 and 3 o'clock? - A. Yes, sir.

During those 12 minutes of time almost two years ago,
did you think you would have to be remembering what had
taken place so that you could repeat it all almost two
years later? - A. No, sir.  In a crisis situation such
as that then all you concentrate upon is doing your
job, as I did trying to save lives, and doing your very
best, and the situation I find myself in today,
attempting two years later to bring to mind those
tragic events on that day, it is very hard indeed.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I hesitate to interrupt but it
was obviously a reference to my questioning, and
whether or not two years on he could remember.   I did
                                        D. G. DUCKENFIELD

offer the opportunity to this witness, which he
declined which he was entitled to, but I offered him
the opportunity to refresh his memory from the
statement he had made not long after the disaster, and
we were told that on advice he was not going to refer
to that or answer questions about it, so perhaps that
could be noted, sir, in the light of the question my
learned friend has chosen to put.

     MR. ISAACS:    The question that I put and what
was intended to be conveyed is that we spent this
morning, and indeed we have spent this afternoon,
though perhaps this morning is more appropriate, 100
minutes of time on 12 minutes almost two years ago.
That is the point.

     MR. KING:   Well,   I won't take it any further.




      THE CORONER:   That is what I understood
                                             D. G. DUCKENFIELD


      THE CORONER:     That is what I understood actually.

      MR. ISAACS:  I am obliged.
 You were asked this morning and shown a photograph,
 that is 326A, of a view.  Could you turn to that,
 please? - A. Yas, I have got it in front of me.

You said this morning that that was not the view vou
would have? - A. Yes.

I would like you to look at three other photographs,
please.  The first one is 439.  Mr. D u c k en f i e l d ,‘ you
will not have seen this before, I do not think.             This
shows the 1983 semi-final.  We can see that it is
4.20? - A. Yes sir.

We can see Leppings Lane terrace? - A. Yes.

And the crowd on it? - A. Yes sir.

And the crowd on Pen 6, do you see         it? -A. Yes    sir.

Could you turn over in the bundle and look at 490.  It
is the same game, as I understand it approximately the
same time, certainly during the game? - A. Yes sir.

We can sea the same crowd as we saw in 489, but this
time from a different view? - A. Yes sir.

As compared to the view of that same terrace in 326A,
how does the view that we see in 490 compare with the
view that you had from the Control Room? - A. In 490,
that is more realistic of the view that I had in the
Control Room.

We can see in 490 where Pen 6 would be, the area of a
full Pen 6, or what appears to be a full Pen 6? - A.
Yes sir.

We know from looking at 489 that Pen 6 was full? - A.
Yes sir.

Could I ask you now to look at 449? - A. Yes sir.

This is a photograph taken,      I think at 6 minutes past
3 in 1989? - A. Yes sir.

If you would look to where Pen 6 would be, which we
know at the time would have been almost empty? - A.
Yes sir.
          *
          t


What does it look like to you? - A. It looks full,
sir.
                                                           98

                                             D. G. DUCKENFIELD


Q.   As between the view in 326A and the view in 449, which
     is the view that closest approximates to the view that
     you would have had from the Control Box? - A. Sir,
     obviously the view in C449.

Q.   Mr. Duckenfield, when you were asked this morning
     certain questions about what your knowledge of the
     ground would have been from your walk round, you
     mentioned you knew where the tunnel was, that Gate C
     would lead onto the concourse, etc. You were taken
     through those things in sequence.  When you made that
     decision on Mr. Marshall's request in a crisis, did
     those things go through your mind in sequence in t'na
     way that Mr. King put them to you this morning? - A.
     Sir, when you are faced with such an enormous decision
     as I was, you do your best under the circumstances,
     and you realise that there is space in the concourse
     and that there is space to save people's lives.

          MR.   ISAACS:   Thank you vary much indeed.

          THE CQROHER: Mr. Duckenfield, thank you very much
     indeed for being here.  Members of the Jury, I will
     let you go in one minute.  There is just one point I
     want to make.  It is really a comment both to you and
     also to the press, or the media I think would be a
     better word.  Remember that the only evidence which is
     of any significance is what you hear here.   Clearly
     there may well be publications.   What may be published
     in the media is not the evidence.   The evidence is
     what you hear here.

           What I say to the media, of course you are
     entitled to publish within the normal rules, and I
     would not wish to stop that in any sense of th-? snr.l,
     but I do remind you that we are getting to tha eni of
     this Inquest and I do not wish to get into a situation
     where publication, either of matters which have
     happened in this Court or indeed other matters which
     may not immediately be apparent as being related to
     the subject matter of the Inquest, may possibly be
     construed as prejudicing the proceedings.   So I would
     ask all the people x^ho are in any way involved with
     media publications, plaase consider very carefully as
     to what, in fact, is published, whether it be reports
     from this Court, whether it be interviews, whether it
     be anything you like.   Once the Inquest is over then
     the issue of contempt and prejudice and problems with
     the Jury no longer apply, but for the sake of what is,
     in fact, probably a relatively short period of time
     now comp&red to what we have done, please bear that in
     mind.   I am not saying that anything has been
     published or said which I am criticising.   I am
 really just reminding everybody of the very ?r^at ne«d
 to avoid mistake in this field at this stage.

      So 10 o'clock tomorrow,     thank you.

             (In the absence of the J u r y )

          THE CORONER: Can I tell you what my plans for
tomorrow are, and then I will listen to anything which
you might wish to draw to my attention.         We are°going
to have Dr. Nicholl.         He is a statistician.  He will
come along tomorrow morning.         Then we have got five
witnesses - PC Harratt, Inspector Hemmingway, PC
M a a g h a n , PC Ibbotson and PC M.S. Smith, who are the
witnesses who are dealing really with specific
personal matters which are of concern to individual
f am i l i e s .

          We are going to have another lady called Dawn
Goodall.           She is, in fact, the plan drawer, the one
wno has done all the plans for us, and I am hoping
that she will bring with her the composite plan. °You
will remember all these witnesses who have marked
plans.          I have not seen it yet, but as far as I know
she has done it, so she is going to show it to us and
that will give me an opportunity to thank her for a
great deal of work that she has done.            I do not know
when I will take her because she has to go back to the
West Midlands, so I will fit her in wherever it is
c o n v e n i e nt .

     Hopefully tomorrow I will also read PC Smith's
statement, that is the perimeter track Smith.    I
cannot quite remember his Christian  name at the
moment, but you know who I mean.  I  hope to read his
statement.

     If we finish all these people tomorrow, then we
will review the situation as to what we do on Friday,
because that is it apart from Dr. Slater, who
unfortunately is not available and whom I only want to
call to dot two "I's" basically, not controversial in
any sense of the word and we cannot have him tomorrow.
If that is so and if we finish with these witnesses,
it looks as if we will either only have a very short
day on Friday, or possibly not even have to sit at
all.  That would not be too great a hardship.

     Mr. Isaacs, I take it you are still        in trouble
over Monday, would that be right?

     MR. ISAACS:  Sir, I am still in trouble on
Monday.  I will try to do whatever is convenient to
you and my colleagues.
      THE CORONER: I 'enow I can just say, "I am sorry
about it, Mr. Isaacs, I am going ahead", but I want to
avoid it.   I know how difficult it is to estimate
times.   I have failed abysmally for four months and
Mr. King encouraged me this morning by also not
getting it right, but can you give me an indication of
how long you estimate the legal submissions are going
to take, because I think depending on that will depend
what I say about Monday?




                       /MR.   ISAACS:   I was
      MR. ISAACS:   I was unfair to my learned friend,
Mr. Payne.    I have discussed the matter with him.    He
is going to be a lot shorter than I had envisaged.     I
was hopeful, having heard that, that we may well finish
if we do it in the way you suggested, namely, that each
person has their go, in the day.    I hope that is the
case.

     THE CORONER:   Do you think if I allowed two days
for the legal submissions, namely, Tuesday and Wednesday
- I am not saying we are going to take that long - but
are you going to exceed that period of time?

     MR. PAYNE:   I should think it is very unlikely.
To be constructive and helpful in view of the way the
timetable seems to be going, what I would respectfully
suggest is that it might be appropriate to put in any
written submissions that there are before the weekend.

     THE CORONER:   That would be very helpful because I
could read them over the weekend.

     MR. PAYNE:    I am grateful to that indication.   Now
that being so it will be necessary before the written
submissions go in to ask you for a ruling as to the
extent of the submissions.    We will need to allocate a
little time to do that before we know how much we are
allowed to put in.    I do not think it will be a very
difficult ruling myself but it is something which we do
need to get a decision about.

     THE CORONER:   I think it is quite difficult,
actually, but be that as it may.   I will come back to
that, Mr. Payne.

     Anything else on the general point about the timing
for the legal submissions?    What I want to do is that I
want to send the Jury out on Monday week because I do not
want to put them under time pressure to reach their
conclusions.    I want them to feel that if need be they
can overshoot and spend the night somewhere.    Hopefully
they will not overshoot another night, but in fact there
is space, if you like, in the week for them to do that.
I would prefer, if I possibly can, send them out sometime
on the Monday morning, which means if we can get our
submissions done on Tuesday and Wednesday, I can start on
my summing-up on Wednesday and Thursday, then I think we
should be on target with timing and we should finish
these Inquests before Easter in fact.    That is what I
want to do.   Is that acceptable?   Does that sound
reasonable?   Nobody has got any complaint about that?
     Does anybody want to address me on the point
Mr. Payne has raised, namely, where do you draw the line
between questions of fact and issues of law?

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, what I would respectfully suggest
is that the best use of time, certainly from my point of
view, would be if I were to invite you over the
adjournment tonight to re-read and remind yourself about
the case of Queen and Galbraith, of which I can hand in a
copy which, as I understand it, is the most up-to-date
ruling about the relevant considerations where there is a
submission of no case to answer, which seems to be the
appropriate criteria.

        THE CORONER:    Have you a copy of that?

     MR. PAYNE:   I have got a copy and perhaps if I put
that in overnight, the submissions could be more direct
and to the point.

        THE CORONER:    Yes, we can deal with them tomorrow.

     MR. KING:   Can I just say, and it is no fault of
anybody's, but it is now five minutes to five, sir, and I
for one am in certain professional difficulties now.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, fair enough.   We will conclude
the matter tomorrow.    We have got Friday in hand,
anyway.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    Sir, can I mention very briefly,
the Zeebrugge case, ex parte Spooner, may also be of some
assist ance to you, since it certainly contemplates
submissions of the kind I think my learned friend
Mr. Payne is referring to.    It may be worthwhile
refreshing your memory.

     THE CORONER:   I have got a copy of that.   The
other one which you mentioned, Mr. Payne, I haven't got a
copy of.

     MR. PAYNE:   Have you got a copy of the decision of
the judge in the case Mr. Catchpole is referring to?

     THE CORONER:        Mr. Justice Turner do you mean?    I
think I have.

        MR. PAYNE:     Yes, his decision on Day 20.

        THE CORONER:     I have got something.

        MR. PAYNE:     I have got a spare copy of that as
well.
                                                                    103
A

            THE CORONER:   If you could let me have a spare copy
       I will be able to tell straight away whether I have
       already seen that.

           MR. KING:   Given it is a legal matter, sir, I _have
B     been trying to trace a copy of that for some time without
      success.   I wonder if possibly I could have a copy also?

               THE CORONER:    Mr. Payne, you would not object to
       that?

               MR. KING:   I am obliged,    sir.

           MR. PAYNE:   If submissions are going to be put in,
      it would be helpful if they were put in by everybody.
      What I don't want to do - well, the implications of that
      are obvious.

           THE CORONER:   I think Mr. King is merely saying he
      would like to read the Judgment.

            MR. KING:   Absolutely.  I am talking about the law,
D   sir.   I am very willing to lend my copy of Smith and Hogan
    in return, sir!

               THE CORONER:    Very well.

                    (The Inquests were adjourned until
                    ten o^clock the following morning,)




H
