                                                                                                M I R . 15


                                                                                                                         \   6?>
     OTHEFJ-DOCUMENT f o r m                        Date and tim e raised                                    Num ber



     T itle   ~ T pw saggjP T       £x-            iij~                                                           Si_
     Hbcliidk sohrce and any document number if relevant)                   (i-CSL.        ^ (-hL)
C*             Ji
     Receiver’ s instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                             Receiver




                                                                                                                               Indexer
     D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

     No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                        Statement Reader
     Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                               Indexer
      Indexed as indicated

     No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                        O /M         SIO
      Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                        r-



                                                                                                                               Indexer
      F urther action No(s)


     When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master N um ber Form
    I




          HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE


•
                       (WEST DISTRICT)



                INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

             VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                        STADIUM DISASTER

                    ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



                   INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                    GARY CHRISTOPHER CHURCH




                             Before

        DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci. B M , B S , MRCGP

                     (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                               At

                    The Medico-Legal Centre,
                         Watery Street,
                           Sheffield.

                               On

                           2nd May 1990




                    TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




             From the Notes of J.L. Harpham. Ltd.,
                  Official Shorthand Writers,
              55. Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                    A

                                                          INDEX


                        DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Called

                    B    By THE C O R O N E R .........................................    2



                        POLICE INSPECTOR MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS - Called

                          By THE C O R O N E R ............................................^
                          Cross-Examined by MR. FRAS ER ............................. 5



                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                          By THE C O R O N E R ....................................   •-   6

                    D


                                                        -oo — oo-


                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        2nd May 1990

                               INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF GARY CHRISTOPHER CHURCH

                                 MR. FRASER:       The evidence to be presented to you now
                           relates to Gary Christopher Church.       Gary's father is in.
                           Court.     His mum is not in the best of health and has decided
                           not to make the trip from Liverpool today but her thoughts
                           are here.       I represent the family in a personal capacity and
                    B      also on the usual basis through the agency of the Steering
                           Commi t t e e .

                                THE CORONER:   Mr. Church, I am sorry to hear your wife
                           is not very well.  Please remember us to her and tell her it
                           was a perfectly right decision not. to put herself under any
                           more stress by coming all this way.   I am glad you are here
                           because you will be able to recount to her what you hear
                           this afternoon.

                                I will briefly outline what we are going to do.    I am
                           going to read to you what was said on the 18th April 1989 in
                           this Courtroom and then we are going to deal with the blood
                           alcohol level.   I am going to tell you what those are.
                           Dr. Slater, who is a Pathologist, will corne and give us the
                           pathological evidence relating to your son and then we will
                    D      hear from the Officers who are going to present summaries to
                           me, first of all, on the evidence and then Inspector Layton
                           will deal with the visual evidence.

                                He will describe it in the first instance and then he
                           will come over here and show us on the big plans what it is
                           heis actually talking about because it makes it a lot
                           easier to understand.  Then when I have done that we will
                    E      conclude the evidence.

                                This then is the resumed Inquest which was opened on
                           18th April 1989 and on that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin,
                           Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

                                "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                                identified to PC 1638 Lindop of the South Yorkshire
                                Police as that of Gary Christopher Church by Anthony
                                Owen, his friend-     He was 19 years of age having been
                                born on 31st December 1969 at Liverpool- He was a
                                single rnan and he 1 ived at ___________________________
                                Liverpool.     He was a joiner by occupation-   He died at
                                Hillsborough Football Ground following an incident
                                there on Saturday, 15th April 1989.      PC Lindop caused
                    G           the body to be removed to the Medico Legal Centre and
                                there he identified it to Detective Constable Simon
                                Weigold who subsequently identified the same body to
                                Dr. Slater.     It is the family wish that the body should
                                be buri e d ."



                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER



                                 I wrote to you, Mr. Church, didn't I? On 25th April
                            1939 you signed a form.  I don't know whether you still
                            remember that but you did and you confirm that all the
                            information which I have given regarding Gary, name,
                            address, age and so on is correct.

                                 Dr. Forrest did the blood alcohol estimations in
                            respect of Gary and as far as he is concerned the result was
                            negative.  Now we are going to listen to Dr. Slater.
                    B
                                        DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER ~ Called

                                                 Bv THE CORONER:

                        Q. Dr- Slater. - A. My name is David Neil Slater.  I am a
                           Consultant Histopathologist and a Fellow of the Royal
                           College of Pathologists.

                        Q. You are now going to tell me, aren't you, about the young
                           man who you identified as Gary Church?  Is that right?
                        A. Yes.

                        Q. And his identification number was 14- He was identified to
                           you in the first instance by Detective Inspector Timms
                           though we have got it reported as Simon Wei gold- There is
                    D      no question about it in your mind that the lad you are
                           talking about is Gary Church? - A- Gary's body was clearly
                           labelled by both name and number, sir.

                        Q   Would you be kind enough to take me through the post mortem
                            findings? - A. My examination of Gary showed that the main
                            finding was that of asphyxia.  This was indicated by the
                    E       presence of extensive blueness to the face extending to the
                            chest.  In addition there were numerous small, so-called
                            petechial, haemorrhages in the face-  Similar haemorrhages
                            were also present in the internal organs including the heart
                            and also the lungs.  The asphyxia had resulted from
                            compression of the chest and this was evidenced primarily by
                            a large dislocation of the bone between the clavicle and the
                            breast bone on the right side.




                    G



                        Q. As is common with all these cases you would take the view

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                 P.I. MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS



                          that Gary would have lost consciousness immediately? That
                          is right, isn't it? - A. That is so.  The sequence would
                          have been, sir, a rapid loss of consciousness within
                          seconds, if not indeed virtually instantaneously and then no
                          further feeling of pain or discomfort having lost
                          consciousness and then death after three or five minutes.

                                THE CORONER:     Mr. Fraser.

                    B           MR. FRASER:      No questions,   sir, thank you.

                                MR. CATCHPOLE:      No questions,   sir.

                                POLICE INSPECTOR MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS - Called

                                                   Bv THE CORONER:

                        Q. Mr. Sawe'rs. - A- Matthew Robert Sawers, Inspector, West
                           Midlands Police.   I am already sworn, sir-

                        Q. Inspector Sawers, can you help me with the case of Gary.-1
                        A- At approximately 0920 hours on Saturday, 15th April 1989,
                           Mr- David George Church saw his son, Gary Christopher
                           Church, leave the family home with the intention of
                    D      travelling to Sheffield.    Gary Church ;was known to have a
                           ticket for the Cup Semi Final football match which was to be
                           played at the Hillsborough Stadium that day.     He travelled
                           1 :0 Sheffield with Mr. Anthony Owen and other friends in a
                           minibus arriving at 1410 hours.

                                The party made their way on foot towards the ground
                           and on the way met up with other friends including Mr. James
                    E      Thomas.  It is true to say, sir, the evidence of this
                           witness has previously been referred to in that the group of
                           friends included Gary Church, Christopher Devonside and
                           Simon Bell, all of whom lost their lives at Hillsborough.
                           They joined the mass of people waiting to enter the ground
                           and then entered by turnstile C before going down the tunnel
                           and into Enclosure No. 3.

                                At 1504 hours when Beardsley hit the crossbar there was
                           a surge in the crowd which resulted in James Thomas and Gary
                           being forced forwards and up against the crush barrier
                           within the enclosure.  Mr- Thomas could see that Gary was in
                           distress and then he felt the crush barrier bending before
                           it gave way-  Gary fell underneath a crowd of spectators and
                           Mr- Thomas did not see him again.
                    G           At 1525 hours, following the severe crushing in the
                           West Stand terracing, Police Constables Webster and Haigh
                           carried Gary from Enclosure No. 3 and on to the pitch where
                           they unsuccessfully attempted to revive him-  They left him
                           to assist others.  He was then placed on a temporary
                           stretcher and carried across the pitch by persons who have

                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                P.I. MATTHEM ROBERT SAWERS



                           not been identified and into the gymnasium where a temporary
                           mortuary had been set up.

                                At the gymnasium Police Constable Lindop assumed
                           responsibility for Gary's body.  At 1553 hours, Dr. Matthew
                           Bull examined Gary and certified life extinct.

                                At 2255 hours Anthony Francis Owen identified G a r y ’s
                           body to Police Constable Lindop in the temporary mortuary at
                    B      the gymnasium.  Police Constable Lindop later escorted
                           Gary's body here to the Medico Legal Centre and confirmed
                           the identification to Detective Constable Weigold.

                                At about 1300 hours on Sunday, 16th April 1989, Mr.
                           David George Church confirmed the identification of his son
                           to Detective Constable Kinsella.

                                On Sunday, 16th April, following identification again
                           by Detective Constable Weigold, Dr. David Slater carried out
                           an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of death.

                        Q. Just one or two small points, in paragraph two you refer to
                           turnstile C.  That is not Gate C, that is right, it is page
                           eight I think you will find?  It took me a little while to
                    D      appreciate that when I read it? - A- Yes, sir, the middle of
                           the page.  The witness refers specifically to being pushed
                           to turnstile C which was set apart.

                        Q. Yes.  Although he says it was set apart, “I handed my ticket
                           in at the turnstile and went in” , d o e s n ’t he? - A- Yes, that
                           is correct.

                    ®   Q- There were several turnstiles labelled A to G, weren't
                           there, so there must have been one which had a C on it?
                        A- That is correct, sir, yes.

                        Q- I only say this because we might be thinking we are talking
                           about Gate C-   On t-hat page he says they arrived at the
                           ground at 2.25-   Have you said that? - A- He does, sir, yes.

                        Q- If you look at Jarnes Thomas' evidence, page 17? - A- Yes-

                        Q. He talks about turnstile B, that is the paragraph in the
                           middle of the page.  Can you see it halfway down the page?
                        A- Yes, sir.

                        Q. He says, "By the time we all met up again it was about
                    Q      2-45", is that right? - A- He does say that, sir, yes.

                        Q- In fact he also says, "I did not see any gates open other
                          . than the turnstiles"? - A- That is correct, sir, yes-




                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                         P.I. MICHAEL LAYTON



                             Cross-Examined by HR- FRASER;

    Q- 0 fficer, the meeting up again at         it is not terribly
       C L03.1? V
                .O CVHB• Is that inside the ground or outside it? -

                 THE CORONER:      Page   17 I was referring you to.
         B
                 THE WITNESS:   It is true to say, sir, a number of
             eople had met outside the ground some time ac about quarter
             o tw o .

    Q-            THE CORONER:   It might help you, if you look at page
              7, and find the centre paragraph, “the two turnstiles", can
             'ou see that? - A- Yes-

    Q.   Fhree lines down,       "I handed my ticket in"? - A- Yes.

    Q.    f you read down to 2-45 I think there is the answer for
         Hr. Fraser.  Can you read it? - A. "It took about ten
         minutes to get through the turnstiles.   I handed my ticket
          n retaining the stub and once inside the ground I waited
         and met up with others who had all entered through the
    D    turnstiles with tickets for the terraces.   By the time we
         had all met up it was about 2.45 p.m."

                MR - FRASER:      That has cleared it up.    Thank you,
         Of f icer -

                 MR. LIMB:      No questions, sir-
    E
                 MR. CATCHPOLE:      No questions.

              THE CORONER:   That was just in James Thomas'            statement
         so that we know where it comes dated 6-7.89.

                   DETECTIVE INSPECTOR M ICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                                    By THE CORONER:

    Q. Mr. Layton. - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
       West Midlands Police.  Sir, an examination has been made of
       video and photographic evidence and Gary has been identified
       alive in Enclosure No. 3 on a video referenced MAP 1 timed
       at 1456:31:05 and also subsequently being removed from the
       terraces.

              James Thornas has indicated on a plan of the. terraces
         the position in which he found Gary prior to losing sight of
         him following the large surge from the crowd.    He has
         indicated the position on the plan by the letter C-     That
         plan is referenced J T 2 .

                 PCs Webster and Haigh confirm their identification on
H
                                            5
                                                                       P. I. MICHAEL LAYTON



                            the video, a BBC video again, sir, again MAP 1 timed at
                            1525:53:02 and at that stage they are carrying Gary on to
                            the pitch.  lir. Church, G a r y ’s father, has viewed some of
                            the visual evidence and confirmed the identification
                            relating to his son-

                                 Perhaps I can just say, sir, on a personal note to view
                            the visual evidence was a particularly difficult decision
                    B       for Mr. Church but nevertheless he chose to view the visual
                            evidence to assist us and, in fact, we were abli to conf 1 rm
                            the identifications.

                        Q. Thank you very much for saying that. - A. Sir, can I refer
                           you to a plan which is referenced MWJL1/30, which is a plan
                           of the terraces?

                        Q. C214. - A. Arid then JT2 I believe it is, the plan by James
                           Thomas.

                        Q. Is it this one? - A- Yes, it is, sir, and it is the one
                           referred to in the summary showing position C I believe.  If
                           I can just double   check that, sir-  It shows   anumber of
                           positions in fact   in addition to that one-
                    D   Q. Can I just have a   look? Just, bear with me for a moment
                           because I am not sure whether we haven't gotenough just by
                           using your plan.  Just allow rne to have a look.   I arn
                           inclined to think that we don't need it-   The only trouble
                           is that we have referred to it in the summary, haven't we?
                        A We have, sir, yes.

                    E   Q   I ,suppose we had better exhibit it then, hadn't we? C215.
                            It doesn't add very much to what we have already got but it
                            is C215.   I think I am right in saying the base of the p ian
                            is standard but it is prepared by a lay person who is u - y m
                            to help us? - A. That is right.   It is not the usual format

                        Q. You will have to show us all the points on that plan? -
                        A. (moving to plan) I think, sir, in that case that is perhaps
                           the one I should refer to first.

                        Q. This is James Thomas' plan? - A. Yes, JT2 I think it. is
                           referred to as, sir.  I don't believe there is a reference
                           on there but I am sure in the summary it is referred to as
                           JT2 .

                        Q. Yes, it is, J T 2 . Before you start, I think what Jarnes is
                           trying to do is that he is trying to do a diagrammatic
                           drawing of how he came down the tunnel and where he
                           remembers they were? - A. That is right, sir, it is a little
                           difficult to follow.    As I read it, sir, position 1 on the
                           plan James Thomas intended to stand - do you want me to read
                           the wording he has put on the plan?


                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                         P. I. MICHAEL LAYTON



                        Q. I think.it is easier if you start at the bottom and work
                           upward where he starts with C? - A- He has written here,
                           "position at which crushing started, position C" and on this
                           plan it is indicated in this position here in Enclosure No.
                           3.  He refers to the figure 3 and says "position after being
                           carried by crowd".        In fact I am sorry, sir, he refers to an
                           arrow then, "pulled out of gate" and refers to an arrow in
                           that direction there.        This is Gate 3.  Then he goes to No.
                    B      3, "position after being carried by crowd" and he indicates
                           there ( ind icat in g ) • Then there is a dotted line which is
                           I am sorry but it is a little bit. confusing.

                        Q. It is a little confusing I know and that is why I was
                           reluctant to use it. ~ A. It says, "movement after barrier
                           broke with feet off ground" and he indicates a flow
                           basically from here to here ( indicat- ing) • Then the next-
                           thing is, "direction of James Thomas during crush within Pen
                           3" and he has got a straight line with an arrow.

                        Q. I donttt think you need worry about that because he is
                           talking about himself? - A- That is right, yes.   Perhaps the
                           most important is that he has got "letter A, position of
                           Gary Church when crush barrier broke" and he has
                           specifically referred to Gary being in that position there,
                    D      the dotted line when the barrier broke.   Then he refers
                           again to James Thomas and I don't know whether you want
                           that .

                        Q. No, I don't think we need that.        Those are positions •p   -



                        A. It looks like a 2 and a 1, sir.        They are for James Thomas.

                        Q- If we look at this plan sensibly, the only position that is
                           of any relevance to Gary is the one he has marked as A?
                        A. Yes, that is right.

                        Q. So can you put your mark on that? - A. Yes.

                        Q. I wonder whether it would be sensible if you produced
                           another plan which we can give a number to? We can give a
                           number to it now C216 and we will give it the correct West
                           Midlands reference when we have it on which you mark. - -
                        A. Gary's position.  I think that would be easier to follow,
                           sir.

                        Q.   It would be. a lot  easier to follow because he is describing
                             himself rather than Gary? - A. That is right,      sir-
                    G                THE CORONER:     Is that satisfactory, gentleman and
                             lady,    if we do it that way?

                                     MR- FRASER:   Yes, sir-

                                  THE WITNESS:   In relation to MWJL1/30 there are two
                             identifications.  The first is the video identification and
                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                           P.I. MICHAEL LAYTON



I think it was timed at 1456, sir-   The position shown there
again is in Enclosure No- 3 and it is in this position here
(indicat ing) • If you can just give roe a second to double
check that time.   It is 1456:31:05 and the second position
relates to the photographic identification and the
photograph PR1/8A is timed at 1503 and that photograph I
believe is in this position here (indicat ing) approximately.
In other words, in front of now as opposed to the other
ones.

That James gave? - A. That is right.  Just a point I didn't
mention earlier, in respect of the photograph PR1/8A my
perception of the photograph is that at that stage Gary is
still alive but I can't say at what stage of the medical
process we have had described that he has reached-

     MR. FRASER:      No questions, sir, thank you.

     MR. LIMB:     No questions-

     MR. CATCHPOLE:      No questions-

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Church, just to come back to this
plan, what we are going to is that Inspector Layton will
produce one.  On the whole the plans are produced in a nice
standard with coloured spots so that we can find our way
around them and he will do that in respect of James' plan
but he will only put the one mark on which refers to Gary
because that is the only one we are really interested in.
We will leave it as we have referred to it.  It will be with
all the papers in due course.

     That is all the evidence we are going to take in
respect of Gary.   May I say how very, very sorry I am that
Gary should have lost his life in these tragic
circumstances.   I arn exceedingly sorry for you and I arn
obviously very sorry for your wife and the fact that she is
ill clearly doesn't make it any easier for her and I don't
suppose for a minute it makes it any easier for you.     I
would be very grateful, in addition to what I have already
said to you to convey to her, if you would wish her the best
of health.   I don't know what is wrong with her but whatever
it is I hope she will improve and that she will feel better.

     As I have already said on my own behalf and everybody
else we are very sorry.  At these Inquests we have to deal
with all these plans and the technicalities but at this
point I like to pause and say, “Yes, that is okay.  We have
dealt with all the evidence but now we pause and think for a
moment that we are talking about your son" and I want you to
realise that I am conscious of that.  Thank you for being
here.

     Ladies and gentlemen, we will pause for a few minutes.
                        We will have a cup of tea or whatever and then we will
                        resume in ten or fifteen minutes, something of that order.
                        Is that satisfactory?

                             MR. FRASER:   Yes, sir-

                         (The Inquest, into the death of Gary Christopher Church
                                 was ad 1ourned until a date to be fixed)
                    B




                    c




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G
i




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
