                                                                                                                         &

                                                 OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR      MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                 WATERY STREET
                                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE         SHEFFIELD
                                                              (West District)
                                                                                 S3 7ET
                    STEFAN L. POPPER, LLB., B.MED.Sci.. B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                                 CORONER


                                                                 (0742) 738721
                                                                                  27Wi-"Seipt:emBer""19"*91" v
                                                                                         ■■ ■■■■• ■■, .■ ■■■■ *::■ "■ ■■.....

          SLP/JT.


                                                                                   '                           ‘                    *■ '


             ■> ■   ...                                        ■A--

                                                                                        ■■   ■■■■ ■ ■■■■                        ■

          Dear Colleague,


          I have recently been approached by the father of one of the deceased at'
          Hillsborough to inquire what steps if any I was taking with regard to making
          available material, documentation and papers including photographs etc.,
          relating to or arising out of the Hillsborough Disaster.

          He told me that he had been making sopie personal inquiries and has  ?   '
          discovered that a considerable amount of material is available in relation to
          the Ibrox and Bolton Disasters and as I understood him he appeared to be able
          to obtain copies of some of this material, if he so wished.

          I am of course aware that generally speaking, coronal papers are not
          disclosed to the general public for a period as specified in the appropriate
          Act subject to the exceptions with which we are all familiar. It is also of
          course possible for a coroner to give specific consent to allow access to
          coronal papers.

          The matter is fairly complex because in addition to the coronal inquiries
          there may have been public inquiries as well as inquiries by or on behalf of
          the D.P.P. the Police Complaints Authority, the Health & Safety Executive and
          Air Accident Investigators, quite apart of course from any private inquiries
          and investigations undertaken by the parties themselves.                  .

          The material which becomes available following a major disaster seems to me
          to fall into the following classes s-

                    1.    Coronal papers proper i.e., transcripts, documents admitted
                           under Rule 37 and exhibits at the inquests.

                2.        Statements, photographs, documents, videos etc., on which the
                           evidence contained in the documentation referred to in No.1
                           above was based.

                3.        Other statements, documents, photographs, videos, tape recordings
                           or other material which was available but was not used in the
                           coronal proceedings.

                4.        Documents etc., which were collected on behalf of or prepared for the
                          D.P.P. or the public inquiry, whether or not these were also made
                           available to the coroner.




  R8606
LESABA
'   ,"4    r 5t   Intra-office papers e.g., correspondence, minutes of meetings etc.

  'in addition to the coroner, the Chairman of the Public Inquiry, the D.P.P.,
   the Police Complaints Authority and the police themselves who have taken the
   statements, there may be other parties who may have interests in some of the
" material e.g. , B.B.C. or I.T.V. in respect of T.V. footage.         . '- ,

     On the other hand, I think it is probably right to say that with events which
     we class as major disasters, there is a considerable argument for saying that
     the material relating to this event should not only be preserved but should
     also be made available for historical purposes, r e s e a r c h , and preventative
      reasons,

      I would be most interested to know whether you have had any similar
      approaches from anybody in relation to the disasters in which you were
      connected.                                     _ •

      Whether or not you have had such an approach, I would be most interested to
      learn whether you have any views with regard to the inquiry, the disclosure
      of the material in whole or in part., or any other comments relating to this
      matter.

      One thought that has, crossed my mind (bearing in mind the somewhat complex
      nature of the situation) is whether_there might not be some advantage in
      discussing the issue with the public, records office or one of the major
      museums with a view to them taking over the material, sorting out with
      various interested parties the rights and wrongs of disclosure and perhaps
      even setting up what one might describe as a Major Disaster Section where
      material from several of the major disasters could be collated and collected
      with a view to having in one place this sort of information available for
      inspection, subject to such restrictions as might be appropriate or agreed.

      It may well be that there will be some material, e.g., personal
      correspondence or other matters which may be deemed to be of such a
      confidential nature that it should not be included in such a venture or that
      its disclosure be restricted for the appropriate period of time allowed for
      in the Public Records Act.

          I look forward to hearing from you in due course.


          Yours g^ncerely.




          S. L.Popper,
          H.M.Coroner.


          c.c. Dr.   P.   Chambers.
               Dr.   P.   Knapman.
               Mr.   R.   Sturt.
               Mr.   J.   Turnbull.
               Mr.   P.   Tomlinson.
                                                 30th September


SLP/JT.


Mr. L. Gorodkin,
H.M.Coroner,
Fire Statical Buildings,
London load,
Mancheat«r. M'
Dear Mr. Gorodkin,
I h m written the attached letter to your colleagues,m   you will
see on the circulation list. As you dealt with the Manchester Air
Disaster, I would appreciate any ooMents which you would viah to
oak*.
Yours sincerely,


S.L.Popper,
H.M.Coroner.
         A
  t




                                                            27th September        91




         SLP/JT.




         Mr. J.D.K. Burton,
         H.M.Coroner,
         77 Fulham Palace Road,
         London.W.6.


         Dear John,

         IDENTIFICATION OF VICTIMS IN MAJOR DISASTERS.

         Neither Lord Justice Taylor nor I dealt with one matter which caused
         considerable concern to many of the relatives, namely, the identification of
         victims following the Hillsborough Disaster.

         There are two limbs to this:-

             a.    the identification and procedures at the temporary mortuary and

             b.    the further viewing/identification of victims at the Medico-Legal
                   Centre.

         You will appreciate that as far as the inquests were concerned, these matters
         were strictly outside my powers and Lord Justice Taylor did not feel that it
         was necessary for him to deal with the matter either.  The complaints that I
         seem to recollect (not necessarily exhaustive) were as follows:-

             a.    That the bereaved had to wait for a considerable period of time
                   before it was possible to allow them to start identifying their
                   loved ones.

             b.    That the choice of the temporary mortuary was unsuitable.

             c.    That the viewing of photographs caused pain to the bereaved.

             d.    That the bodies when presented for identification were in body bags
                   and had not yet been cleaned up or tidied up (I believe in fact
                   some attempt was made but as you will know, a sero-sanguinous
                   fluid can leak from a dead body even after it has been cleaned).

             e.    That not enough time was allowed for relatives to stay with their
                   loved ones and to handle and touch them.

             f.    That statements were taken of identification immediately after the
                   viewing.

             g.    That there was not enough privacy.

TAYAAA
                           2




   h.    That when the bodies came to the Medico-Legal Centre the viewing
         arrangements did not allow the touching of the bodies because
         of the glass partition which was built into the viewing room.

    i.     That again there was not enough time with the deceased andall
         the people had to wait a long time for viewing.

    j.   That in some instances, officers involved were rude or curt with
         people.

Whether or not these criticims have any substance is not the purpose of this
letter. In fact I think that the viewing arrangements with the use of
photographs to save people having to look for their loved one amongst 95 dead
bodies   were a very major improvement, but what I am interested  iniswhether
you think that the Coroners’ Society ought to consider setting    upa
sub-committee with a view to thinking about the best possible methodology for
dealing with viewing and identification of deceased people in a major
disaster situation.

I am of course aware that once the body is handed over to the families there
is no reason why they should not have as much time as they wish with the
deceased but in practice, however fast one acts, a few days is likely to have
elapsed and it may be too late for the people involved.

Yours sincerely,




S.L.Popper,
H.M.Coroner.
                                                      7th October         91




     SLP/JT.
     PAK/ER.




     Paul A. Knapman,
     H.M.Coroner,
     Inner West London,
     Westminster Coroner’s Court,
     Horseferry Road,
     London.SW1P 2ED.

     Dear Paul,

     Thank you very much for your letter of the 2nd of October.   I have noted what
     you say.


     Yours sincerely,




         S .L.Popper,
         H.M.Coroner.




TAYAAK
Telephone: 071-834 6515                                   WESTMINSTER CORONERS COURT
Facsimile: 071-828 2837                                         HORSEFERRY ROAD
                                                                LONDON SW1P 2ED

                                  HER MAJESTY’S CORONER
                                     INNER WEST LONDON



     Your Ref: SLP/JT                                       2nd October 1991
     Our Ref: PAK/ER


     Stefan L Popper Esq
     H.M. Coroner for South Yorkshire
     Medico-Legal Centre
     Watery Street
     Sheffield
     S3 7ET




     Thank you for your letter.


    My view is only the evidence of the inquest (i.e. transcript plus admitted
     documents) should be available, i.e. item 1.


    By all means keep the rest for your private historical purposes, but it is
    the beginning of a slippery slope....




    Paul A Knapman
    H.M. Coroner
    Inner West London
                                                           7th October         91




         SLP/JT
         RS/KB/CORONERSHIP




         R.H.B. Sturt,
         H.M.Coroner for County of Kent,
         (Canterbury & Dover District),
         34 & 36 Castle Street,
         Dover,
         Kent CT16 1PN


         Dear Richard,

         Re: ARCHIVAL MATERIAL.

         Thank you very much for your letter of the 2nd of October, the contents of
         which I have read with interest.

         I have heard from Paul Knapman and am awaiting the views of others.

         I thank you very much indeed for replying so promptly. I had hoped to see you
         at the annual dinner but unfortunately it was not to be.




         Yours sincerely,




         S .L .Popper,
         H.M.Coroner.




                                                                                         i
TAYAAJ
. R.H.B. STURT, M.A.(CANTAB)                               34 & 36 CASTLE STREET
H.ty. CORONER FOR COUNTY OF KENT                                    DOVER
  (CANTERBURY & DOVER DISTRICT)                                      KENT
     TELEPHONE 0304 240250                                        CT16 1PN
         FAX 0304 240040                                             ALSO AT
                                                                68 CASTLE STREET
                                                                  CANTERBURY
                                                                     KENT
                                                                    CT1 2QB




      Our ref: RS/KB/CORONERSHIP                         2nd October, 1991
      Your ref: SLP/JT

      Dear Stefan,

          Thank you for your letter of the 27th September.   As you
     know, I have a mini museum in my attic where all my Zeebrugge
     archives are stored, and I have recently added the Royal
     Marines material to it.     The intention has been to allow
     seriously interested students to have the papers available for
     historical research, but I am bound to say that no-one has
     approached me with a request to go through it.   I am not sure
     that the idea of a central archive is a particularly good one.
     It might become a hunting ground for ghouls.

          I frequently get requests from people wanting to pursue a
     particular case.   I had one only recently, who was conducting
     a campaign against St. Augustine's Mental Hospital and wanted
     to look at the papers of an Inquest conducted by my
     predecessor in the 1970s      for the purpose of gathering
     ammunition.  I refused him permission to have such access and
     he made quite a nuisance of himself.     We therefore vet all
     such applications very carefully to ensure that the inquirer
     has a bona fide academic interest in what is required.     You
     might like to know that TVS supplied me with a video of a good
     deal of the highlights from their new coverage of my Zeebrugge
     Inquest and I have this video in my archives.

             Hope you are keeping well.   Kindest regards.

                                      Yours sincerely,




                                      R .H .B . Sturt
                                      H.M. Coroner for Kent
                                      Canterbury & Dover District

     S.L. Popper, Esq., LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.,
     H.M. Coroner for South Yorkshire
     (West District),
     Medico-Legal Centre,
     Watery Street,
     SHEFFIELD, S3 7ET
                                                                          idl'b




                                                           14th October        91



         SLP/JT.




         Mr. R. Wells,
         Chief Constable,
         South Yorkshire Police,
         Headquarters,
         Snig Hill,
         Sheffield.

         Dear Mr. Wells,

         Re HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER.

         I have had a telephone conversation with Mr. Devonside, the parent of one of
         the lads who died. He is very anxious to prepare for his own nuances as I
         understand it, a series of photographs of the disaster.  He assures me that
         he does not want any shots of individuals, it is more general scenes than
         specifics.

         What he would like to do is to go through the bundle of photographs and pick
         out a number he thinks maybe between 20 and 40 at the very most and then
         obtain copies of these. A large number of photographs are of course South
         Yorkshire Police photographs and others were taken by various other people.
         Would you have any objection to Mr. Devonside either looking through the
         photographs at Police Headquarters (I assume that you have sets of copies) or
         alternatively if you made arrangements for him to view them here, so that he
         could identify those which he might find helpful.

         I would be grateful if I could hear from you on this as soon as possible.


         Yours sincerely,




         S.L.Popper,
         H.M.Coroner.




TAYABB
                                                                                          jTZsuXv
DEPUTY CORONER. & ASSISTANT DEPUTY CORONER COYER.

TTTT.T.R'RO'ROTJGH PREPARATION AND INQUEST C0 7 SR FROM ^ . 1 0 . 9 0 - 2 8 . 3 . 9 1 .



3 - 10.90
   .
1 9 10.00
24.10.90
25.10.90
2 6 .1 0 .9 0
31.10.90
1 .1 1 .9 0
  .
2 11.90
7.11.90
8 .11.90
9.11.90
12 .11.90
1 4 .11.90
15.11.90
16 .11.9 0                                              == 3 weeks
19.11.90            -   19.12.90        Inauests )
27 -2 8 .1 2 .9 0                                   ^ == 4 weeks
31 .1 2 .9 0 - 28.3.91.                                   13 weeks

                                                          20 weeks
HILLSBOROUGH                           STEERING                COMMITTEE
                       Castle Chambers, Cook Street, Liverpool L2 9SH
                        Tel: 051 255 0628 Fax: 051 236 0047 DX 14100




Dr Popper,                                                   30th April 1991
Medico Legal centre,                                         EMS/DW
Watery Street,
SHEFFIELD   S3 7ET




Dear Dr Popper,

I noticed in the Press at the weekend that you will shortly be retiring from your
Office as Sheffield Coroner.

I would like to take the opportunity both on my own behalf on behalf of the rest
of the Steering Committee and our clients thanking you for your kindness in the
past and to wish you every happiness and success in the future.

It has been a very long two years since the Hillsborough tragedy particularly
as far as the families are concerned.

The care and sensitivity and inparticular the arrangements made for the families
at the individual* Inquests wa§ very much appreciated both by them and by us.

As far as the lawyers are concerned your unfailing courtesy and consideration
to the advocates and ready response to various problems that we, as Solicitors,
have had to burden you with have been appreciated by us all.

I doubt whether any other Coroner has been faced with such a task before and whatever
you decide to do in the future we thank you for making a difficult time easier
and send our very good wishes.

Yours Pfi n rprpl v




MISS E M STEEL
                                                                    *]Lclls




                                                          lf^th September      91




         SLP/JT.




         Mr. P. Hammond,




         Dear Mr. Hammond,

         With reference to our recent telephone call, I have arranged for a copy of
         the Interim Inquest Transcripts to be sent to Mrs. Williams.

         I have written to the Council regarding your request to waive £5,000 of the
         transcript costs and have given them your address and asked them to
         correspond directly with you.

         Yours sincerely,




         S.L.Popper,
         H.M.Coroner.




LESAAS
                                                           13th September       91




         SLP/JT.




         Mrs. P. Gordon,
         Chief Executive,
         Sheffield City Council,
         Town Hall,
         Sheffield.


         Dear Mrs. Gordon,

         I have had a telephone call from Mr. Hammond of the Hillsborough Steering
         Group. Apparently the cost of the transcripts has not yet been fully repaid
         to the solicitors and it seems as if there are some difficulties with
         recovering all the money from the various families.


         He told me that it looks as if he and Mr. Hicks will have to foot   a
         substantial proportion of the expenses and inquired whether the Council would
         be prepared to waive £5,000 of the charge.  I think that they want to keep
         these transcripts amongst their archives.

         This is obviously is a matter for you to decide, and I am giving you Mr.
         Hammond’s address so that you can deal directly with h i m .




         Yours sincerely,

         S.L.Popper,
         H.M.Coroner.




LESAAR
                                                                         ft,



                                                          23rd July            91




         SLP/JT.




         Mrs. P. Joynes.




         Dear Mrs. Joynes,

         Re: Hillsborough Stadium Disaster.

         I am in receipt of your letter of the 17th of July.  It is my view that no
         useful purpose would be served by corresponding with you regarding the
         matters which you have raised and I do not intend therefore to do so.

         Yours sincerely,




         S.L.Popper,
         H.M.Coroner.




BAKAAI
                           X'7-tln J u l y X 9 9 X




TO: Dr Popper




Dear Sir,

Re: Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

I would be very interest to hear your views :

The Police Complaints Authority have decided to discipline Mr
Duckinfield and Mr Murray (two years after the disaster).  I am
hoping that they will be dismissed without pensions with a view
to seeing justice done, especially after the Inquests in
Sheffield which were a total "whitewash" for the establishment.

Yours, a very sad bereaved mother    who once believed   in the
Police and British Justice.


PATRICIA JOYNES
SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY



South Yorkshire County Fire Service
H. E. Wright, Q.F.S.M., M.I.Fire.E., F.B.I.M.                                                                   Gefmmand H.Q.,
             Chief Fire Officer                                                                               /W ellington Street,
                                                                                                          /    Sheffield,
                                                                                                         /     South Yorkshire S1 3FG
                                                                                                     /         Telephone: Sheffield
                                                                                                 /             STD (0742) 727202
                                                                                             /                 Fax: (0742) 726894
             FP/B34/
Our Ref:     AS/JMT                                 Your Ref:    SLP/JT/Hills/Escape                           Date: 16.5.91

This matter is being dealt with by . . ACO. A.. .Seaman...................................           Ext. No. . . 205..............


  Stefan L. Popper, Esq.,LL.B,B.MED.Sci,BM,BS,MRCGP,
  Coroner,
  South Yorkshire (West District),
  Medico-Legal Centre,
  Watery Street,
  SHEFFIELD,
  S3 7ET.


  Dear Sir,

  HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

  Thank you for your letter of 1st May, 1991, which I note you have copied to
  the Home Secretary     and Dr. Helen Muir.   I have noted your observations and
  shall of course be pleased to assist in any way I can any initiatives to find
  solutions which are reasonably likely to improve spectator safety at sports
  grounds.

  To a very large extent I believe that the major issues of safety arising from
  Hillsborough have been addressed by Lord Justice Taylor in his Interim and
  Final Reports. The 76 recommendations in the Report covered all the major
  issues which arose during the Inquiry. Apart from the move to all-seated
  accommodation which should naturally create better control over crowd numbers
  and improve the comfort of spectators, it was recommended that an Advisory
  Design Council be set up, together with a National Inspectorate and Review
  Body, and that the Green Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds be reviewed.

  The recommendations have been accepted by the Government and steps have been
  put in hand to ensure their implementation. My experience in South Yorkshire
  is that the recommendations provided in the reports are being treated as
  requirements and you will be aware that the Green Guide has been revised by
  the Home Office inaccordance with the Report and the recommendations of the
  Technical Working Party (see Appendix 3 of the Report).




                                                                                                                  Cont'd. ...




                                All communications to be addressed to the Chief Fire Officer.
I believe that the safe organisation of any match is achieved jointly by the
Police and the Club Management, both of whom ideally require the co-operation
of spectators which sadly is not always the case.     They, unlike the Fire
Service and other members of the Advisory Group who do not as a matter of
course attend matches, are in attendance/control on match days.    I consider
effective ground management to be an absolutely essential feature in achieving
safety in full realisation that good management can compensate for some less
than ideal aspects resulting from the existing nature of grounds, whereas poor
management can make an otherwise ideal situation unsafe.        I am pleased
therefore to note the increased emphasis upon management responsibilities in
Section 2 of the revised Green Guide.

As you may realise, in the aftermath of the disaster I gave positive thought
as to how it happened and what steps might be taken to prevent any repetition.
In so doing I was conscious of the need to put forward practical suggestions
capable of being implemented quickly and relatively easily. I therefore
enclose for your information a copy of my submission to Lord Justice Taylor.

I have copied this letter to the Home Secretary and Dr. Muir for their
information.   Should you wish to discuss any aspect further please do not
hesitate to contact me again.

You:   faithfully




Chief Fire Officer.
SUBMISSION OF H.E. WRIGHT, QFSM,MIFireB,FBIM, CHIEF FIRE OFFICER, SOOTH
YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE, TO THE COMMITTEE OF INQUIRY INTO THE
DISASTER AT THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM, SHEFFIELD, ON 15TH APRIL, 1989.




1.      Introduction



        I feel sure that all the members of the Safety of                            Sports    Grounds

        Working     Party, including myself, never believed that the disaster

        at   the    Hillsborough      Stadium,            Sheffield,       could       ever      occur.

        However,     it   did,    and having given positive thought as to why it

        happened and what steps might be taken to obviate the                            possibility

        of    repetition         at   any         stadium,          I     submit     the      following

        recommendations for consideration.                   In making these I am conscious

        of   the need to put forward practical suggestions capable of being

        implemented quickly and relatively easily.



2.      Recommendations



2.1     Ingress

        To prevent any unduly large crowd                   from        being   kept    waiting     for

        admission      and   at the same time minimising the consequent dangers

        of crushing and illegal entry:-



2.1.1   Separate turnstiles should be provided to permit                           access      to   each

         stand, terrace and pen within the stadium.



2.1.2 The    turnstiles      providing      the           access    mentioned        in 2.1.1 above

         should be in sufficient number to                   be    capable      of     admitting     the

         capacity    calculated       using       Chapter          16 of the Guide to Safety at

         Sports Grounds in not more than 1 hour, using the notional rate of

         750 persons/turnstile/hour.

                                              -   1   -
2.1.3   Where       there    are     insufficient; turnstiles to satisfy 2.1.2 above,

        either:

         (i)    additional turnstiles must be provided, or



        (ii)    the capacity             of   each        stand,   terrace     or    pen   should     be

                restricted          to    the    number        of spectators that the existing

                turnstiles will admit using the notional rate                          mentioned      in

                2.1.2 above.



2.1.4   Chapter       5     of    the    Guide       to     Safety at Sports Grounds should be

        amended to satisfy the above and cross referenced to Chapter 16.



        In effect the capacity of each stand, terrace and pen will be *the

        lowest figure produced based on exit capacity, standing or seating

        area and the capacity of the turnstiles.



        The factor which determines the capacity should be recorded on the

        General Safety Certificate for each stand, terrace and pen.



2.2     Control of Numbers



        There       has     never been a legal stipulation in the Safety of Sports

        Grounds Act 1975, that required the capacity of                             individual     parts

        of      a     sports       ground       to    be     specified    in    a    General       Safety

        Certificate.



        Section 2(2) of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act,                            which     did    set

        out     matters          which    had    to       be included, was replaced by Section

        19(2) (a) of the Fire Safety and Safety of                       Places       of   Sport     Act,

        1987, with effect from 1st January, 1988.

                                                     - 2 -
        The   present position is that the Secretary of State now has power

        to    issue   Regulations     detailing      the    matters     to    be      covered,

        including     capacities,     but    has    not    yet done so, therefore each

        authority is free to        apply    whatever      conditions        it    wishes    to,

        therefore



2.2.1   The    Secretary of State should urgently make Regulations regarding

        the terms and conditions as may be included in the General                        Safety

        Certificate.       This    should include a requirement for the capacity

        of each stand, terrace and pen to be specified.



2.3     Perimeter Fences



        Planned means designed to allow for the              quick    release        of     crowd

        pressure need to be clearly specified in guidance to authorities.



        Chapter 15, paragraph 215 of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds

        provides guidance on the width but            not    the     frequency       at     which

        gates should be provided in perimeter fences.



        The    provision    of    perimeter fences goes against all professional

        training of Fire Service Officers and it is hoped                    that    a    better

        solution might be found.



2.3.1   Perimeter     fences      should    only    be required where it can be shown

        that they are absolutely necessary and the continuing provision of

        all existing fences should be reviewed in this light.




                                            - 3 -
2.3.2   An    accepted      professional body should be requested as a matter of

        urgency to produce a standard specification for a perimeter                 fence

        for    use    at    sports grounds.     1 recommend that this specification

        provide for sections to be quickly and              easily   removed    from     the

        perimeter track side by authorised personnel in an emergency.



        When     available,        this standard should be satisfied at all grounds

        where perimeter fences are considered necessary.



2.3.3   Where perimeter fences are required then gates, not less than                    1.1

        metre in width, must be provided to allow spectators to be quickly

        evacuated       onto    the    pitch   perimeter.     Such   gates     should     be

        sufficient         in   number   to provide for the evacuation of each area

        within 3 minutes, with a minimum provision for each area of 2 such

        gates.       Chapter 15, paragraph 215 of the Guide to Safety at Sports

        Grounds should be amended accordingly.



2.3.4   A level stepping arrangement should be provided through                 gates     to

        avoid     tripping hazards and wherever possible such gates should be

        in line with radial gangways.            Gate-release fastenings        should    be

        capable       of    easy    and immediate release from the pitch side only,

        especially under crowd pressure.



2.4     Stewards



        It is vital that the number of stewards on duty are sufficient                     in

        number, adequately trained and effective in their duties.



2.4.1   I     recommend that in broad terms a syllabus to enable satisfactory

        training for stewards, together with            examination     standards        with

        regard to their duties, be established on a national basis.
2.4.2   The   Police should be the examining authority for stewards and the

        passing of the examination will enable those so              qualified         to   be

        employed if so capable as stewards at sports grounds.



2.4.3   The   standard     of    examination should reflect the responsibilities

        and duties of each steward.



2.4.4   A Chief   Steward       should    be     appointed   to   take   charge    of       all

        stewards.



2.4.5   Senior Stewards should be appointed to take charge of the stewards

        in a defined area of the ground.



2.4.6   All stewards should be readily identifiable when undertaking their

        duties    and I suggest that this be in the form of coloured jerkins

        each separately numbered to enable each steward to                be    identified

        from a distance.



2.5     Communication



2.5.1   The use of the public address system to provide advice to stewards

        and Police should be fully realised, especially when                   noise    seems

        to    apparently     reduce      the    overall   effectiveness    of     hand held

        radios.     Training in the use of this equipment should be                provided

        for    those   who      use the equipment to instigate messages and those

        who are expected to react to them.




                                               - 5 -
2.5.2   Should any decision be made to evacuate any part of a stadium                             for

        whatever       reason, I suggest that each emergency service be alerted

        even if their attendance may not be required at that                     time.           This

        will     provide     a pre-warning during which basic requirements as to

        the correct address to which a               response     may   be    needed     can       be

        satisfied, together with the need for a likely rendezvous point.



        Should     the     situation      develop to the point of needing a response

        from another or all emergency services a much                   briefer      call        will

        ensure this.



2.5.3 I      understand      that    the    Police     have made recommendations to the

        Inquiry which suggest either:-



          (i)    A senior officer of each of the             emergency       services       be     in

                  attendance at the Police control box at a stadium, or



        (ii)     the     Police     control    box     at the stadium is provided with a

                 private     wire     connection       to   the   Control     room     of        each

                  emergency service.



        My      opinions     regarding     these      suggestions are not supportive.               I

        understand that at Hillsborough on 15th April the                     Police        in    the

        control box were not aware of the difficulties that existed on the

        West Terrace.         Should this be so then I            would assume that          a Fire

        Service     Officer       would    have      equaldifficulty         but even when the

        problem was identified he would                be    of little       use without          the

        manpower       and    equipment       that    he would undoubtedly request.               The

        advantage would, therefore seem                to    be related       to knowing          the

        abilities of the Service.



                                               - 6 -
        The provision of a senior Fire Service Officer to achieve this on,

        hopefully, the extremely infrequent                   occasions         when    it        will     be

        required      would       seem     to   be    an    over-provision         which          could be

        achieved more easily by close liaison between the Services.



        I also understand that the Police were in communication with their

        own    main       control    room       at Police Headquarters which already has

        private      wire     connection        to    each    of   the        emergency        services.

        Private wire connections from each of the stadiums provided with a

        safety certificate, or likely to require such in                          the        future,       to

        each    of    the     emergency         services     control rooms would also be an

        extremely expensive way of providing good information to the other

        Services which good training and liaison should satisfy.



2.6     Liaison



2.6.1   Regular liaison between all those responsible for implementing the

        requirements         of     the    Safety     of     Sports    Grounds         Act        and     the

        respective          clubs         should     take    place       to     provide       a    greater

        understanding of the problems being met.



2.6.2   The arrangements proposed by the                    Club   and    Police,       where           these

        differ       from    those        specified      in the General Safety Certificate,

        should be considered by the appropriate                       local      authority         working

        party        to     ensure       that    these     will    not        affect    other           safety

        precautions.




                                                   - 7 -
           »
2.7 '   Other Matters



2.7.1   The Club managements of each ground              requiring     a   General       Safety

        Certificate     should   be    required     to     audit the safety provisions

        within their ground considering the different uses to                    which    they

        are    put.    A full written report should be presented to the local

        authority for consideration.          The full satisfaction of            the    Guide

        to Safety at Sports Grounds should be used for such audit.



        Any    proposed changes to the ground which would affect any part of

        the safety precautions should be accompanied                 by    a   safety     audit

        report    identifying    the    effects     of     the proposals and the steps

        proposed to compensate for them.            The    proposals       and   the     report

        should    be   submitted to the local authority for -consideration and

        approval under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act prior to any other

        submission for approval.



2.7.2     In   order to undertake such duties effectively it must be realised

        that manpower resources are needed and this should be catered                       for

          in   the     departments     of     local       authorities          holding     such

        responsibilities.




HEW/JMT

10th July, 1989.




                                            - 8 -
                                                      DAY;    9
DATE;     29.11.90.

NAME;     Robert Arthur Knowles.

DESIGNATION;     Supporter.

STATUS;

ASSESSMENT.     A good and interesting witness.   He gave a
                clear account.




   Mr. Knowles left early from Birkenhead at 10.15.   There
   were traffic delays on the road around       . He arrived
   in Sheffield at 1.35. He had two boys with him.    His aim
   was to get into the ground as was his normal practice a
   good half an hour to forty minutes before the game, in order
   to enable the children to get a good position.   On this
   occasion because they had had a long journey, they stopped off
   at a pub in the town centre, where they had something to eat
   and drink.   Supporters were there from both sides as well as
   local people and the atmosphere was grand.   They caught a
   taxi to the stadium, leaving at about 10 past 2. They were
   dropped off at approximately ten minutes walk from the stadium
   which they approached from over a little bridge, turning right
   into the ground.   They arrived at about 2.30.  They were met
   by a ’bunch crowd’ attempting to make their way into the
   ground.   He also noticed that there were people milling around
   on the little bridge.   He noticed that there were no orderly
   queues, there was just a crowd.   He did see some perimeter
   gates and that there were two police horses in front of them.
   The gates were shut. He together with the boys made their
   way through the crowd and came up to the horse.   There was
   a bit of pushing and he also felt in some danger from the
   horse itself. He was noticed by the policeman standing within
    the gate, and because of the two boys, he was allowed to go
    through, the gate being opened slightly. He describes the
    attitude of the crowd at that time as being frustated, not
   knowing exactly what was happening.   There was no indication
    of why the gates were shut. He does however say that there
   was quite a crowd inside and again there were no orderly
    queuing and so he thought that people were a bit anxious
    about what was actually happening.  He heard various remarks
    including comments like "I have got a ticket. Why c a n ’t I
    be allowed to go through". When asked whether this was being
    said forcefully or not he said "no, they were shouting but not
    really aggressively".  Having now got beyond the perimeter
    gates but outside the turnstiles in the area of turnstiles
    H and G, he says it was literally a free for all trying to




BADABW
                                      -   2 -
Robert Arthur Knowles   (cont’d ) .

get through the turnstiles.   There was no sort of queuing or
anything.   There was a police force in there at the edge of the
crowd.   People were trying to get past him to get out saying
they were in the wrong place with wrong tickets, and that they
w ere’nt being allowed in. This was impossible, because the
gates were closed.   He felt it was pointless to try and join
a queue so he stood to one side and watched.   There were people
climbing the walls, there were people on the wall trying to pull
people up and there was quite a crush going on, in fact it was
worse than it had been outside the perimeter gates. He
describes it as being a complete blockage with no real movement
but that the area outside the turnstiles was barred on the right
by a barrier and that beyond that, things were moving quite
freely.   By about quarter to three he was getting a little
anxious.   He was comparing the situation with other football
matches where policemen are normally stationed by the turnstiles
asking for tickets and forming queues.   The situation he
observed was just a crowd of people pushiong each other and
trying to gain entrance.   He said "obviously probably they paid
money, they wanted to get in and see the game.   They were
worried about not seeing the kick-off".   He spoke with the
policemen and he was told that the men had been pulled out as
they were worried about getting hurt because they were standing
by the wall and were being pressed up against the wall.    He was
told that the policemen had actually being taken out. When
pressed, he confirmed that he recollected that the actual words
which were also said to him were "let them fight amongst
themselves, if that’s what they want to do".   The impression he
formed was that control in that particular area had been lost,
had been given up and the matter just been left to the fans to
try and get in any way they could, which left them open to
pushing and shoving each other in an attempt to get through.
Interestingly, he suggested that the concertina gate might be
opened to allow people through and thus relieve the blockage at
the turnstiles. When asked whether he noticed that the crowd at
this stage was becoming agressive he replied "I think they were
very frustrated in trying to gain access to the ground.    The
ones at the back were pushing and saying come out let’s get in
and the ones at the front knowing that there was nowhere for
then to go were shouting back please stop pushing, people are
actually getting crushed in the front part. Please ease back,
but in a situation like that you can’t really hear or understand
you are just pushing forward trying to gain access.   I don’t
think they could hear anything being shouted from the front".
He was asked whether he heard any loudspeaker annouoncements.
He said that although he saw an officer with a microphone, he
did not hear anything himself. Eventually he overheard a
message to the effect that the gate should be opened and he
managed to enter it. He distinctly heard shouts going up from
the back, a message being passed back that the gate was open and
he said that there was no sort of funnelling or telling people
 in which direction to go. He entered the tunnel with others and
exited on to the left side, Pen 4. The back of this terrace was




BADABW
                          3

Robert Arthur Knowles   (cont’d).

 quite full but he did not think this was anything unusual and he
 therefore, because of the boys, decided to move to the front.
 Their first aim was to go down behind the goal but noticing that
 if was packed, he told the boys to move left away from the
 centre.    They managed to get right down to the bottom and he
 then said "down at the bottom there was a yard or so of flat
 area right next to the front and that was fairly free.      There
 was a gap you could walk along so we walked along as far as we
 could go. We then came up against the fence running from front
 to back”. He didn’t particularly like it there and he stepped
 back a little way into the terrace and he positioned the boys a
 couple of steps forward and actually on the fence itself.      He
 remembered that on entering the terrace, the players were on the
 pitch, the goalkeeper was in the goal in front of them. He said
 that having got their the viewing position and had been
 satisfied with it the game kicked off "possibly in a minute or
 so the game did actually kick off". He noticed that the
 enclosure next to him on the left was empty (this is in fact a
 void area and was intended to be so) but he also noticed that
 the outer pens were relatively spacious.     The game having kicked
 off was a shot at the Liverpool goal.     There was a forward
 movement from the crowd and he was moved against the boys.      He
 found that he could not move back.     He noticed the people
  further along were beginning to climb the fence to try and get
 out. He said "I don’t know why, I will never know why, I just
  said to the two boys "climb over the fence and get on to the
 pitch.    I just don’t feel comfortable, I think there is
  something wrong". You may feel that this inclines at that point
 he had not yet appreciated the seriousness of the situation but
  instinctively felt that the boys should be put into a safe
  environment.    He said that at that point he was not being
  crushed in the sense that he was hurting in any way but he was
  up against the fence, unable to move and that did worry him. He
  thought if I am going to get pushed any more from the back,
  there is nowhere for me to go. At that point, it was bearable
  but any more pressure would have been a different matter.
  People were beginning to shout "please stop pushing" and in fact
  he heard shouts from the back saying "move forward". He was
  unable to say whether the cheering came from his own Pen. He
  described his son being put back into peri 3 by a policewoman but
  confirmed that that pen was in fact empty and that his son was
  in no danger in that enclosure.    Somewhat later, he noticed a
  man who appeared to be in a very poor state.     He describes how a
  police officer who was standing at the gate helping people by
  pulling them out coming into the pen and attempting to give him
  the kiss of life.    He then left the enclosure, assisted with
  trying to rip up the fencing and then quite properly went and
  looked for the children.    He felt that there was no way of going
  backward and that the only way out of the enclosure was through
  the fence or over the fence.     You will probably remember this
  this            of Mr. Hale because he used their illustration
  of p ’s and was trying to demonstrate with that the fact that if
  pressure is applied to columns which are not contained, they




 BADABW
                            -   4 -

Robert Arthur Knowles   (cont’d).

will merge. A proposition which the witness accepted. When
asked by Hr. Payne what was the nearest ordinary means of escape
he replied "back through the tunnel". Mr. Manning explored the
reasons for the trapping at the perimeter gates and the crushing
within the turnstile area. He agreed that there obviously was a
danger of police officers being crushed, but he would have
thought so would have other people standing next to them.      He
also could understand the feelings of apprehension which
somebody like Mr. Gillan might have felt.    Finally he agreed
with Mr. Manning that at the moment just before the kick-off the
terrace did not appear to him abnormal.    He agreed with Mr. King
that he was not aware that the Leppings Lane terracing was
divided into pens and indeed he described them as cages.      He
also said that terrace 6 and 7 were virtually empty.     That he
was surprised at this bearing in mind the closeness of the
kick-off and the crowds which were still outside.     He agreed
that there was no queues at the turnstiles, that it was like a
bottleneck he said.   There was nowhere for anybody to go and
that although, when he approached the perimeter gates were shut,
the fact that there were masses of people within the turnstile
area indicated to him that at some point they must have been
open. He confirmed that he had seen stewards in the concourse
area but that they had stood aside when the gate was open.       He
also said that he wondered how it was possible to get on to the
outer terraces. We then had some discussion with regard to the
difference between swaying and surging.    The witness himself in
his statement had used the word ’surge’ to describe the events,
having at least described two of these.    He confirmed that after
 the second surge he had heard screams and shouts from the crowd
 against the fence indicating the pain and obvious discomfort.
He was specifically asked whether he got the impression that
 people were trying to get out, that there was panic around him.
 His response was not in the sense people were frightened, but I
 think they were all expecting the crush to ease off. Question
 "but it didn’t" Answer"it didn’t". Question, "and you heard
 shouts clearly from people wanting to get out" Answer "Yes". He
 said that he felt that the police on the pitch side at that
 stage had not realised what was going on. Mr. Knowles just
 before the end of his evidence was asked to re-summarise the
 position with timings. He said "we came out of the tunnel.
 There was a fair pack of people at the top of the terrace so I
 suggested we make out way to the front of the terrace and to the
 left because there was a fence down the middle.    You could only
 go left so I pushed the lads in front of me. We forced out way
 down.  It was tightly packed, but you could gain access. We got
 down to the front and behind the goal and began to walk along
 the front towards the left of the ground.   There was a slight
 gap at the bottom that you could walk straight along.    You




BADABW
