                                                                                                                           46                2>\
   INQUISITION
   An in(|tiisitlon taken for our Sovereign Lady the Queen

   At      C o r o n e r s C o u rt                            inthe W est D i s t r i c t                 of    S o u th Y o r k s h ir e
                                               19 t h                         A p r il
   On the                                                      day of                                       19 89
   [And by adjournment                   on v a r i o i i s d a te « i up t o and i n c l u d i n g t h e
                                                               day of     M sk CK-                         19 91       3
   [Before and by] H me
                                                                                  STEPAN LEOPOLD POPPER
   One of Ho- Majesty's coroners for                                          S o u th Y o r k s h ir e   (W e s t) D i s t r i c t

   [and die undermentioned jurors] touching cmthe death of
   &5X2£l£ifi2fiKB«£a5!flX2S}i2&§2&3&3to£l£llimtoC
   [ft y v a P u n cn HIfW lrH ] [C 'tn iv v lltn tg p (TCKInUflilfp                     CARL BROWN

   The following matters are found                                                       CARL BROWN
1 Name of deceased

2 Injury or disease causing death: [2]                           1(a)     I n h a l a t i o n o f S to m a ch C o n t e n t s
                                                                 2       C ru sh A s p h y x ia
   Time, place and circumstances at or in which injury was sustained: p]
 "D \aA         on       -VW. \6 f'p M -                                 « s a. fiasoUfe. ©£ erOsV^ in^orias
                           aW.       V \ \ \W\>o roo^                  FboLVaedl     gtoood,


4 Conclusion of the jury/coroner as to the death: [4]

                                       AodJ du2^Jb&A
5 Particulars for the time being required by the Registration Acts to be registered concerning the death
   a Date and place of birth                                 e Date and place of death            c 4 sq . . . . .
   21.3.71             L e ig h ,
                                G r e a t e r M a n c h e s te r                                         *     b n e r n e id
                                                                        H i H s b o r o n f f h Fo o t b a l l G round
   b Name and surname of deceased                            f Occupation and usual address
     C a r l Brown                                             S tu d e n t

  c ^ex    M ale
  d Maiden surname of a woman who has married


                                                                                    Signature cfycor^ r

  Signature of jurors:




                                                                                                                                 Please turn over
   NOTES
1 Modify this as necessary according to whether the
  inquest is held with or without a jury or partly
  with and partly without a jury,
2 In the case of a death from natural causes or from
  industrial disease, want of attention at birth, chronic
  alcoholism or addiction to drugs insert the immediate
  cause of death and morbid conditions (if any) giving
  rise to the immediate cause of death.
3 Omit this if the cause of death is one to which
  Note 2 applies.

4 a Where the cause of death is one to which Note 2
    applies, it is suggested that one of the following
    forms be adopted:
     C.D. died from natural causes.
     C.D. died from the industrial disease of
     C.D. died from dependence on drugs/non-dependable
     on drugs.
     C.D. died from want of attention at birth.
     (In any of the above cases, but in no other, it is
     suggested that the following words may, where
     appropriate, be added:
     "and the cause of death was aggravated by lack of
     care/self-neglect').

  b In any other case except murder, manslaughter,
    infanticide or stillbirth, it is suggested that one
    of the following forms be adopted:
     C.D. killed himself/herself (whilst the balance of
     his/her mind was disturbed).
     C.D. died as the result of an attempted/self­
     induced abortion.
     C.D. died as the result of an accident/misadventure.
     C.D. was killed lawfully.

    •Open verdict, namely, the evidence did not fully or
     further disclose the means whereby the cause of death
    arose.
  c In the case of murder, manslaughter or infanticide
    it is suggested that the following form be adopted.

     C.D. was killed Unlawfully.
  d In the case of a stillbirth insertj&tillbirth' and do not
    complete the remainder of the form.




  Price £4.00 fear 25 copies or £14.00 for 100 copies (exclusive of tax)

  ISBNO 11 340764 5
  Printed in the United Kingdom for Her Majesty's Stationery Office
  Dd 291453 C130 11/88
                                  OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR        MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                    WATERY STREET
                                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                               (W est District)
                                                                    SHEFFIELD
                                                                    S3 7ET
    STEFAN L. POPPER, L.L.8., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                   CORONER


                              Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721                       19



Your Ref: AL/SB

Widdows, Solicitors,
P.O.Box 1 2nd Floor,
(south wing),
Turnpike House,
Market Street,
Leigh WN7 1DZ.


Our Ref: Hills/Sol/4/SLP/JT                                        17th September 1990


Dear Sirs,                         '

Re: RESUMED INQUESTS 19th NOVEMBER 1990.


If you are not already aware, I intend to resume the Inquests into the deaths
of the 95 people who died at Hillsborough, one or more of whom you represent,
on the 19th of November 1990 at 10.a.m. Details of venue will be notified in
due course.

I do not have to remind you of the fact that a considerable amount of
evidence has already been taken, nor of the nature and limitations of a
coronal investigation which you will recollect is not adversarial but
inquisitorial in nature, and which of course has only limited objectives.

Subject to the Coroners' Act 1988 and the Coroners’ Rules, the Inquest is
under my control, and in particular, it is my responsibility to select the
witnesses who wish to give evidence.  I am at present engaged in considering
this and in determining who I wish to invite to attend.

Without prejudice in any way to my rights in the matter, I am writing to you
to give you an opportunity to draw to my attention the names and other
appropriate details of any witness or witnesses whom you would like me to
consider calling to give evidence at the resumed Inquests.

May I please ask you in considering whether you wish to draw any names to my
attention, to bear in mind the scope and limitations of an Inquest.

I also want to make it absolutely clear that the submission of a name or
names for consideration is nothing more than that, and that the decision as
to who to call to give evidence is and remains a matter for me.

I would be grateful if you could respond as soon as possible. If I have not
heard from you by the end of September I will assume you have no names to
submit.
                                  OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR             MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                         WATERY STREET
                                            SO U TH YO RKSHIRE
                                                                         SHEFFIELD
                                                   (West District)
                                                                         S3 7ET
STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B.. B .M E D .S ci.. B.M.. B.S., M .R .C .G .P.
                                                        COR ON ER


                             Telephone: S H E F F IE L D (0742) 738721      . 2 1 s t . •A u g u s t   19   39 i


SLP/JT/H/006.

 Viddowa,
 P.O. Box 1,
 2nd Floor {south vrtng),
 Turnpike House,
 Market Street,
 Leigh W87 1DZ.



                 Sirn,

S*‘            0A3L SHOW? (deooaosd) Ho.46.
As you are aware, the Inquest(s) arising out of the Hillsborough
Disaster stand adjourned to a date to be fixed. You may also
be aware that it had been in my mind to resume these Inquests
on the 15th of January 1990.

I have now been informed that the Director of Public Prosecutions
has decided to have a criminal investigation undertaken on his
behalf. In these circumstances, I have decided not- to resume the
Inquest(s) on the date mentioned.

I will review the matter further after the Director of Public
Prosecutions has announced his decision as to what action (if any)
he may wish to undertake.

I am not in a position to say how long the Police Inquiry
or the Director of Public Prosecutions consideration of the
matter will take. I anticipate however that there will be
a substantial period of time before I am in a position to communicate
on this matter further.

I would be grateful if you could please ensure that this information
is conveyed to members of the bereaved family so that they may be
fully informed of the position regarding the Inquest(s).

Yours faithfully,



S.L.Popper,
H.M.Coroner.
                                               OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR                MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                         WATERY STREET
                                                          S O U TH YO R K SHIRE
                                                                                         SHEFFIELD
                                                                  (West District)
                                                                                         S3 7ET
            STEFAN L. POPPE R, LL.B., B .M E D .S ci.^B JU L B .S ., M .R .C .G .P.
                                                                       COR ON ER


                                          Telephone: S H E F F IE L D (0 7 42 ) 738721
                                                                                                                89.

        3LP/JT/H/K4/0Q1.



        Widdows,
        Solicitors!
        P.O. Box 1,
        Turnpike House,
        Market Street,




        Bear Sirs,

        You. will be aware that I do not normally release post mortem
        reports until the resumption of the Inquest, ’-men they are
        in fact put in as evidence.

        However, in view of the numerous requests which I have received,
        and the obvious distress which delay is causing to your clients,
        I have decided that subject to certain conditions set out below,
        I am prepared to release to you upon request, the post mortem
        report of your client(s).

        The release of these post mortem reports are on the basis that:-.

                a.       They have to be treated as provisional, and therefore
                         subject to amendment or alteration until such time as
                         they are given or produced in evidence at the Inauest.

                b.       They are to be used only for the purpose of bereavement
                         conselling of the deceased’s relatives or for proper
                         legitimate purposes in connection with any legal proceedings
                         in which solicitors may be engaged.

                c.       Subject to ~h8.'ca-fe§¥§} they are to be kept confidential until
                         they come into the public domain at the resumed Inauests.

        I have your request for the post mortem report to hand in respect
        of each of the persons listed on the attached sheet, and on the
        assumption that you will confirm that the report in respect of
        each of your respective clients is accepted on the terns set out
        above, and in order to save further delay and upset to your client,
        I enclose a copy of the relevant post mortem report. If for any
        reason you cannot agree to the contents of this letter, please return
        the post mortem report to me, without of course making any use of it.

        The cost for the copy post mortem report(s) is        per sheet (total t %. y>                                )
        Please make your cheques payable to the City of Sheffield.

        Yours faithfully,



R8606
        S.L.Popper,
        H.I-l.Coroner.
Carl Brown.
             w                               widdows
                                             SOLICITORS, COMMISSIONERS FOR OATHS
                                             P.O. Box 1, 2nd floor (south wing)
                                             Turnpike House, M arket Street, Leigh, W N7 1DZ
                                             Telephone: 673311 and 605901. std code 0942. DX 22502 LEIGH                                   Fax: 0942 261760


                                             y
                                             Your   R f
                                                    Ref.                                                             -ur as® f i r -   JulYz
                                                                                                                                         '   1989

                                                                              AL/SB



Dear Sirs,


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER                      -        CARL BROWN DECEASED


We act for Terence Brown and Mrs. Delia Evans Brown, both of
                        ktfhose son, Carl Brown of the same address was
tragically killed at Hillsborough.

Our clients     are extremely distressed as a result of their loss and
matters are     made worse by the lack of information that is available to
our clients     in connection with the precise circumstances of their
son's death     and the actual causes.

We appreciate that post-mortem reports would not normally be disclosed
prior to any inquest, but in these most unusual circumstances, we feel
that an exception should be made.    Certainly, it would help a great
deal to relieve the heartache our clients are presently suffering.

Accordingly, if at all possible, it would be greatly appreciated if a
copy of the post-mortem report could be forwarded to us at the
earliest opportunity.

    Thanking you in anticipation of your kind co-operation.


Yours faithfully,




r                                                              n
Mr. S.L. Popper,
H.M. Coroner,
Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,                                                   i
L
Sheffield.                                                     — I
S3 7ET
                  John S. Bullough, Robert E. Toppin, LL.B., Alan Lynch, LL.B., M ark R. Mason, LL.B., Associate: Keith Freer, B.A.,
                                        Regulated by th e Law Society in th e conduct of investm ent business
                                               O ffices a t Leigh, W esthoughton, Lowton, Earlestown.
 TELEPHONE:                                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
 SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                     POLICE HEADQUARTERS
 TELEX: 547996                                 SNIG HILL
 FAX: (0742) 523243                              SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


 P WRIGHT CRE OSt J CBIM
 CHIEF CONSTABLE

Dr S L Popper                                18 April 1989
M^k:o-Legal Centre
vl^mxy Street
Sheffield
S3 7ET



*
L> -7 d i      h


I refer to your recent conversation with Superintendent
Sleath concerning the release of the deceased persons from
the Hillsborough incident to their respective next of kin,
following the adjournment of the inquest.

After consultation with Professor Usher, I have no objection
to this course of action.
                                               18th December

SLP/JT.
LL/jg.

Linda Lythgoe,
Social Worker,
City of Liverpool,
Social Services Departaent,
The Hillsborough Centre,
Stanley Park,®
1 Anfield Road,
Liverpool.4.

Dear Miss Lythgoe,

Ret CARL BROW.

Thank you for your letter of the 7th of December. I have had
an opportunity of speaking to Mr. Lynch who has agreed to
release the post mortem report to Mr. & Mrs. Brown’s G.F.
The reluctance had been based on a misunderstanding as to
his powers in relation to the copy which I had supplied.

I have spoken to one of your colleagues on the phone and
have informed her of this.

Yours sincerely,




S.L.Popper,
H.M.Coroner.
                                          SOCIAL SERVICES DEPARTMENT
                                          David Mason
               City                       Director of Social Services
                                          The Hillsborough Centre
      \        of                         Stanley Park
               Liverpool                  1 Anfield Road
                                          Liverpool 4

                                          Telephone: 051 263 5366


                                          Your Ref:

 ©r. P.S. Popper,                         Our Ref:    LL/jg.
 H.M. Coroner,
 Medico-Legal Centre,                     Date:   7th December, 1 9 8 9 .
 Watery Street,
 Sheffield S3 7ES.



 Dear Dr. Popper.,

      Rei   Carl Brown. __________ _

      I an writing about your Post Mortem Report on the above named
 young man, who died in The Hillsborough Tragedy.

      This report is with Mr. 8e Mrs. Brown's solicitor, Mr. Lynch.
 Carl's parents have not in the past felt able to look at it, but
 Mrs. Brown has now asked me if this can be arranged.

      After some discussion with Mrs. Brown and her G.P., the most
 satisfactory arrangement would seem to be for her to see the report
 with her doctor in his surgery whilst I offer continuing support.

      I made a request to Mr. Lynch for the report to be sent to
 the G.P. but unfortunately he has taken the view that he is unable
 to release the report at this stage.

      I do feel it is very important that the report is made available
 to Mrs. Brown, who feels she has reached the stage where she can
 cope with this information. Although Mr* Lynch would be happy for
 her to see the report in his office Mrs. Brown would not be at all
 happy with this.

       In view of these circumstances I an writing to ask if you
 could forward another copy of the report to me here in order that
 Mrs. Brown can go through it ia the way that she feels most comfortable
 with.

      Thanking you for your co-operation.

                         Yours sincerely*,




                         Linda Lythgoe*
                         Social Worker.


When calling or telephoning please ask for
              w                              widdows
                                            SOLICITORS, COMMISSIONERS FOR OATHS
                                            P.O. Box 1, 2nd floor (south wing)
                                            Turnpike House, M arket Street, Leigh, W N7 1DZ
                                            Telephone: 673311 and 605901. std code 0942. DX 22502 LEIGH                                Fax: 0942 261760

                                                                                                                         23rd April, 1990
                                            Your Ref.                          H/SOL/3/LIST/8                             Date
                                                                               AL/SB
                                            Our Ref,




 Dear Sirs,


 LIMITED RESUMED INQUESTS - HILLSBOROUGH                                                     -       C&RL BROWN DECEASED


 Further to previous correspondence, we confirm that our Mr. Lynch, a
 partner of this firm, will be attending the inquest in respect of the
 above on Tuesday 24th April 1990, with relatives of the deceased.

 We would refer you to the copy enclosed letter dated 10th April 1990
 from Det. Supt. R.I. Taylor, and confirm that we do not intend to
 raise any questions at the inquest providing the Coroner deals with

•the matter referred to in the final paragraph of that letter.


 Yours faithfully.




r                                                              n
 The Listing Officer,
 H.M. Coroner,
 Medico-LegalCentre,
IWatery Street,
L-Shef field.
 S3 7ET
                  John S. Bullough, Robert E. Toppin, LL.B., Alan Lynch, LL.B., M ark R. Mason, LL.B., Associate: Keith Freer, B.A.,
                                        Regulated by the Law Society in th e conduct of investm ent business
                                               O ffices at Leigh, W esthoughton, Lowton, Earlestown.
J M ERVYN JO N ES M S c                              FU RN IVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                            Furnival Gate
 HILLSBOROUGH IN Q U IR Y TEA M                      Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                     Telephone: 0742 731546
W EST M ID L A N D S POLICE HQ                       Fax:        0742 731483
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                               M edico Legal Centre
Colmore Circus Queensway                             Telephone: 0742 726105
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                    Fax:       0742 726247
Telephone: 021 -2 36 5000, extn. 2025

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STA TIO N                      Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                    Our Ref:
                                                                  AL/KH
Telephone: 021 -3 59 3332
                                                     Date:
                                                                 10 April 1990


 Widdows
 Solicitors, Commissioners for Oaths
 PO Box 1, 2nd Floor (South Wing)
 Turnpike House
 Market Street
 Leigh
 WN7 1DZ


 Dear Sir

 CARL BROWN DECEASED

 Further to your letter of the 9th April 1990, concerning the points you have
 raised, in relation to Paragraph k of the summary of evidence in respect of
 the above named deceased.

 Due to a grammatical typing error, Police Sergeant 2607 Andrew Eddison, was
 shown in the summary of evidence, as assisting to remove a person from Pen 3
 "who he now knows" to be Carl Brown. This is in fact incorrect.

 Police Sergeant Eddison, in his statement of evidence, states having viewed
 the clothing photographs and a facial photograph of Carl BROWN, it is a
 possibility Mr Brown, may be one of the persons he assisted to remove from
 Pen 3 .

 An amended summary is included with this letter covering the aforementioned
 facts.

 The presenting officer of the facts in relation to the Coroner’s Inquest,
 Woman Police Sergeant Appleton, has spoken to the family of Mr Brown, and
 outlined to them the amended facts in this matter.

 Your comments are noted, regarding your clients concern as to whether their
 son was alive when he was removed from the terracing.  This matter has been
 referred to H M Coroner for his information, in order that he may address
 the comments your clients have raised.

 V niixlo   f a i f h f u l 1 tt_______________^




 R I TAYLOR
 DETECTIVE SUPERINTENDENT



  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
J MERVYN JONES M Sc                                  FU RN IVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                            Furnival Gate
 H IL L S B O R O U G H I N Q U IR Y T E A M         Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                     Telephone: 0742 731546
                                                     Fax:        0 7 4 2 731483
WEST M ID LA N D S POLICE HQ
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                               M edico Legal Centre
Colmore Circus Queensway                             Telephone: 0742 726105
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                    Fax:       0742 726247
Telephone: 021-236 5000, extn. 2025

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STA TIO N                      Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                    Our Ref:
                                                                  AL/KH
Telephone: 021-359 3332
                                                                 10 April 1990


Widdows
Solicitors, Commissioners for Oaths
PO Box 1, 2nd Floor (South Wing)
Turnpike House
Market Street
Leigh
WN7 1DZ


 Dear Sir

 CARL BROWN DECEASED

 Further to your letter of the 9th April 1990, concerning the points you have
 raised, in relation to Paragraph 4 of the summary of evidence in respect of
 the above named deceased.

 Due to a grammatical typing error, Police Sergeant 2607 Andrew Eddison, was
 shown in the summary of evidence, as assisting to remove a person from Pen 3
 "who he now knows" to be Carl Brown. This is in fact incorrect.

Police Sergeant Eddison, in his statement of evidence, states having viewed
the clothing photographs and a facial photograph of Carl BROWN, it is a
possibility Mr Brown, may be one of the persons he assisted to remove from
Pen 3.

An amended summary is included with this letter covering the aforementioned
facts.

The presenting officer of the facts in relation to the Coroner’s Inquest,
Woman Police Sergeant Appleton, has spoken to the family of Mr Brown, and
outlined to them the amended facts in this matter.

Your comments are noted, regarding your clients concern as to whether their
son was alive when he was removed from the terracing.  This matter has been
referred to H M Coroner for his information, in order that he may address
the comments your clients have raised.

Youfls faithfully




R I TAYLOR
DETECTIVE SUPERINTENDENT



 PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
                                          widdows
                                          SOLlCnGHS, COMMISSIONERS FOR OATHS
                                          P 0. Bo* 1, ?iH florv (south wing)
                                          lum pike Mouso, M m to t oitoci. Lotyli. W N / 1UZ
                                          1otophone. (JATf I I .'Hid 00!>!KH. Mif codfi                                 DX22b(YJ Lf.IGH   Fax   0942 261 7G0


                                                                  AL/KH                                                9th April, 1990



Pear Sirs,

Limited Resumed Inquests - Hillsborough -
Carl Brown deceased - Reference Number 46

Further to our letter of the 29th March, we confirm that our
clients will be attending the inquest and they have also
instructed the writer to attend on their behalf.

^ 2 only query that, they have with regard to the report provided
 by the West Midlands Police is with regard to paragraph 4.

Todate, our clients were not aware that Police Sergeant 2607
Andrew Eddison, together with other officers, had assisted to
remove the deceased from pen 3. Our clients wish to know whether
their son was alive when he was removed from the pen and the
exact circumstances concerning the same.

We await hearing from you in due course, together with much
warning as possible with regard to the date of the inquest.                                                                                      *   --

Thanking you in anticpation of your kind co-operation.

Yours faithfully,
WIDDOWS




D/Sgt. M. Tredgold,
West Midlands Police,
Hillsborough Inquiry,
PurnivaJ House,
Eyre Street,
Sheffield,
SI 4QN
             I'MidS Rnfi'iiwjfi Ftrd'+*»tf Ictfjjtw* ) | R , A lw 'ly iw h t l R M ir t,f l M ason, 1 i K . A ' s w m m P’A W t R A
                                                                   i■»rtw?          trf             hitsinnnft
                                                    »»•I                       t.owton, f mV.&town.
