  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)




        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

           ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS» MRCGP

            (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                      At

                The Town Hall,
                  Sheffield.

                      On

                7th March, 1991




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                 Page
     W.C. CRAWFORD Recalled

          Cross-Examined by Mr. King               1
          Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien           8
          Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King      19
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell          21
          Further by The Coroner                 22

PROCEDURAL MATTERS                               22

     R.L. GREENWOOD Sworn

         By The Coroner                          25
         Cross-Examined     by   Mr. Payne       57
         Cross-Examined     by   Mr. Isaacs      60
         Cross-Examined     by   Mr. King        62
         Cross-Examined     by   Mr. Catchpole   96
         Cross-Examined     by M r s . McBrien   98
                              ERRATA



TRANSCRIPT DAY 62


Page        Letter


Cancel previous Errata in transcript of Day 6 4 :



13                    "phone the Control Box” should read
                      "from the Control Box” .

17            B       ” .... but it is the obvious route....”
                       should read ’’....but it is not the
                       obvious route
29          D-E          A. Non league matches” should read
                         A. On league matches’’.
                                                            1




                SIXTY FIFTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                   THURSDAY, 5th MARCH 1991

              WILLIAM CAMERON CRAWFORD Recalled

                  Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Q. Mr. Crawford, the mechanics of carrying out an
   instruction to close off the tunnel entrance are not
   difficult, are they? That is to say, what you have to
   do in order to close one or both of the gates if that
   was the order is not a difficult task, is it? - A. It
   isn't difficult.

Q.   It could be done in a matter of moments? - A. Yes.

Q.    If we can just have a little look at C263, please? Mr.
     Crawford that gives a view of the entrance to the
     tunnel from the concourse? - A. From the concourse,
     yes, that is right.

Q. Tell me this, if one just has one of the leaves shut
   and the other gate open, how many Policemen would it
   take to be spread across the open part, in other words
   the width of one gate? How many Police Officers would
   be required?

          THE CORONER:   Is that a sensible question?
     Forgive me for putting it like that, but do you mean by
     that so that they totally obstruct the entrance, so
     they can do it by stretching their arms out, how many
     rows deep?  I don't know whether that is a question
     which one can answer.

          MR. KING:   Sir, I had not anticipated it was
     going to cause so many problems.  Perhaps I ought to
     take it in stages.

Q. I am not asking you for measurements, Inspector
   Crawford, because we have all been to the Ground and we
   can see the size of the tunnel.  When one of the leaves
   is shut one then just has an open space, all right? -
   A. Yes.

Q. If you wanted to just have one row of Officers shoulder
   to shoulder, so that they were, in fact, blocking in a
   single line just that part which was open, all right? -
   A. Yes.

Q. I am not for the moment postulating the     learned
   Coroner's idea, which I had not thought     of, of putting
   arms out, I just want to get an idea of     width really.
   How many Officers would it take, do you     think? - A. It
                                         W. C'. CRAWFORD


would take either three, depending on the size,
obviously there are some'bigger Officers, or four if
they were shoulder to shoulder, the smaller ones.

Three or four? - A. Yes.

In other words, we are not dealing with a large space,
are we? - A. It isn't a large space, no.

Indeed, in your serial there were some ten Constables,
is that right? - A. Ten Constables, yes.

Indeed, there were reserve serials in the gymnasium in
1989, weren't there? - A. I presume there were reserve
serials, I don't really know, but that is normally the
case.

That is normally the case? - A. There are reserve
serials, yes.

And the position is this, that you had a radio, didn't
you? - A. Yes.

And if you received an order which you felt required
further assistance in terms of manpower, you could
communicate that to control? - A. Yes, I could.

Indeed, just dealing with communications, if there is a
difficulty with communication by radio one can, of
course, send a message on foot, either to you or from
you, can't you? - A. Yes.

Indeed, dealing with a communication between the
concourse area where you were, and the Police Control
Box inside the Ground, it is a relatively short
distance between those two points, isn't it? - A.
Approximately 100 yards.

Can I just deal now with 1988, some of the matters you
gave in answer to my learned friends? You told us that
you did not regard the fact that there had been an
order to close off the tunnel in the way you have
described, and that it had been carried out, as
something which should have been in a debriefing,
because I think you said that was something done as a
matter of course at a football match? - A. Yes, if
required.

Yes, if required, and if required, from the presumption
which you made yesterday, the presumption being because
the pens were full, that would be the reason which you
would think of for the reason for the order? - A. Yes.
                                         W. C. CRAWFORD


Thus it does not come as a surprise to you that is a
method of preventing further entry into the centre
pens? That does not come as a surprise to you that
method would be used? - A. It would not come as a
surprise, no.

Inspector, tell me again how many years had you been
involved policing at Hillsborough? - A. That is rather
difficult to say.  I have been coming back and forward
to Hillsborough from Barnsley, where I did work,
fifteen years - that is just guessing - since 1980
working regularly, I suppose, at Hillsborough.

Can I deal with something else? You yourself said that
there was quite a bit of, if I can put it this way,
aggressive words used to you by people who came through
the turnstiles before the big gate was opened? - A.
Yes.

And the gist of the aggression seems to be that they
were clearly upset as to what was happening outside the
turnstiles? - A. Yes.

It has been elicited already that the message seemed to
be that people were in difficulty, people were being
crushed, someone might get killed and they were very
upset about it? - A. Yes.

Of course, the opening of gate C, the big gate, was
doing something about it, wasn't it? - A. Well,
obviously it eased the problem outside.

It removed, therefore, the basic grievance, if I can
put it that way, of the people you had met coming
through the turnstiles who were telling you about what
was going on outside? - A. Yes.

So it was removing the reason for their aggression to
you, if I can put it that way? - A. No, I wouldn't say
eased it . It continued, the aggression, but obviously
I would say that was the individuals themselves.

But it certainly would remove the reason for the
aggression, wouldn't it? There would no longer be any
reason to be upset and angry? - A. I don't know.

Let me put it another way to you.  You told us that you
saw, I am not sure you put it this way, but you did at
one stage talk of 2,000 rushing in, and I think you
mean rushing in through gate C? - A. Yes.

You don't actually mean, or do you, Inspector, that you
saw 2,000 rush in? - A. No, the initial surge when the
gate opened, they came in and then they continued to
                                         W. C. CRAWFORD


come in.  Obviously once the initial surge had come
through then it tapered off a bit into walking pace.

Yes, indeed.  The 2,000 we are talking about came in,
if we are talking about gate C - it is only a rough
guess for gate C - over a five minute period, you
understand that? - A. I understand the question, but if
you say a five minute period, it could have been two
minutes.

This may be totally unfair to you, Inspector.  Have you
had an opportunity to view the video showing the entry
of people through gate C at the time it was opened? -
A. Yes, I have.

If you have then you would agree with me that if you
observe that video the manner of the people coming in
over the five minute period, after the initial entry,
was one of people just walking in, wasn't it, if you
look at that video?

     THE CORONER:   Can you remember what the video
showed? - A. I can remember the video but the gates
weren't closed after they came in.

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, I have stopped interrupting Mr.
King but really all this is, it is yet another
disguised speech.  He is selecting a piece of evidence
from the video, but to put it in context he ought also
to refer to the evidence of the gatemen and their
response, and what it was actually like on the ground
for people dealing with the people coming in.  It is a
selective address to the Jury on a particular point.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, you are right in the
sense that Mr. King picks a point that he wants to
explore, and if he wants to explore it he has got a
reason for it, so the fact that he does not necessarily
pick every conceivable point I am not surprised about
and I would not want him to, because we would never
finish, but the issue really is not whether he picks a
selective point.  He is putting a point to this Witness
as to whether or not he has seen the video and whether
the video, on his recollection - which I think he ought
to have asked - indicates that people were walking in,
as opposed to running in or jumping in or falling over,
or what have you.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am sorry to interrupt.  If my
learned friend would just wait a few moments for me to
complete this picture, then by all means he may address
you, sir.  The problem is he jumps in, if I may very
gently say, too soon, because there are further
                                         W. C‘. CRAWFORD


questions I am going to ask to bring it all in the
round and we will see what the Witness says.

     THE CORONER:   I don't have any particular
problems with the question, Mr. Payne, I must say.

      MR. PAYNE:   I have a particular point in mind
here.   We touched on this point:  I asked this Witness
about three or four questions, that is all, about what
he himself could say about what he knew about what had
happened.   Now, I could quite easily, when I was doing
that, have said to him,   I wonder if you happened to be
in Court?" or "Have you had a chance to read the
transcript of the evidence of the gatemen?", and then I
would have gone on and given their names, "Who said
that        and then I would have said what they said,
and then asked him if he knew anything about that, and
he would have said no, he did not know anything about
it, thereby me making a disguised speech reminding the
Court about the evidence of the gatemen.   Well I didn't
do it, of course I didn't do it, and I have
deliberately restrained from doing all sorts of things,
a lot of points like that.

     THE CORONER:   I entirely accept that, Mr. Payne.
I am not for a moment disputing it, but I ....

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am bound to say I resent the
suggestion that what I have been doing is a disguised
speech.  I am trying to fit in this evidence, and I am
entitled to put it to him, with what is seen on the
video and I am going to ask this Witness in a moment
whether, if he has seen it on the video, that fits in
with his recollection, and that is how I am approaching
it, sir.  It isn't that which my learned friend is
attempting to suggest.

     THE CORONER:   I think it is right that you should
check how much he remembers of the video.  I am sure
that is right.

     MR. KING:   I couldn't agree with you more, sir.
I am sorry to get into this debate because I didn't
want to.

     THE CORONER:   I don't want to either so press on.

     MR. KING:   I was investigating, Inspector, your
evidence yesterday that 2,000 rushed in, all right?
That is what I was investigating. - A. Yes.

You have agreed with me, without reference to the video
for the moment, your evidence is now, and to be fair to
you was yesterday in a different part, that there was
                                          W. C~. CRAWFORD


initially a rush in and then it changed, and you have
said today down to walking pace? - A. Yes.




            /Q. I was suggesting to you
                                  W.C. CRAWFORD



I was suggesting to you, therefore, that you did not
see 2,000 rush in.    The rush in would be the initial
people coining in and I think you probably agree with
that? - A. Yes.

Then I put to you, and I put it to you again, as to
whether or not you have seen the video which we have
showing the manner of entry of the people through
Gate C at various stages when it was opened and I
think you said yes? - A. Yes.

Does the video evidence which you have seen tie in
with that which you were trying to convey to the jury
in your words as to what you saw of the manner of the
people coming in? - A. Yes.

      MR. KING:   I can leave it at that sir.

      THE CORONER:  In fact I ought to say I have
looked at the transcript of yesterday's evidence
and in fact we had covered the point and he had
actually agreed basically with what you have now
re-established.

      MR. KING: I am bound to say, sir, because I had
a note when my learned friend was cross-examining him
that he said "2,000 rushed in". That is what I was
worried about.

      THE CORONER: Well never mind.    I have looked
at what I asked him. Carry on.

      MR. KING:   Sir, I agree with that.

      THE CORONER:   Just press on.

      MR. KING:   I think I have probably covered all
my points.

I have asked you about the mechanics of closing the
gate so I don't have to ask you about that.  I have
asked you about communications.  I don't have to
investigate that any further. You have told us that
what happened in 1988 you regarded as a matter of
course and you have agreed with me that the video
evidence coincides with yours as to the manner of
people entering? - A. Yes.

Just one other matter I want to ask you. Were you
yourself briefed before the game in 1989? - A. We all
were.

Tell me: on the concourse area did you regard yourself
or your Serial had any job connected with the directing
or controlling of the people entering the West terraces
                                  W.C. CRAWFORD



the Leppings Lane terraces. Did you regard that as
part of your responsibilities? - A. That was not on
the actual match order, that was not the instructions.

I am sorry? - A. It was not on the match order, it was not
part of my briefing. My briefing was to search the
people and my Serial was briefed to search the spectators
coming in through the turnstiles for banners, alcohol,
weapons etc.

Who did you understand if anybody from your briefing -
it may be you had no understanding - who did you
understand had the job of directing, controlling and
directing spectators who had come through the turnstiles
as regards those going to the Leppings Lane terraces, the
West terraces? - A. I don't know that, I don't know.

      MR. KING:   Thank you very much.


            Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Inspector, I believe you said you have worked at a
number of semi-finals and league matches at Hillsborough?
- A. Yes, that is correct.

So you are quite familiar with the ground there? - A. Yes.

And you were there at the 1988 semi-final? - A. Yes.

Was your position that year behind the turnstiles 1-16.
Am I right? - A. No, my actual brief that year was
the West Stand and also the stairways leading to the
West Stand and obviously that did entail walking through
the concourse and up the stairways to the West Stand
and generally in the concourse area.

Oh I have misunderstood that, I am sorry. You had
something to do with the tunnel so I thought may be
it was because you were behind the turnstile area?
- A. No, the Officers who were on the stairway, one
of the Officers was involved in the closing of the
gate on that tunnel.

Did you understand some of the basic principles of
Chief Superintendent Mole's system for the fans of
"find your own level"? *A$.you had worked at that
ground for a number of years were you familiar with
the way he did things? - A. Yes.

He emphatically told us that for semi-final matches
the tunnel doors were to be in thfe locked open position
whilst the ground was in use and also the radial gates
were also to be in the locked open position and left
unmanned so that the fans could find their own level
                                                             9


                                       W.C. CRAWFORD



     on the terrace. Were you aware of those procedures?
     - A. The radial gates are normally left unopened at
     the majority of matches. They are unmanned apart from
     when the emergency procedure is implemented.

Q. He also told us that they would be manned at league
   games, but that was a different system? - A. No, no,
   no, when the emergency is implemented at league games
   in the majority of matches.

            THE CORONER: I think what he said was,
     Mrs. McBrien, that when the gates are shut, when they
     are sequentially filling the pens and the gates are
     shut, then he mans them or his system was to man the
     gates.   If the gates were open or put in the open
     position then he didn't man them.

           MRS. McBRIEN: Yes, that is how I understood
     it but I don't think I put it over properly.

           THE CORONER: But we are talking about the
     match where the gates were opened.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN:  Yes, but for the semi-final it
     was his understanding that they would be left open,
     wasn't it? - A. That is Mr. Mole's?

Q. Yes and you as a Sergeant then would have operated
   according to Mr. Mole's system, I am sure? - A. Yes.

Q. Now in 1988 you said P.C. Lang decided to close off
   the tunnel at about 2.45.

Q.         THE CORONER: He didn't. What he said was an
     order was given but he does not know by whom, through
     whom or how it was communicated. That is right, isn't
     it? - A. That is right sir.

Q. But an order was given that the tunnel should be
   blocked off and P.C. Lang was deputed to do that
   job.

           MRS. McBRIEN:   There was a lot of confusion
     with my notes.

           THE CORONER:    It is not just your notes,
     Mrs. McBrien.

           MRS. McBRIEN: But yesterday there were con­
     flicting things that I had written down and it was
     very difficult to assimilate all this information.

Q.         THE CORONER: Have I summarised what you said
     about the position with regard to the gate in 1988
     correctly? - A. Yes sir.
                                                               10


                                             W.C. CRAWFORD



              THE CORONER:    Take it what I have said to be
     right.                         ••

              MRS. McBRIENs    Right, thank you.

              THE CORONER:    Shall I repeat it for you?

              MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes please.

Q.         THE CORONER: What the witness said was in 1988
     somebody, he does not know who, gave an order to somebody,
     he does not who to, requiring or requesting that the
     gate be shut and P.C. Lang, one of his Officers, was
     deputed to do the job. He did not tell the Officer to
     do it but he knew that he had been asked to do it.
     That is correct? - A. That is correct.

Q.         MRS. McBRIEN:  Would P.C. Lang have a radio.
     How would he get the message?

           THE CORONER: Well he just said he did not know.
     Isaid he did not know, repeating his evidence.

Q.         MRS. McBRlEN:   But you as senior Officer, he
     would come to you surely for any order? - A. He would
     not come to me. He was positioned in the stairway
     and it could have been a senior Officer who went to
     him and passed the message on or it could have come
     from somewhere.   It certainly was not me. I am
     guessing at that but he did have an instruction to
     close the gate.

Q. So you didn't know anything about it? - A. I picked
   it up but again that was part of my supervisory role.




                             Q. When did you pick it up
                                                                  11

                                                     W. C. CRAWFORD


    Q. When did you pick it up? - A. I don't know that.   It was
       such an insignificant thing then.   I was like moving a
       barrier.   You wouldn't place any attention on that.

B   Q. Did you see PC Lang at the tunnel in 1988? - A. Yes, I
       saw all my Serial.

    Q. He was positioned at the tunnel, was he? - A. He was
       standing at the tunnel.

    Q. One of the doors was closed? - A. Yes.

    Q. So presumably he was one of the Officers who was blocking
       the other part to prevent...

              THE CORONER:    He has told us that as well,
         Mrs. McBrien.

    Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:   I am sorry, it is very difficult,
         this one.   There were other Officers with PC. Lang at
         the time? - A. There was his partner, a PC Tyler, who was
         standing on the stairway.   He was assisting the steward
D        on the stairway and both Officers were working together.
         When the order was given to close the gate or whatever,
         PC Lang stood at the entrance to the tunnel.

    Q. Can you remember what time it was you saw them?  I think
       I made a note of about 2.45 or 2.50.   Does that
       sound...?

              THE CORONER:    That is what the Officer said.

              THE WITNESS:    It was well before kick-off time.

              MRS. MCBRIEN:   Yes, I thought that was correct.
         So they had taken this action - well, PC Lang had taken
         this action, it seems, on his own initiative maybe?

              THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien...

              MRS. MCBRIEN:    We don't know.   I'm sorry.

              THE CORONER:    Also tell me what you are trying to
         find out.

              MRS. MCBRIEN:   He was there presumably to prevent
         fans going down the tunnel, because he felt it was full?
         Was there a reason for his standing there?   That is what
         I am trying to establish.

              THE CORONER:   It is easy enough to find that out,
         whether this Officer knows:




H
                                              W. C. CRAWFORD


Do you know    why (a) one leaf of the gate had been shut
and (b) why    PC Lang was in that location? - A. I presume
that the pen   was full and he was placed there to stop
anybody else   going in.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Yes, it would seem obvious to
anybody that would be the reason.   From that point he
would not feel the need to go on to the terrace to check
if the centre pens were full?   He would have taken that
measure...

     THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien, no, I don't think we
can go into that.     He has told you where he was.   He
has told you what he   saw and he has told you why he
thinks he was there.    That is sufficient.    He can't
tell you what other thoughts might have been going
through Mr. Lang's mind.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Are you aware that at that semi­
final numerous people have said that the centre pens were
extremely full at kick-off time?   That is, fifteen
minutes after that action was taken.   They said they
were quite uncomfortable, so do you agree that either the
tunnel was closed off when it was rather too late for
comfort, or that fans had gone round to the sides...

     THE CORONER:   No.   I don't mind the first half of
the question.   Not that it gets us very far.   However,
the second half, don't answer.   I will ask it:

Did you know - not now - but did you know in 1988 or,
indeed, in 1989, prior to the match, that fans had been
uncomfortable in the centre pens during the 1988 match? -
A. No.

You didn't know? - A. I didn't know.

Do you know it now, as a matter of interest, apart from
my just telling you? - A. Just when you told me.

     THE CORONER:     He will not be able to help you any
further on that.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   You said earlier, Inspector, that
you did understand Chief Superintendent Mole's system
that fans, if they went to the side...   If they decided,
whether there was anyone there or not at the tunnel
entrance, if they decided to go round to the left there
was nothing stopping them getting to the centre section
if they used the radial gates which were open at the
back, was there? - A. Yes, that's quite true.  They could
have done that.
                                                             13

                                                 W. C. 'CRAWFORD


Q.    It was a circuit, wasn't it?  They could go all the way
     round if they wished to? - A. Yes.

Q.    When Gate C first opened at 2.48 and you saw a fan being
     ejected. I think you said you thought about fifty fans
     came in at that time.    You were not aware that some
     Police Officers believed that that opening was in
     response to Superintendent Marshall's request, were you?
     - A. I don't know about that, no.

Q. And that they had actually been encouraged by Police
   Officers?

          THE CORONER:   No.    I will ask the question for you
     as far as you can go:

Q. You described an opening of the gate which you took to be
   an ejection? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. You thought that fifty came through, possiblv a bit more.
   You modified that? - A. Yes.

Q. The question is this:  were you aware at that time that
   other Police Officers - not you - other Police Officers
   had taken the view that the gate was being opened as a
   result of Superintendent Marshall's request for the gates
   to be opened? - A. I wasn't aware.

Q. You weren't aware of that.

          THE CORONER:   Then he doesn't know.    I would
     expect him not to know.

Q.        MRS. MCBRIEN:   However, you took the correct action
     by running over to the gate, I believe? - A. Yes.

Q. To ensure that it was locked again.   I believe a mounted
   Officer did manage to do that after just a few seconds? -
   A. Yes, a few seconds.

Q. Now your Serial was the only one in the concourse area,
   wasn't it? - A. I think it was at that particular time,
   yes, but I do not know who was working behind me, if
   anybody was working behind me.

Q. You only had ten Officers there? - A. I had eight
   Officers at the turnstiles and one Officer was watching
   the programme sellers, protecting the programme sellers,
   and another Officer at the snack bar protecting the staff
   there.

Q. Your Serial was number 14? - A. That's correct.
                                              W. C. CRAWFORD


Under   the command of     Superintendent Greenwood. You were
under  the command of      Superintendent Greenwood, weren't
you? - A. Superintendent   Greenwood was in charge of the
operation within the       ground, yes, overall.

Would   you mind turning to page 31 of the Operation Order?

     THE CORONER:   What is it you are going to ask,
Mrs. McBrien?   We are not going to go over the whole of
the Operational Order again.   I said it yesterday and I
meant it and I don't intend to do it.   What is it you
are getting at?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   I just wanted to go through the
first part, phase 1.

      THE CORONER:       No.He has told us what his duties
were.    He has said   it to me.  He has said it to
Mr. King.    I don't know whether he has said it to
Mr. Payne, I can't remember.     He said his job was
searching:

That's right, isn't it? - A. That is correct, sir, and
also phase 2.   I also covered phase 2.

     THE CORONER:   What in particular do you want to ask
him about that?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:     Just what his duty was there and how
easy or difficult it was going to be that day for this
Officer to carry out his duties really.     That is the
question.

     THE CORONER:   Please tell Mrs. McBrien what your
duties were.   Phase 1.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Just very briefly.  Searching will
do. - A. Searching of the fans as they came through the
turnstiles.   Searching for alcohol, searching for
banners, etc.

Normally you would be able to carry that duty out
comparatively easily, wouldn't you? -A. Initially it was
easy.

I mean at all these other matches that you have policed.
If you were in that sort of position you would not find
it too difficult to perform that task would you? - A. It
isn't a difficult task, no.



              Q. Were you able to perform
                                                               15

                                                    W. C. CRAWFORD


Q. Were you able to perform those duties right up to the
   time that gate C was opened? Did you feel you were
   doing your job as well as you possibly could that day?

          THE CORONER: That is not a possible question to
     answer.  I know what you are getting at but he has got
     to say yes to that, has he not, if you think about it?
     "Was I doing my job as well as I possibly could?" and
     the answer must be yes. What I think you are trying to
     ask him is, was he able to do his job to the standard
     which he would liked to have achieved that day.

         MRS. McBRIEN:   Up to the opening of gate C.

Q.       THE CORONER:    Have you understood? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Answer my question which is a bit more pointed
   actually? - A. No. The answer is no.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN: You were not able to do your duty
     that day to a reasonable standard up to the opening of
     gate C did you say? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. Why? - A. I couldn't perform that duty after a certain
   time.

Q. No, before a certain time I asked? - A. Between, until
   the gate opened it was impossible.

Q. It was impossible to do your ordinary duty that day?

          THE CORONER:   No, he did not say that.

Q. Repeat your answer? - A. What I said was that I could
   not perform this duty after a certain time and you
   said, up until gate C opened. Well, it was between
   that time when gate C opened I could not do it simply
   because of the manner, the aggression and the actual
   carry on, the overwhelming situation that I was placed
   in with the fans.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:  I was coming to that later
     actually. As you said the tunnel had been closed off
     in 1988. Did you consider doing the same thing again
     in 1989 at about quarter to three? Would it have been
     a possibility or a consideration? - A. It could have
     been done had I prior knowledge, yes.

Q. It could? - A. It could have been done.

Q. But you did not consider it? - A. The problem I had was
   on the turnstiles and I concentrated my attention on
   the turnstile, it was so serious.
If some Officer of your serial would have gone on to
the terrace at about a quarter to three that day, do
you think he may have decided to close off the tunnel?

     THE CORONER: No, do not answer that question.
That is a completely hypothetical question which is
impossible for him to answer. Try something different.
Mrs. McBrien, I am going to hurry you on a little bit
because we have not made any progress in the last
twenty minutes at all so far as this Inquest is
concerned.

     MRS. McBRIEN: Inspector, you said you thought it
might be considered a sensible possibility to do that
though, is that right?

     THE CORONER:    No, he did not say that.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    The closing of the tunnel.

     THE CORONER: He did not say it and he does not
have to answer it.

     MRS. McBRIEN: I believe Mr. Lock said when he
gave his evidence that closing off the central tunnel
to the Leppings Lane terrace would be an incredibly
stupid thing to do. I hope I have got that right.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: With respect, Mr. Lock said that
closing both gates to the tunnel would be an incredibly
stupid thing to do. He did not say closing the tunnel
itself.

     THE CORONER: Yes, that is right. You are quite
right, Mr. Catchpole. What is the question?

     MRS. McBRIEN: Also Chief Superintendent Mole was
emphatic about leaving the tunnel doors open, both of
them, at a Semi Final match. Also...

     THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, please ask the
question otherwise I am going to ask you to move on
because I do not think there is a question behind this.

     MRS. McBRIEN: I will just ask you one more
question, Inspector. This one is a long question. We
know that you did not decide to do that and no one in
your serial did it.

     THE CORONER:   In 1989 you did not decide to close
the tunnel I think Mrs. McBrien is asking.  Do you
agree with that? - A. I agree with that.
                                                   W. C. CRAWFORD



     MRS. McBRIEN: We also know that the number of
people outside the turnstiles had overwhelmed the
Officers there and control had been lost. That is what
the fans were complaining about when they were coming
in to you and they irate. They were complaining
because things were chaotic on the other side of the
turnstiles, weren't they? - A. My view is actually
restricted with the turnstiles and I can only see
through the actual turnstiles but you can sense there
is a problem outside. So in answer to your question it
was obvious there was a problem.

It seemed to me from the notes I made that the fans
wanted something to be done about the situation outside
the turnstiles.  If it was a public order situation
then they wanted the Police to deal with that
situation, didn't they? They were asking for help
outside. Though you couldn't see it they were telling
you about it? - A. Yes, they were telling me about it.

If the numbers had overwhelmed the Officers outside
they would also overwhelm you and your serial if they
came into that concourse whether they came in at a
steady rate or not.

     THE CORONER: They may have done or they may not.
I do not know whether you can ask this question. You
are making a speech, Mrs. McBrien, and that is not
proper.  It will be a decision for the Jury, Mrs.
McBrien, whether or not that is so. All you can ask
this Officer is what he perceived. You cannot tell him
what would have happened.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  I am trying not to do that but I
wanted to ask, did the numbers overwhelm you?

        THE CORONER:   That is fair enough.   I do not mind
that.

    THE WITNESS:  I said initially it was an
overwhelming situation which we fought to control or
try and control.

    MRS. McBRIEN: Do you say the Operational Order had
certainly not made provisions for your single serial of
10 men to deal with this type of overwhelming
situation? - A. It is not written into the order.

It was completely unexpected for you, wasn't it? - A.
It was unexpected.
A
                                                                    is
                                                         W. C. CRAWFORD


    Q. Did anybody tell you it was going to happen? - A.
       Nobody told me it was going to happen, no.
B   Q. So the possibility is that you and your serial could
       have been carried along with this current of people if
       you had tried to direct the fans by speaking to
       individuals in a crowd such as that. Do you think that
       is a possibility? - A. Carried on, you mean get caught
       up in the rush?

    Q. Yes, if you would have gone in the middle of the crowd,
       in the centre, do you think you yourself may have been
       carried along? - A. I am sure that could have happened.

    Q. If you would have taken the other alternative which
       people have suggested of closing off the tunnel, if you
       would have rushed over to that spot you would have had
       to...

              THE CORONER:    No, Mrs. McBrien.

    Q.        MRS. McBRIEN: The photograph that we have seen
         several times of the tunnel doors, C.263, they show the
         doors. One would have to go into the tunnel to bring
         those doors outwards to close them.

              THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, I am sorry, no. I am
         sorry, I am getting tired.  I do not want you to
         continue with this line of questioning.  It is not
         relevant.

              MR. CATCHPOLE:  It might be, I do not know, that
         Mrs. McBrien is about to ask a question as to the ease
         or difficulty of closing those tunnel doors against a
         flow of people that is already established.  That might
         be the case.

              THE CORONER:    Is that what you are asking?

              MRS. McBRIEN:    That was exactly what I was going
         to do.

              THE CORONER: Thank you, Mr. Catchpole.     All
         right, fair enough, I misunderstood you.

    Q. The question was, do you have to go into the tunnel in
       order to get the gates shut? - A. What you would do,
       the gate is never locked.  It is just pushed open if
       that was the case. They open in towards the tunnel.

    Q.        MRS. McBRIEN: What I was asking is, you would
         need to go partly into the tunnel before you could even
         start to close the doors of it. They were not on the
                                                                - 1 9

                                                        W. C. CRAWFORD


      outside, the tunnel doors, in other words, were they? -
      A. I know what you mean. You would have to walk in a
      couple of yards to get hold of the gates and actually
B     close them.

    Q. So that by the time you had gone a little way into the
       tunnel the stream of people who were coming in could
       have already reached the tunnel by that time, couldn't
       they, so that you could still have been caught up in
       the flow by doing that? That is what I was trying to
       establish? - A. I could have been, yes, if that was the
       case.
    Q. To deal with that sort of entry of fans, would you
       think that the whole Operational Order or the whole
       layout of Hillsborough Stadium would need to be
       altered?
            THE CORONER:    No, Mrs. McBrien.   Do not answer
       that question.

            MRS. McBRIEN:    Thank you.

            MR. KING: Sir, I am sure it was all my fault, but
       in the confusion of earlier on there was one area I
       failed to investigate which was on my list.

            THE CORONER: Yes, I quite understand.      It is
       perfectly all right for you to go ahead.

            MR. KING: It arose out of my learned friend, Mr.
       Isaacs' cross-examination.

                  Further Cross-Examined bv MR. KING

    Q. You were asked yesterday, Inspector, about what you
       might have done on your own initiative in 1989 if you
       had heard over your radio messages, first of all, "Can
       the gates be opened?". That was the first hypothetical
       message you might have heard because you did not hear
       it, of course. - A. I did not hear it, no.

    Q. First of all, if you had simply heard that message you
       would not know which gates, would you? - A. They would
       have to identify the gate.

    Q. If you simply heard, "Can I open the gates?" or "Can
       the gates be opened?" you would not know which gates
       were being referred to? - A. No.

    Q. It equally follows that if you heard a message, "Yes,
       open the gates", you would not know which gates were
       being referred to? - A. No.
                                                     W. C. CRAWFORD



    Q. Would you agree with me that for you to do something
       you would need to be told which gate was about to be
B      opened? - A. If I was aware gate C was open then I
       would have to qualify it.

    Q. In order for you to be able to be in a position even to
       start thinking about doing something, about what was
       about to happen, before it happened, you would need to
       know which gate was about to be opened, would you
       not? - A. Yes.

    Q. Furthermore, for you of your own initiative to decide,
       "I must close off the tunnel in some way", you would
       need to know, if you had not heard anything about a
       tunnel or any order about any tunnel, there was a need
       to close off the tunnel, would you not? - A. Yes.

    Q. Simply hearing a message, "Can I open the gates?" would
       not tell you anything about whether there was a need to
       close off the tunnel, would it? - A. That is true.

    Q. It would not tell you anything about the state of the
       centre pens? - A. It wouldn't.

    Q. You would need information from a different source than
       outside the ground in order to reach any sort of
       assessment as to the need to close off the tunnel,
       would you not? - A. Yes.

            MR. KING:   Thank you.




                                /Cross-Examined bv MR. RUSSELL.
                                           W. C. CRAWFORD


           Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

Inspector, just one matter, as the Coroner observed
yesterday we have had a wealth of evidence before this
Inquest that the radial gates at the back of the pens
were to be opened and locked open, and were on the day
of this tragedy open and locked open, and I think there
is some doubt in your mind as to the precise
configuration of those gates at the back of the radial
terraces, as to whether they were simply open or were
actually locked open.  Yesterday do you remember you
were shown a photograph by Mr. Payne of the pen which
included in that photograph the radial gate at the top
of the fence between pens 2 and 3, in an open position?
- A. Yes.

Of course, one could not in that see whether that gate
was locked open or not.  Could I ask you to have a look
at this photograph of which Sergeant Griffitfhs has
prepared an acetate.  Those, as I sure you will
appreciate, are the gates in the radial fences between
pens 4 and 5, and 5 and 6? - A. I don't know which pens
they are in, but that is the radial type gates, yes.

One can see that there are two gates, aren't there,
close together? - A. Yes.

The only place at which that occurs on that terrace is
between 4 and 5 and 5 and 6, isn't it? - A. I don't
know about that.   I don't know.

I am sure it is a photograph which can be taken on its
merits.  That photograph was taken at about 10-to-5 on
the afternoon of the disaster, and quite clearly both
those gates are padlocked open, aren't they? - A. They
are padlocked, yes, and up to the wall.

Does that in any way help you with your doubt or
confusion as to whether the gates were just open or
were, in fact, locked open? - A. Yes, they were open on
that day and they were kept open.  I think initially
when the question was asked a photograph was shown of
the wooden gates at the bottom of the tunnel, and I
think they were referred to as the radial gates
initially, and I think that is where the confusion
arose.

I think we were talking about the radial gates, in
other words the gates at the top of the radial fences
like that, and perhaps you were referring to something
else, but as far as those gates are concerned it is
quite clear that those gates were locked open, isn't
it? - A. Yes, they are kept open at all matches, apart
                                           W. C. CRAWFORD


from when there is segregation and then they are
locked.

And when they are open they are not merely open, but
they are locked open, aren't they, as we can see in
that photograph? - A. Yes, they are locked.

     MR. BEECHEY:   The "C" number, sir, for that
photograph is C521.

                Further by THE CORONER

     THE CORONER:     Thank you very much indeed.  That
won't be in there.    Do you want to check something? -
A. No.

Please feel free. - A. I thought he was referring to
this album, that he wanted me to look at it, that was
all, sir.                                   /

No, we have not yet got it in there, I don't think.

     THE CORONER:     Put up the ....

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     It is 266, I think, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I remember taking you through this
because I thought we were getting confused.  Was that
the one that you were looking for? - A. Yes, that was
the photograph that was shown initially when Counsel
referred to the radial gates.

Anyway, so long as we are clear as to which ones we are
talking about now? - A. Yes, it is the gates in the
actual terracing, which I did say, it was Counsel that
referred to those as the radial gates.

Now, I want to ask you one other question which
interests me.  I know you have told me that you did not
(a) receive any messages about opening gate C, (b) you
did not open it, and (c) you did not see who did it,
that is right, isn't it? - A. That is true.

Do you now know who actually received the message to
open gate C? - A. No.

                 (Short Adjournment)

     THE CORONER:    (Addressing the Ju r y ) There are a
couple of things which you have asked me about which I
will deal with.   The first question you have asked is
re C268, the photograph of the West Stand and the
Terrace, and you are asking where it was taken from.
In fact, we had a bit of evidence on this.  It may not
be entirely fresh in your mind, but somebody suggested
it was taken from a gantry, higher up.  In fact, you
have given me another comment on this and I will
mention it, namely that you cannot reconcile that view
with your own inspection.  That is a matter entirely
for you and I will deal with that in the summing-up.
It just happens to be a photograph which gives a
complete view.  What value it has will be a matter for
you to decide in the light of what you have heard and
what you have seen.  Is that clear?

     MR. ISAACS:    I am sorry, sir.  Is this the
photograph that is taken from the North Stand?

     THE CORONER:   No, C268.  Put it up just so we can
see which photograph we are talking about.  It is one
of the West Stand and the West Terrace, that one.

        MR. ISAACS:   Very well, sir.   Thank you very
much.

     THE CORONER:   What the Jury are asking is where
it was taken from because of that particular
projection, that is right, isn't it?  (Jury assents)
We probably could find out exactly if we traced the
photographer but I don't think it is essential to do
that because we heard that it was assumed to be from
the gantry, and you yourselves have, of course, been
round, and that is one of the reasons why we go round
the site.

     The second thing is, you asked me if there were
any videos available showing the Leppings Lane Terrace
from the Police Control Box, and the answer is yes
there are, and you have already seen them but a long
time ago.  There are hours and hours of them and you
have not seen them all but the compilation tape, do you
remember that, the two hour tape, the first half of it
contains a substantial number of shots of the views
from the Control Box, namely those cameras.  Secondly,
you also saw another video which was a split screen
video, if you remember, 1988/1989, which was about half
an hour's length, and that was Police cameras from my
recollection.  If you remember I was not very happy
with that so I had it re-done.  We did a shortened
version of it and we have got photographic spots out of
that, and that is from there as well.  I am just
reminding you of that but I would not want us to look
at all those videos.  I think we have got quite a bit
of evidence before the Court and it would not help us.

     The third thing you were enquiring about, the
computer print-out, I think Dr. Nicholson dealt with
that, and Mr. Mackrell may have done as well, I can't
quite remember, or Mr. Lock.   The problem is that there
are no intermediate print-outs as to what was going on,
say, between 2 and 3.   It is all on the screen and you
can watch it with your eyes, but unless you press a
button and get it .printed out it is lost, it is gone
forever.  In fact, there is a print-out of the 3
o'clock total.  Dr. Nicholson actually gave us those
figures in his evidence, and if you remember there is
also a graph which was introduced where you can, if you
like, reconstruct the turnstile entries on the basis
that he explained to us.   So although, as I say, we
could find the 3 o'clock print-out.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I have got a copy of it in Court
if that would be of assistance.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.  Maybe if you could let
me look at it later on.  I don't think it is' going to
be any help in the light of what we already know, but
if you would just allow me to have another look at it,
I have seen it before but I can't fully visualise it
now.

     I think that deals with all the questions.  There
is one more about a video about gate A.  I can't
remember whether that is on the compilation.  It is, in
fact, on the compilation tape but I will double check
that for you and make sure that it is there.  If it is
not there I will have a look at the snippets and see -
there isn't very much, I can tell you that.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     Sir, I have got it here, if I can
hand it up now.

     THE CORONER:     Then I can take it with me, thanks.

     MR. KING:   Sir, this may be not a problem but it
has been raised by those behind me.  Sir, the Jury
asked a question as to whether there was a video of the
view of the Control Room of the Leppings Lane Terraces,
as I understand it.

     THE CORONER:     No.

     MEMBERS OF THE JURY:     Yes.

     THE CORONER:     Say that again.

     MR. KING:   Their question was directed to whether
there was a video of the view from the Control Box of
the Leppings Lane Terraces, sir.
                                           R. L. GREENWOOD


     THE CORONER:   I beg your pardon.   I misread that.
I thought Leppings Lane ....

     MR. KING:   I congratulate those sitting behind me
then, sir, because they picked  up the confusion.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, very smart.   No, that is not
on the compilation tape as far as I know and I don't
know whether there is one in existence but I will look
into that.  I have misread it.    Idid not see the word
"Terrace", or if I did see it,   itdid not impinge upon
my conscience.  Thank you, I will check that.

            ROGER LIONEL GREENWOOD Sworn

                   By THE CORONER

Mr. Greenwood, would you give me your full names,
please? - A. My full name is Roger Lionel Gr'eenwood.

You are a Police Superintendent in the South Yorkshire
Police , I believe that is right, isn't it? - A. I am,
sir.

I know you have been in Court for virtually the whole
time.  - A. Yes.

Maybe the whole time, I am not certain .... - A. More
or less.

Certainly a good bit of the time? - A. Yes.

What I want.to deal with first of all is just to
establish that you have been a Police Officer for about
26 years, I think? - A. Yes, 27 now.




      /Q. f
          Y ou have had a certain
                                                                                                                               26


                                         R.L. GREENWOOD
                                           :---------------------------   f------------------------------------------- —



Q. You have had a certain amount of experience of policing
   football matches? - A. Yes, that started I think in
   1975 when I was an Inspector.

Q.   In fact you were I think an Inspector                          in 1981.                                               Is that
     right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q.   You attended the 1981 semi-final between Tottenham
     Hotspur and Wolverhapipton Wanderers.  Is that right?
     - A. Yes.
Q. It is also right, isn't it, that you happened to be
   on the perimeter track. Is that correct? - A. Yes,
   that is correct.
Q. We have already heard quite a bit about this semi-final
   but mainly from people who weren't there. Can you
   just confirm for me that that semi-final the terraces
   were different to what they are now in that they had
   no radial fences at all? A. That is correct.

Q. In fact could we put up a plan of the ground just for
   a moment. We will turn to that in a moment.   It is
   right that for whatever reason there was a crushing
   incident that year on those terraces? - A. Yes.

Q. Now what I want you to do, I want you to tell me or
   show me on that plan, forget the radial fences because
   of course they weren't there, but could you just indicate
   where the crushing incident in fact was? - A. Yes.

           MR. GRIFFITHS:     That plan sir is 274.

           THE CORONER:     Thank you.

           THE WITNESS: Yes, the crushing on that particular
     incident took place in this area here directly beneath
     the Control Box, what now would be referred to I suppose
     as Pen 1 or the south west terrace, directly there,
     directly behind Gate 1.
q.         THE CORONER: Thank you.   If you would come back.
     Would I be right: was that a sell-out match as far
     as you remember? - A. Yes, it was an all ticket match
     and as far as I can recollect it was a sell-out.

Q. It is a very long time ago and if you can't remember
   this just say. Do you recollect whether the whole
   terrace was actually full of people? — A. No, I don't
   think so. I think, and I am combining sort of
   recollection here with debriefing notes that I have
   examined.   I think that there was a problem in terms
   of space iix the centre and compactness particularly
   in the areal where I was because I was^ by that gate
   at the time of the incident.
                                                             27


                                    R.L. GREENWOOD



Q. When you say "problems with space in the centre", are
   you saying that there was crowding in the centre or that
   there was gaps? - A. No, I think there was space in
   the centre.

Q. In fact the reverse to what we have got now? - A. Yes.

Q. I have forgotten who it was, I think it was Mr. Mole
   was saying that there was "pressure towards the centre”
   I think was the expression he used. Does that fit in
   with your recollection of the situation? — A. I think
   what happened I think there was a spin-off effect to
   1981.
          The clear area of crushing was in the location
   I have described and the gates were opened and
   that problem was dealt with there. Then I think there
   was a spin-off, from recollection, further along the
   terracing and I think that people came over the fences
   further along where there was no problem of overcrowding
   or cnushing but I think it was - this is only my
   judgment from recollection - that it was the spin-off
   effect of people coming over because some people, quite
   a lot of people were out on the pitch viewing from the
   pitch and it was like a chain reaction, but there was
   no problem in my recollection further along that
   terracing at all.
Q. From your recollection and with all the caveats with
   time and so on, can you recollect whether the crushing
   that did occur where you were, are you saying it was
   localised? - A. Yes, it was localised and it was
   different than what I experienced in 1989. It was
   localised in that area and I was at that gate, Pen 1,
   and the pressure was coming from the back. There were
   clearly people at the front/ I can remember it fairly
   distinctly, who were being crushed in some trouble.
   It was not on the scale of 1989 at the front and the
   gates were opened and it was pressure from the back
   that created it and the lesson I suppose out of that
   incident is if you have got a particular type of crowd
   then there is a danger, you can get a spin-off effect
   from opening the gates and what actually happened was
   once the gates had been opened and the problem was
   alleviated that the pressure continued to come from
   the back and it was like a tap, you could not turn it
   off at all, and it just kept going as a flow through
   the gates.
Q. What I can't understand and that is why I am asking
   you is if the terrace was completely open and if
   this appears to have been a rather localised event*
   why did th^ pressure not dissipate itself laterally,
   at least towards the left. It may not have been able
   to get towards the right because the terrace ends there?
                                 R.L. GREENWOOD




- A. I think the answer to that, and a judgment on my
part, is that the pressure was coming from the back
and it was creating a forward pressure which was
increasing towards the fence and I suppose that the
momentum, because it was moving forward, would not allow
people to move to the sides of it.

      Clearly the density you could not draw a line on
it, it did extend beyond the gate, but the major problem
was at that particular gate area.

Obviously there must have been something to have induced
you to open the gate? - A. Yes.

Was the crushing already around the gate before the
gate was opened? - A. Oh yes.

I don't know whether you know this and if you don't
just say "I don't know", but was it in fact the gate
which had attracted people towards that part of the
fencing and that is the reason why people said:  "We
were in that area" or was it purely coincidence that
they were there? - A. No, I think within my experience
that people who go early to football matches, and if
you make the comparison between a league game and a
semi-final I think it is important that on all ticket
capacity games you can get people on the terraces who
normally would sit in the Stands but they can't get
a ticket because of course the restrictions that are
imposed and people do come early and they do go down
to the front and sometimes you can find that there
are younger people at the front and they stand there.
What had happened was the pressure from the back had
forced them nearer to the fence. I can't remember
distinctly but they clearly wanted to come out, to
get out of that pen and we managed to qet them out,
but there were people climbing over as well, I must
say that.

I know there were some injuries but of course no deaths
fortunately in that case? - A. No, my recollection of
it was that there weren't any serious injuries and
we were successful in that regard.

I don't think there is any need to explore with you
what remedial or other steps were taken as a result
of that incident because we have heard that from
others.

      In addition to that match of course you presumably
policed a few others? - A. Yes.

But you clefarly were involved in 1988? - A. Yes, I was.
                                    R.L. GREENWOOD .
      •                         M




I think you were involved in 1987 as well? - A. Indeed.

Can you just remind me where you were in 1987? - A. Yes,
in 1987 I was outside the ground on the Leeds United
end which was the Leppings Lane end.

So 1987 you were in'Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes.

1988 you were in Leppings Lane end? - A. That is right.

And then 1989 we know that you were ...    A. Inside the
ground.

We have heard a fair bit about 1988 and I want to just
deal with one or two aspects in relation to that. Well
indeed let's take 1987 first and dispose of that? - A. Yes

As far as you were concerned in 1987 did you have any
problems of any substantial nature with getting people
in through the turnstiles in 1987? - A. No, no.

We know that was I think a Sunday kick-off? - A. Yes,
it was, 12 o'clock kick-off.

Would you agree that it was postponed the kick-off.
Can you remember that? - A. Yes, it was.

From your recollection, irrespective of what anybody
else may have said, was that postponement in any way
related to any problems at Leppings Lane end? - A. No,
none whatsoever. We had anticipated problems on that
particular match but they did not transpire and the
problem of course was at the other end with the other
supporters.

So although it was postponed it was not at your either
request or indeed any need from your point of view?
- A . No, the operation went very smoothly at the
Leppings Lane end.

Then in 1988 you had the same job? - A. That is right.

We’ have already heard, perhaps you can just confirm
this, that the 1987 and the 1988 orders were not
identical but based upon each other.   Is that right?
- A. Yes.

At least 1988 was based on 1987? - A. It is a building
process as you have heard but basically the same.

Again I take it from that you had no particular
problems getting people in in 1988? - A. None whatsoever.
                                 R.L. GREENWOOD



Now one of the things which we have heard from a lot
of people, well not a lot but a fair number, was in
1988 there were filters.   In fact we have had them
located at at least three   locations. One at Catchbar
Lane, the other one at the bottom of Leppings Lane
near the Penistone Road roundabout and a third one
I think somewhere n6ar the perimeter gates. These are
all from evidence from various people? - A. Yes.

Now you have heard that, haven't you? - A. Yes, I have.

The substance of what we have heard is that the Police
set up a system whereby people had to pass between
them or round them so that they could check for tickets..
Now tell me what you know about that as far as you are
concerned? - A. Well as far as I am concerned that did
not happen.  I say*that because my role was if you wish
a roving commission to a degree.  It was always my
practice to finish up at the Leppings Lane end by
the turnstiles but prior to that I would have a look
round the area.  Like Mr. Mole I had a Land Rover with
loud speakers on and I would get about a bit.

      It was always my practice.  In those days there
were greater numbers that came by train from Wadsley
Bridge and so I would escort those trainloads down
and then after I had done that I would finish up at
the turnstiles, so that means that I would directly
pass the area that has been referred to on those journeys
there and certainly that is something I did not see.
More than that I did not arrange it. More than that
I would not arrange it because there are great
difficulties with it.   I certainly was within view
of the turnstile area up the road Parkside and Catchbar
and again did not see that.

      As to the one at the turnstiles that has been
referred to I think confusion may have created this
because what transpires there is that when you get
supporters coming to the ground if they have not been
before particularly, I suppose like we all do if we
go to football matches or rugby matches or what have
you we asked Police Officers or Stewards:   "Well where
do we go?"  It is easier I suppose.   It is a natural
reaction and a lot of people within my experience
would do that.   Now that might be confused as a
ticket checking operation.   That is the only thing
that I can put on that.

      The only other - having thought about this as
to where this may have come from - the only cordon
that I can recall using has been at the end of a
game and I .used it on the Leeds United/Coventry game
and I think also on the 1988 Liverpool game and that
is what is known as a filter cordon.   It is not a
                                  R.L. GREENWOOD



total block of Officers, it is Officers with spaces
in between.

         Now the reason that that filter cordon was
in place at the end of both those matches is really
to prevent public order problems because what does
happen at that end of the ground, particularly on
larger matches, that supporters from that end will
try and get round to the other end and there can
be friction, so what you are trying to do is deter
supporters from actually going round there.     You have
the conflict situation, which you have always got,
of balancing the freedom and the liberties of every­
body else that they may have parked up there.     They
may be going round there quite legitimately, so it
is trying to separate the two and put that filter
cordon in place so that people who are going round
to create trouble potentially will be deterred from
doing so and yet it lets the person who really wants
to get round there because of a parked car or what
have you to go through it, so cordons were in place
certainly in 1987, I believe in 1988 as well.     Now
whether that has created some confusion or not I
d o n 't know.




                  Q. Can I just put ..
                                                         32

                                           * R. L. GREENWOOD


Q. Can I just put this to you, we did not take any evidence
   from people in 1988, other than Police Officers
   basically, but we did hear from one Policewoman, I think
   her name was Ruth Cobb as far as I remember, who was
   initially on coach serial duty. - A. Yes.

Q. Then went down near the Penistone Road roundabout but a
   little bit higher up.   She seemed to describe what I
   would call a chicane, where people had to pass between
   Officers and they were checked for alcohol. - A. Yes.

Q. Did you have anything like that in 1988, as far as you
   remember? - A. No, not that I can recall.   My
   instructions to the Inspectors on that part of the
   territory is that a successful operation hinges on the
   alertness of Officers.   When you draw Officers in from
   other Divisions you are getting people who may not have
   done football matches before and I think it really is a
   question, as Mr. Mole said, of taking the ground, in a
   sense, the question of being alert, so that people...
   If I may say so, if it is a slack operation, within my
   experience if you have got particularly troublesome
   elements of football supporters then they will take
   advantage of it.   It would not surprise me if there was
   something which was going on, but it is something that is
   not within my knowledge and it certainly was not formerly
   planned.

Q. Can I turn the question round slightly?   Did you in fact
   either experience or have reports - I am talking about
   1988 now - of any substantial number of ticketless fans
   being present?   There are always some, we know that, but
   substantial numbers? - A. No, because...  I have thought
   about this as well.   If that had been the case then it
   certainly would have stuck in my mind because we would
   have needed a contingency to contain them and that
   contingency was present and it was never used to my
   knowledge.

Q. That is, once a match has started a place where you would
   congregate them, so to speak? - A. Yes, dependent on the
   numbers.

Q. Just tell me, so that we can clear it, where were you
   planning if you had had that?   Where would you have put
   the Leppings Lane end people? - A. Non-ticket holders?

Q. The non-ticket holders. - A. I think that depends on the
   scale, on the numbers.   There is always a contingency.
   One thing you could do, if there were only smaller
   numbers, then you could keep them within the perimeter
   gates to the actual turnstile area, if they were a small
   number.   However, I seem to recall that Cole Road up at
   Wadsley Bridge station was one of the areas.   That is a
                                                           33

                                           * R. L. GREENWOOD


   service road that runs at the railway station that is
   just used for special trains, which goes nowhere.   It is
   sealed off at the other end.   I think that was one of
   them.   I think certainly Hillsborough Park was the other
   one for the other end of the ground, but they were never
   used of course.

Q. They weren't in fact used? - A. No.

Q. Of course, the problem will only arise with ticketless
   fans, or at least there will only be a remainder of
   ticketless fans if the available tickets from touts is
   less than the number of people who come?   That's right?
   - A. Yes, that's right.

Q. Can I ask you this final question on this point?   Did
   you have any knowledge of a substantial on-site, so to
   speak, ticket sales?   I don't mean at the turnstiles but
   in the vicinity, in 1988, can you remember that? - A. No.
   It would be most unusual if there weren't any, but I have
   no recollection.

Q. I think I am right in saying that as far as you were
   concerned the operation in 1988 was entirely successful?
   - A. Yes.

Q. That is not to say there weren't arrests and odd
   problems, but in basic principles it was a successful
   operation which had gone off smoothly? - A. Yes, that is
   quite correct.

Q. There is one small thing which I have forgotten about
   1981.   You told us you opened one gate which was the
   gate we would now call Gate 1? - A. Yes.

Q. Underneath the Control Box, basically. - A. Directly
   underneath the Control Box.

Q. Did one of your colleagues open another gate and if so
   which one was that? - A. I have some difficulty with
   that.   I can't remember whether it was two of us at the
   same gate or whether it was the other gate.   If there
   was another gate open then it was the one, I think, that
   was immediately adjacent to it.   What I can't recall is
   whether the gates - I think even the fencing was
   different - and I think the gate layout might have been
   different as well.

Q. You are right.   There was fencing but it was of some
   different design. - A. I see.

Q. Before we move on to 1989, I think you had an experience
   of another crushing incident on the Kop, is that right?
   Can you remember that? - A. Yes, I cann .
                                          R. L. GREENWOOD


What happened then? - A. I have no direct experience of
the actual crush itself, but my experience was limited
really to the effect of people being transferred from the
Kop end.    I understood that the reasons why - I think
the Kop went slightly over capacity and I think at that
time the mechanism for counting people into the actual
area was a manual system, a clicking system on the
turnstiles.    I seem to recall that something had gone
wrong with that and it went slightly over capacity.     As
a result of that - there was space at the Leopings Lane
end terraces, they weren't full - people were transferred
and I think again that was before the alteration in terms
of the pens on Leppings Lane terraces.     They were moved
over.    Not a great number of them, but they were moved
over.

It was because of the problem on the Kop end rather than
at Leppings Lane? - A. Yes, certainly.        x

Do you by chance remember which year it is?   I am not
asking you which match, but can you remember the year? -
A. I think it was 1985 because I think I referred to this
in my general briefing to the Inspectors and Chief
Inspectors before the 1989 game.

Did the transfer in, if I can call it that - you know
what I mean when I say the transfer in? - A. Yes.

Did that present any difficulties at the Leppings Lane
end, as far as you recollect? - A. Absolutely none.
There was a lot of space on the Leppings Lane end and
they weren't put in the same area as the away supporters.

Oh, I see, it was Sheffield Wednesday fans who were being
transferred? - A. Right.   Sheffield Wednesday fans and
coincidentally I think it was Liverpool who actually
played that night.

So the home team had more supporters than... - A. They
did and, of course, it was before the new Kod was built.

Now if we turn to 1989.   We have already heard from
various people that the FA decided, and the club agreed,
to stage the match in Sheffield and the matter was put to
the Police whether they could handle it and Mr. Mole said
that yes, they could.

Is it right he selected you for the Ground Commander job?
- A. Yes.   I had left F Division in 1986 and gone to
another Division in Sheffield and I was asked to take
part in 1987, asked in 1988 and again asked in 1989.   I
said, "What is the role?"   He said, "I would like you
inside the gtfound."  That is exactly what I did.
                                                                          35

                                                    * r . l . Gr e e n w o o d


    Q. Although you actually policed outside in 1987 and 1988,
       you had already left the Division in 1986? - A. Yes.

    Q. So it was three years since you had left that particular
B      Division? - A. Yes.

    Q. Was it you who said you wanted to do inside, or was it
       Mr. Mole, as far as you remember, who designated you, so
       to speak? - A. No, he rang me up and he said, "I would
       like you to work on the semi-final."    I said, "What role
       would you wish me to adopt?"    He said, "I would like you
       to go in the ground this time," and that was it.

    Q. You   accepted that? - A. That's right, yes.

    Q. Did you at the timewhen you accepted, if that is the
       right word, know that Mr. Mole was leaving and somebody
       else was coming in his place? - A. No, I don't think I
       did, not at that stage.   I cannot be sure of that.

    Q. However, you found out probably fairly soon after that? -
       A. Yes, that's right.
D
    Q. Am I right that you did not have anything to do with the
       actual drafting of the Operational Order? - A. No, that
       was done by a planning team.

    Q. You weren't the Superintendent who was involved with the
       detail of that? - A. No.

    Q. When it was presented to you eventually, did it appear to
       you to be following the pattern of previous Orders which
       you had seen? - A. Yes, I think principally it was what I
       expected, what I got.

    Q.    Perhaps you would just   confirm this. We have heard from
         others that technically    the Serials which were stationed
         outside the turnstiles    but within the perimeter gates
         were technically yours    because they are "ground" people,
         so to speak? - A. Yes.

    Q. However, in practice, whilst they were outside they
       tended to come under the jurisdiction of the outside
       Commander? Would that be right? - A. That's right.    The
       Operational Order really only reflected what had been the
       case in 1987 and 1988 and I suppose a little confusing in
       that sense, but under phase 2, then those Serials would
       come into the ground and be under my command.

    Q.    So what you are saying is that these Serials under phase
         1 had a responsibility more easily dealt with from the
         outside and under phase 2 more easily dealt with from the
         inside? - A. Yes, as it had been done in 1987 and 1988.




H
                                        * R. L. GREENWOOD


I take it that that sort of arrangement had prevailed in
1988 as well? - A. Yes, exactly the same.

You were not concerned or worried about that? - A. No.

You knew Superintendent Marshall I take it? - A. Yes,
very well.

Indeed, the other Superintendents involved too? - A. That
is right.




       Q. Perhaps you would be kind
                                            R. L. GREENWOOD


Perhaps you would kind enough before we move into any
detail to just give me an overview of how you would
describe your role as Ground Commander.  How do you see
it, not with reference to this particular match but in
general terms if you were Ground Commander at a big
match? - A. It is rather unique in a sense.

If you like, describe it in relation to this match.
Perhaps that would be better. - A. Yes, this obviously
was an all capacity big game.  One is using
considerably more Police Officers than one normally
would do.  The rank structure, therefore, is increased
and my particular role in terms of the ground was to
respond, direct, supervise any problems within the
ground and I think in connection with that, possibly
best illustrated, if I may do so, with one of the major
problems that was seen to happen on that particular
day.

    In 1988 I think I had been in the ground in Phase 2
having worked outside, having completed the duties
outside Leppings Lane, and there was a problem on the
Spion Kop with Liverpool supporters who had bought
tickets for the Notts Forest end essentially.  It was
quite a thorny problem.  From that experience of 1988 I
engaged in the planning for what would happen in 1989
and I was responsible for briefing the Inspectors and
the serials in that particular as to how we would
handle that particular situation.  I looked fairly
constantly at that particular problem.  That is not to
say it would be something that I would necessarily get
involved in the nitty gritty.  I had got Inspectors on
there and I had also got a Chief Inspector as well but
if it became a major problem then obviously that would
be something that I would respond to as a
Superintendent.  I think you can enlarge that to the
rest of the ground basically if you use that as an
example.

It sounds to me as if what you are saying is that you
would see yourself in the same way as you described
outside as having a roaming brief? - A. Yes.

Keeping your eyes open, of course, but relying upon
your staff to keep you informed where necessary? - A.
Very much so.

That is right, is it not? - A. Yes, very much so.

The Chief Inspector was in fact Chief Inspector
Creaser? - A.. Yes, at the Leppings Lane end.
                                             R. L. GREENWOOD


We have already heard from many people that there was a
general briefing to everybody on the 15th from Mr.
Duckenfield and others? - A. Yes, that is correct.

You were there I tak6 it? - A. Yes, I was.

Is it right there was also a briefing on the 14th? - A.
On the Friday morning, yes.

Which was for the more senior people? - A. Yes,
Inspectors and above.

I take it you were at that briefing as well? - A. Yes,
that is correct.

In addition to those briefings did you brief your own
staff as well? - A. Yes, in addition to those briefings
there were certain Officers, certain Inspectors, and I
think Chief Inspector Creaser and possibly Chief
Inspector Beale at the Spion Kop end who had not been
at the briefing on the Friday, and I repeated the
thrust of what I had said to the Inspectors on the
Friday.   In addition to that, because of this problem
on the Spion Kop I determined, I would not normally do
it but I determined, in this particular instance that I
would brief the serials directly in that position and
the reason I briefed the PCs if you wish was basically
this;   the problem in 1988 had become quite bad.  There
was danger to them, to their personal safety.   It had
involved those Officers getting their truncheons out in
1988.   It was not an easy problem to deal with and I
felt in the circumstances that they should be briefed
personally by me and that I did.

That is the people on the Spion Kop? - A. Those are the
serials on the Spion Kop.

Those in particular? - A. Yes, because of the
demarcation and the segregation problem.

The next question is a question which may tend to
incriminate you so that I have to warn you that you do
not have to answer this question.  You are free to do
so if you wish but you do not need to. - A. Yes, I
understand.

It may well be in the course of what I ask you and
indeed what other people may ask you I will have to
remind you of your privilege. - A. I understand.

It is a privilege that you are entitled to exercise. -
A. Yes, I understand.
                                            R. L. GREENWOOD


In your briefing not to just the people in the Spion
Kop but to the staff as a whole, are you able to tell
me what that briefing contained? What were the main
headings that you briefed them on? - A. Yes.   The main
headings were, as I recall, one of them was in relation
to the Spion Kop segregation problem which I have
mentioned.  I also mentioned the question of people
climbing up into the West Stand and the importance of
the awareness and the attention of Police Officers who
were actually stationed in the West Stand.   This
briefing taking place, that I am talking about, was to
Inspectors and Chief Inspectors.

    I also talked about the question of alertness of
Officers in the way I think I have described before
hinging on the operation.  I talked about the question
of dangers of Police Officers searching particularly
which was a developing trend at that time.   There was
the question of being careful as to what might be
contained in pockets, what have you.   I talked about
the reputation of the Liverpool supporters within my
experience.  I talked specifically to I think Mr.
Creaser and Mr. Darling about the question of a problem
that again had arisen at the end of the match in 1988
when there had been a pitch invasion from the Leppings
Lane terraces. We talked about that. I said that
arrangements had been made to contain that if that was
going to be the case this year and also talked about
the question of providing a funnel outside the playe rs'
tunnel so that the players, the referee and the match
officials generally could get in.   It was drawn to my
attention because I was not in the ground when that
took place last year that the fencing had been torn and
the gates had come open.

This is the Leppings Lane end we are talking about? -
A. This is at the Leppings Lane end in 1988 and we
discussed that and contingent plans to deal with that.

This was at the end of the match? - A. This was at the
match in 1988, yes.

Again an incriminating question and I will not repeat
the whole warning every time.  I will just use
shorthand. - A. I have taken instructions on it and I
mean if you don't—

I will do my best because I think it is right I should
do it but I do not think I need go to through the whole
explanation each time because I am sure you can
understand it if I say it once. - A. Yes.
                                                  R. L. GREENWOOD


Q. Did you specifically brief the Officers with regard to
   monitoring overcrowding? - A. No, I didn't.      I didn't
   brief PCs who were on the track and I d i d n ’t brief
   Inspectors specifically about overcrowding but if I
   may, I would like to enlarge on that.

Q. Yes, that was my next question.   Can you tell me why? -
   A. Yes.  I think two reasons really.   One is that the
   Officers on the track are very experienced Officers.   I
   have made the point already that I normally would not
   brief PCs and I have given the reasons why I had so
   briefed the PCs on the Spion Kop.   Yes, I would brief
   the Inspectors and the Chief Inspectors and I would
   expect them to brief their men on those salient points
   if necessary.  My briefing links into the main briefing
   which is given on the morning.

       In relation to the question of overcrowding or
   monitoring or what have you I didn't brief the
   Inspectors on that.  They are experienced Officers that
   operate on that perimeter track.  The principle of that
   is quite simple.  You may have seen that on other
   football grounds you do not see Police Officers on the
   track at all.  It was developed I think by Mr. Moseley
   in the first instance.  It was enhanced by Mr. Mole in
   terms of having them in other areas.  They worked there
   continually week in week out and they are very
   experienced in the question of monitoring crowds
   whether it be for any purpose, misbehaviour or
   otherwise.  The simple answer I suppose is that it was
   not necessary for me, in my view, for me to instil into
   Inspectors that particular problem.  Moreover it has to
   be said that on the main briefing that morning there
   was an emphasis which was placed on safety.   So it had
   been covered in direct terms, the safety of the crowd.

Q. Did you know at the end of the 1988 match or before the
   1989 match began that the tunnel leading to the centre
   pens may have been or was closed off in 1988? - A. No,
   I d i d n ’t know and I have thought about it since. I
   would have come passed there at some particular time
   from the Leppings Lane end and I have no recollection
   of anything being closed there at all.

Q. Whether you recollect it or not, you did not know it at
   the time.  That is what I am trying to find out. - A.
   No.

Q. If we then turn to the day. - A. Yes.

Q. The briefingthas taken place and you have told     me about
   that? - A. Yes.
                                            R. L. GREENWOOD


I take it that between twelve and half past one or
thereabouts it was relatively quiet? - A. Yes.

Because there were not many fans about or indeed
anybody else apart from Police Officers? - A. That is
correct, yes.

And players and so on? - A. Yes.

I think in your own mind you had already formulated a
plan as to where you wanted to be at a specific point
in time.  Can you just tell me where you were planning
to be just before kick-off? - A. Just before kick-off I
had planned to be at the central tunnel for two
reasons.  One was because it is a good vantage point.
You have a good view on trackside and bearing in mind
that is where my role is that is where my position
would normally be, trackside, and secondly it was
rather unusual in 1989 that there was a lot of
attention focussed on the fact that the manager of
Nottingham Forest, Brian Clough, had been barred from
sitting in the dug out which, of course, both dug outs
are at the side of the central tunnel.  I had been told
of that, I think it was by Mr. Lock earlier that
morning, and it was said that there was likely to be a
lot of media attention that would be directed towards
him.  I was told of the arrangement that he would be
sitting behind the dug out.  So that was another reason
I think for going there and that indeed is exactly what
I did later on.




                           /Q. We will come to that.
            f
                                        R. L. GREENWOOD


We will come to that in a moment.  I just wanted to
place you there so that we knew that you had some idea
as to what you were going to do, that is right, isn't
it? - A. Yes.

Up to about 2 o'clock or, say, 2.15, in the briefest of
details, just tell me what you were doing, apart from
talking to these serials up at the Spion Kop which you
have already mentioned. - A. I had taken one of my
colleagues, the Operational Superintendent, round the
Ground.   He was new to his particular role.  He had no
actual role on the day, the reason that he was there
was because I think he has a responsibility for the
mounted branch and we were using mounted Officers from
other Forces.   I showed him round, I think it was his
first visit to Sheffield Wednesday, and at the same
time I think updating myself on the Ground, and
generally having a look who was there, who were the
Officers.   I think I remember particularly dne area of
the North Stand where there was a betting booth, and I
spoke to Officers about that particularly, as to how
they were going to be stationed around that to prevent
any problems there, because clearly you are talking
about money and what have you.   So it really was a
general look round and talk to both the Inspectors, the
Sergeants and the men themselves.

Did you go up to the Control Box at all during that
period, as far as you can remember? By Control Box I
mean the Police Control Box? - A. Yes.  No, I can't
recall that.

We are talking about up to about quarter/half-past-2,
that sort of period? - A. Oh, no.

Up to that point in time. - A. Up to quarter-past/half­
past-2, no.

Can you recollect whether you went down into the Club
Control Room or video room or whatever they called it?
- A. Yes, I did and I recall I went to look at the
scene when the team coaches arrived.  Of course, the
Club Control Room is by the players' entrance there and
I think I went in the Club Control Room at that
particular stage.

Do you remember about what time that was?  If you
don't, don't worry. - A. I think if the team coaches
arrived round about 2 o'clock, then it may well have
been -- it would be prior to that.

It would be about that time, yes. Did you notice
anything in there? Was anything said to you that
                                        R. L. GREENWOOD


caused you any concern or alarm? - A. None whatsoever,
nothing.

Had you noticed in that period, and this is a
potentially incriminating question again, any disparity
in the filling between the two teams? - A. You mean the
filling of the Ground.

The filling of the Ground, yes, sorry. - A. I saw
nothing that caused me any alarm or concern, nothing
whatsoever.

You had a radio, of course? - A. Yes.

But you yourself had no visual input as to what was
happening in other parts? What you could not see with
your eyes and what you could not hear on the radio, or
by verbal messages, you did not know? - A. No.

That would be right, wouldn't it? - A. That is correct,
yes.

Perhaps I ought to have asked this earlier, but how did
you see your relationship with Ground Control or the
Police Box? - A. I think Ground Control obviously is
the hive of information, the over-view of the
situation.  It is the normal communication point where
people would refer matters to. That is not to say they
would not be referred to me if it was specifically
requiring me, but if you were talking about the
question of additional manpower and things of that
nature, then that is the channel that you would go
through.

Let's move on to about 2.30, is that clear in your
mind, the time? - A. Yes.

At about that time you, I think, decided to do
something.  What was it that you did? - A. I decided to
have a look round the Ground and around the perimeter
track.

So where were you when you initiated this move, if I
can use that expression? - A. I think probably around
the central tunnel area.  It is difficult to recollect
that.

Were you by yourself or did you still have the other
Superintendent with you? - A. No, he had gone by that
time.  I was on my own.

Which way did you go? Did you go towards the Leppings
Lane end or towards the Spion Kop? - A. Towards the
Leppings Lane end.
                                            R. L. GREENWOOD


Q. As you set off towards Leppings Lane, and again this is
   a potentially incriminating question, did you observe
   or notice anything about the terracing? Let's start
   off with the Stand.  Did you notice anything about the
   West Stand? - A. No, nothing that sticks in my memory.

Q. What about the terracing? - A. Nothing again that
  caused me a ny alarm or concern at that particular time.
  I can't remember, nothing stuck out, nothing stood out
  to me at all as a problem.

Q. When you did your perambulation I take it you were
   walking along the perimeter track? - A. Yes, I was.

Q. Not on the grass but on that gravelly area? - A. Yes,
   that is correct.

Q. You would walk beneath the Control Box, wouldn't you? -
   A. Yes.

Q. You didn't go up, or did you? - A. No, I didn't go up.
   I continued straight around.

Q. You just carried on round the corner? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you, as you were walking past, meet any of the
   perimeter track Officers, at the Leppings Lane end.
   There may have been dozens all over the place but I am
   interested in Leppings Lane. - A. Yes, that's right.   I
   stopped to talk to one in particular outside the
   terraces.

Q. Who was that? - A. That was P.C. Helliwell.

Q. Anything said of moment? - A. Whilst I was there we
   talked of one incident that occurred, and this was
   something unusual that I had not seen before.  A
   supporter from the terraces climbed or was helped, I
   can t remember, went into the West Stand, and of course
   I had given specific instructions about that.  There
   were Officers that were stationed at the front of the
   Stand, particularly to deal with that aspect, and as I
   looked up from the track towards the front of the Stand
   I, or we because we were talking about it at the
   particular time, saw him move along one of the rows of
   the Stand, and there was not a Police Officer near him.
   As he moved along he turned around and saw both P.C.
   Helliwell and myself, I think we were gesturing to a
   Police Officer at that particular time who was further
   away, and he did no more about it, but he came down to
   the front of the Stand and dropped back in the
   terracing.  At that particular time it was a carnival
   ... excuse?me.
                                             R. L. GREENWOOD


Take your time and have a drink of water.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I wonder whether it might be
an opportunity to rise for a few minutes? We have been
going almost an hour and it would break the morning
nicely.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, very well.       We will break
until quarter-past.

                    (Short Adjournment)

     THE CORONER:   Before I carry on, Mr. Russell, can
I just say something?  You will appreciate that my back
is turned to you because I am facing the Witness, so if
you need to attract my attention you will just have to
stand up and shout because I w o n ’t be able to see you.
Please feel free to do so if it is appropriate.

     MR. RUSSELL:      Thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER:    Is it all right to carry on? - A.
Yes, it is.  I am sorry about that.

It is quite all right. - A. As I was saying, at that
particular time it was a carnival atmosphere.     I have
described the incident with the youth in the West
Stand.  I recalled   straightaway the incident with the
beach ball as well.   The beach ball was being flipped
about whilst I was there - no problem - there was a bit
of swaying in the crowd which one would normally
expect, and my view has been supported by photograph as
well.  That is exactly how it was and indeed I think
one of those photographs shows P.C. Helliwell ....

I am sorry, I could not hear you. - A. My view has been
supported, I think, by photographs and one of the
photographs shows P.C. Helliwell actually there.  I
can't be certain about the time that I was there, I can
only back-track as to where I went from there and what
have you, but I would think that was about 20-to,
quarter-to-3, when I was actually outside the terracing
there.

You spoke to P.C. Helliwell, you had a look in, you
were satisfied, then did you continue to walk along
Leppings Lane and turn right past the North Stand? - A.
Yes, I walked down past the North Stand and then down
to the Spion Kop, and looked at the problem in terms of
the segregation.  There were a lot of Liverpool
supporters in there.  I think it was on that occasion I
saw, I think, a chap who had been ejected previously
who reappeared in the Ground and he was taken out as
well.  I think it was at that stage I was going to have
                                           R. L. GREENWOOD


a word and just make sure everything was all right up
there, but the segregation plan was working well and
there were no real problems.  I think I remember
looking at my watch and thinking I must get round to
the central tunnel, it will be kick-off time before
long, so then I went round to the central tunnel from
there.

So in other words you continued past the Kop? - A. Yes.

Then turned back towards the central tunnel? - A. That
is correct.

Where you arrived? - A. Yes.

Haying got to the central tunnel, had the players
already come out or did you beat them to it, so to
speak? - A. No, I was actually at the centraj. tunnel
when the players came out.

Do you know approximately how long you would have been
at that central tunnel? - A. Not very long, not very
long at all.

Before they came out I meant? - A. T h a t ’s right, not
very long.  I think it was quite tight when I came
round from the Spion Kop.

Were you looking in towards the players' tunnel or out
towards the pitch?  Can you recollect which way you
were facing or do you not know? - A. I was looking in
towards the players' tunnel.  I think my attention at
that particular time was focussed on where we were with
the Brian Clough matter, because there were a lot of
cameramen around there, and I think the mobile video
unit was there from the BBC as well.  It was quite
congested, more congested that it normally would be.
It is congested at the best of times when the teams
come out.

We know what time the players came out. - A. Yes.

You know it as well because you have heard it often
enough, 14.54.  Prior to that point when the players
came out did you hear or receive any radio messages? -
A. No.

Neither?  It was a double question:  did you receive
any radio messages, I should have said first of all? -
A. No.

Addressed to you, I mean? - A. Not addressed to me.
                                        R. L. GREENWOOD


Did you hear any radio messages? - A. No.  There had
been problems with the radio.  I recollect a very
staccato effect on the radio at one stage.  I have
great difficulty in determining when that actually was.
I think it was before I got to the central tunnel, but
no, no messages to me.

So are you saying that whatever may have been happening
elsewhere which we have found out now, at that point in
time you had no knowledge of it? - A. None whatsoever.

You had neither heard it on the radio, nobody had come
to tell you, or anything like that? - A. No.   I think
other Officers were in the same position, there were
problems with the radio.  It really is, I think,
something that has got to be witnessed to be believed,
the noise level as well.  I think I have described it
as a cauldron.  It really is a cauldron of noise and it
is very, very difficult to hear what is happening over
the radio.  I think one tends possibly to listen for
one's own name and you are focussing on that, and then
you automatically register, but it is difficult.

The players having come out, followed by the linesmen
and the referee - you saw those come out as well, did
you? - A. Yes.

But Mr. Clough had not turned up yet, is that right? -
A. No.  I think he was slightly after them.

Yes, so did you stay there or did you continue waiting
for him, or did you leave? - A. No, I stayed there.
That would be my normal position if I was going to
start a match so to speak, I would be there, but there
were a lot of press people around there and what have
you, it was very congested, and I waited until he came
out.

Do you know whether he came out before or after kick-
off?  Can you recollect that? - A. I think that is
difficult.  I think it was around about kick-off time.
It might have been slightly after kick-off.  I
certainly did not see them kick off anyway; I was not
facing in that direction.

Did you know that the game had kicked off? - A. Yes, I
think I heard the whistle go.  I think so.

So you were actually facing inward towards the South
Stand, is what you are saying? - A. Yes, I was looking
down the tunnel.
                                                         47


                                   R.L. GREENWOOD




Q. What was the next thing that attracted your attention?
   - A. Well Mr. Clough came and took his seat; problems
   with the cameraman and somebody complained about the
   mobile video unit, I think it was the Notts. Forest
   management, people in the dugout. That was cleared
   away.  They were all ushered away.  Then I stood in
   the mouth, well beyond the mouth of the tunnel, not
   actually on the pitch itself but I suppose just beyond
   the actual opening of the players' tunnel and surveyed
   the ground.  I looked to the left to the Leppings Lane
   end and I saw some people, some supporters coming over
   the fence in the central area and I could see, there
   weren't so many, I could see Police Officers with them
   as well, not many.

Q. The match was in progress? - A. The match was in
   progress, yes.

Q. Having observed that what was your next action? - A.
   Well immediately I saw that I realised obviously that
   there was a problem and I went down the perimeter
   track and went straight to the fencing.

Q. Down the perimeter track, along the South Stand beneath
   the control Box? - A. Yes, beneath the Control Box.

Q. Did you go up to the Control Box at all at that point?
   - A. No.

Q. I will just check this point now while we are at it.
   Is it your evidence in effect you never did go up to
   the Control Box between the time you started your
   perambulation at about 2.30. Was it 2.30 or 2.35?
   - A. 2.35 I think.

Q. Certainly not before kick-off, is that right? - A.
   Absolutely not.
Q. You did not? - A. I never went to the Control Box, no,
   until some time later.

Q. Did you go to the Control Box at all that afternoon
   as far as you remember? - A. Yes, I did later on.

Q. Do you know what time the first time was that you
   actually went up? - A. I think it was well after the
   rescue had been completed I think from memory.

Q. Certainly not around that time? - A.No.

Q. You turned and you went towards .... I know you met
   Mr. Jackson because we have heard that? - A. Yes.
                                                                 48


                                      R.L. GREENWOOD



Q. Was that as you were going round? - A. No, that was
   later.  That was after I had stopped the game.

Q.   You turned and you went towards Leppings Lane.   Did you
     get up to Gate 3.  Was that as far as you got, if I
     can put it like that? - A. I may have gone a little bit
     beyond.  It is difficult to tell.  The problem that I
     saw was in Pen 3 and there wasn't the problem in Pen 4
     that there was in Pen 3.

Q.   Pen 3 appeared to you to be worse than Pen 4.     That is
     what you are saying? - A. Substantially.

Q. When you got there we know the match was still in play
   because you were the Officer who actually went and
   stopped it? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you tell me whether the pen looked any different
   to you as compared to what it had looked when you had
   been there on your perambulation, shall we say? - A.
   Yes, I had a good view of it.  I mean I looked in the
   gate for a start and then I got on the fence and I can
   see the scene today.

           There clearly was a marked difference at the
     front of the pen, the front six rows or so. Very very
     tightly compacted.  The remainder of the pen no real
     difference, no real difference.

           It was a remarkable situation.  I have talked
     about 1981 this morning.  It was different than 1981.
     1981 the pressure as I have described it was coming
     from the back.

           In 1989 when you moved and your eyes moved back
     from the poor people at the front the rest of the crowd
     were watching the game.  I generalised they were watching
     the game and I formed the assessment, the judgment,
     the perception that there was room for that crowd to
     move back.  It is clear today, clear as a bell.  It
     will never leave me.

Q. When you say you felt that the crowd could move back,
   did you mean back within the pen or back out through
   the tunnel or both or neither? - A. No, the judgment
   that I had was that there was room for that crowd
   beyond the compacted area to move back off if you wish
   that particular area.

           I attempted to get them to move back and through
     the tunnel.  The tunnel was not blocked at all and I
     did that when I was up on the fence because I have since
     been able to look obviously at a considerable number
     of photographs and I think when I first got there it
     certainly boosted my recollection in terms of the fact
                                                             49

                                    R.L. GREENWOOD



   that I was involved at the gate and we got people through
   the gate at that particular time.

        There is no doubt that it got worse, but in the
  initial stages that was the judgment that I formed and
  it was only because it had no effect and the problems
  were getting worse that I then determined that the match
  would have to stop and that is what I did.

Q. When you first got there, I want to talk about the
   gate for a moment? - A. Yes.

Q. Was the gate already open.  Can you remember? - A. Yes,
   I am certain that gate was open when I got there and
   remained open.

Q. Do you recollect whether when you first got there
   people were coming through under their own steam or
   had they already got to the position, as we know it
   happened later, that people had to either be pulled,
   dragged, carried through, lifted or whatever? - A. I
   think it was probably at an intermediate stage, there
   was a bit in between.  I am conscious now that people
   had been led out and came out quite freely.  I think
   that at the time that I got there it was becoming more
   of a struggle but it had not reached the stage I think
   that it probably reached later on when it became
   blocked for one reason or another, but people were
   still coming out at that particular time but it really
   was difficult.

Q. What method did you use to try and persuade people
   to move back initially before you decided that the
   match had got to stop? - A. Well I got up on the fence
   and I used both hands in a pushing motion like that.
   That was the initial movement and I was shouting my
   head off for them to move back.  Then there may have
   been people that were saying at the front:  "We can't
   move".  It was trying to draw the attention of the
   crowd to the problem.

         I was of the view that they were unaware of it,
   they were watching the match, so what I then did was
   to point down to the front of the pen to try and draw
   their attention to what was going on.

         Dare I say it it was eerie.    I do not know
   whether that is the right word but it was a very
   strange scenario that you had got this compacted area
   at the front and behind them people seemed oblivious,
   I think totally oblivious to what was actually going
   on and it was strange, very strange.
                                                              50

                                     R.L. GREENWOOD



         I could not understand it. I could not understand
   it and I have time out to I suppose try and understand
   it. I could not understand how with what we had got in
   the pen by way of restraints and what have you as to
   what could cause this basically.  It was like two
   compartments, two separate compartments to the crowd.

Q. Within the same pen? - A. Within the same pen, yes.

Q. What you are saying is longitudinally divided? - A. Yes.

Q. You said after a period of time you realised that things
   were getting worse and further steps would have to be
   taken? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you radio Control to tell them? - A. Yes, I did.

Q. Did you get a response? - A. No, I can't recall a response
   but the noise level by that particular time it would
   have been most difficult anyway.

Q. I think you signalled to Control as well, didn't you?
   - A. Yes, like that, just like that.

Q. And then you went on to the pitch? - A. Yes, I went
   straight on. I suppose, we have a procedure for stopping
   the match but you know one doesn't, one needs to stop
   the match and goes and does it.

Q. Do you remember picking up, if that is the right word,
   P.C. Packer to accompany you? Did you hear him say that?
   - A. Yes I did. One of the, I think strange parts
   about the whole of this, well not strange, one of the
   difficult parts about it I didn't even know him, I
   didn't even know him.  I did not even recognise him.
   If only somebody can bring their recollections totally
   back tojou. You know, very very tight timescale.

         There are other people that have said to me:
   "You said this, you said that" sometimes you can't
   recollect them being there.  It is something I have
   been told is quite natural for something of this scale.
   It is difficult to recall.

Q. Having stopped the match where did you go to next?
   - A. Well I think I went back to the fence, had a look
   there.  I went then towards, I think really I was on
   my way to the Control Box at that stage and that is
   when I met Mr. Jackson.

Q. You had a conversation with him, I take it? - A. Yes,
   I did.  I left him in no doubt as to what the situation
   was and that we had got casualties.
Ra .'                                                                  51


                                                R.L. GREENWOOD




            Q. That there would be casualties? - A. Oh yes.

            Q. Having spoken to him you did not continue to the Control
        _      Box. Is that right? - A. No, no, I didn't.  I presume
        B      now that that is where he would be going and then I
               went back to the fence.
            Q. Now this is again I am afraid an incriminating question.
               Having got back to the fence by this time of course the
               match was over? - A. Yes.

            Q. What further steps if any did you take at that time?
               - A. Well the situation then was worse. That was at
               the time that I noted within my judgment the first
               fatality. Officers were up on the fence. People had
               been clambering over there. Earlier on there were
               more and more people coming in. I think the situation
               in the pen had changed.  I think it had got worse.
               Again Officers were trying to get in at the gate. It
               was blocked.  I at some stage felt like diving off
               that fence and going in.




        E




        F




        G

                                   Q. Do you want ....




        H
                                          R. L. GREENWOOD


Do you want to rest) Mr. Greenwood? - A. No, I am fine,
thank you.

Take your time.   We will let the people go out and that
will give you a chance to recover.   I will break if it
is of any use to you because it is a very difficult time
for you and everybody else as well.    If need be we will
break but I don't want to break if you don't want to. -
A. No, I prefer to carry on.

Take your time. - A. More people had started to come over
the fencing, as I recall.   Clearly I think more people
obviously were aware in the pen, more supporters were
aware as to what the situation was.   Officers were up on
the fence and they were helping people over as best they
could.   I do recall at some stage that I stopped some
Officers going in through that gate.   It was extremely
difficult.   It was a dangerous situation.   Officers
were acting in the best way that they could.   It is a
situation where it is difficult to control resources.
It is difficult to control people.   Difficult to control
supporters.   It is difficult to control Police Officers.
You are faced with something which is a unique
experience.   You cannot train people to deal with such a
situation like that and responses are different.   They
are independent in many ways.

However, when it was safe to do so, when it was the
appropriate time, I said that Officers should go into
that pen.   I also sent Officers up the side of the pen
as well to go in there.   I was aware that Officers also
came in from the back of the pen as well.   I saw that
that was the action that would be needed.   If you could
have lifted everybody out of that pen by whatever means,
then that was really what we were seeking to achieve.
It was not easy.

The rescue operation was hampered.    It was hampered I
think by a reaction that I would expect to be normal in
some people looking back on it.    I was subject to a lot
of abuse.    It was alleged that we had, and I had,
murdered people, killed them.    It was alleged the FA^had
done the same.    Clearly supporters were in a traumatic
state.    I think entirely understandable, as I reflect
back on it.

Sad to say it became an attraction for the media, who
hindered the rescue operation.   I had to depute an
Officer to keep the media, the photographers, the video
man, at bay, to keep them away from the fence.

I also asked one of the Officers if he would go - this
was at a fairrly early stage as I recall - and get all the
                                          R. L. GREENWOOD


St. John's Ambulance people from the ground and bring
them to that fence.

I knew, or I did it myself, I can't be sure which, that
ambulances had been called - ambulances, not just one
ambulance.   I suppose when you are operating in a
timescale like that, "Where are they?"    There came a
stage when I discussed with certain Officers, where were
they?   Where were the ambulances?   In fact I despatched
an Officer to the corner of the Spion Kop, the North
Stand, because I knew that that is the First Aid Post
down there and that there would be an ambulance there.
That is the ambulance you see arriving on video.

I haven't got very many more questions, but just one or
two more.   Can you remember Chief Superintendent Nesbit
arriving? - A. Yes, I do.

When he came had the situation changed in any way as
compared to what it had been, say, in the five minutes
prior to his arrival, or was it still substantially the
same? - A. In terms of...?

Getting people out of the pen.    I take it at that point
he was still on the perimeter track near the fencing,
would that be right? - A. Yes, that rescue operation
had...   As I best recall there were Officers in that pen
and people were being taken out of that pen prior to^
Mr. Nesbit's arrival.   There had been part of a chain, I
think, formed before.   I sit here and say that in my
view I think the rescue operation - I am satisfied that
it was done as efficiently and as quickly having regard
to the difficult scenario and the difficulties, as it
possibly could have been done.     I am quite satisfied
about that.   We did as much as  we possibly could have
done.

This is another potentially incriminating question.    One
of the aspects of the rescue is the entry of people from
the back to get people out of the tunnel, or down the
railing gates which we have heard about.   I seem to have
understood your reply that initially you did not think
that was the appropriate action to take.   Have I
understood that correctly? - A. Yes.   On the initial
assessment and initial judgment, that is correct.   There
were a few Officers at the front of the pen at that
stage.

At what point did you feel that that altered and that one
ought to put Officers within the terrace, either from the
front, side or back? - A. Difficult to say when.   This
is something which has been put to me before in another
forum.   I was always confident that Officers went round
the back very early.   I am now bolstered in that view by
                                          R. L. GREENWOOD


what I have heard, particularly from Mr. Bullas.   I have
been totally honest about it all the time.   I have said
I don't know whether I sent Officers round the back.   I
could have done.    I can't say I didn't.  Or I may have
been aware they were going round the back.   I just can t
recall but it never, until it was raised, struck me as a
particular problem.

Your concentration as far as I can judge from the
evidence was on pen 3.   That would be right? - A. Very
much so.

Did you see what was happening in pen 4?   It is very
difficult, of course, to see two things at the same time
but were you aware what was going on in that pen in the
time between, say, two or three minutes past three and
quarter past when the ambulance arrived? - A. I think
that the answer to that is that would be yes.   There
wasn't the problem in pen 4 that there was in pen 3.    I
think the gates were open and that people were coming out
there.   The two things are just not comparable, in my
view from what I recollect.

We have heard from various people who would say they saw
you with a loud hailer.   Did you in fact have one? - A.
Yes, I did.

Do you know when you acquired that? - A. No, that is
difficult on the timescale.    I remember broadcasting to
the crowd to ask them to move back.   I remember the
eventual evacuation of casualties.    Again, something
that will never leave me.    The struggle that took place
in terms of the gates.    You know, getting people through
the gates.   I can remember exactly the words I used to
get people through there.    I told Police Officers in
there to take people out of the back.   We were not
running as a one-way situation just through the front.
We were running through the back.   We were getting them
out there.   The Police Officers at the front, it took
two to a casualty.   You can imagine that it would be
quite normal for a blockage to occur at the gate trying
to get people out, and it did.

I was broadcasting to them to say bring them to the gate,
now pass it through, now go back and the next one come,
"You come into the gate now, pass it through," rather
than trying to struggle with the casualties actually
through the gate, which is only, I suppose, a normal
door's width.   It was evacuated very quickly in my view.
I look back on it and it was extremely quickly, I think.
                                           R. L. GREENWOOD


You had a particular problem.because the terracing is
below the pitch, isn't it? - A. Yes.   It was a very
great problem because people were trapped in some cases
up to their chests.   They are in a well and, of course,
the other problem is that to get out on to the perimeter
track, with it being a different level, there are steps
there as well.

But some of the people who were against the fence very
fortunately are alive today.




        Q. I have got two more questions
                                                R. L. GREENWOOD


I have two more questions and then we will break for
lunch. The first is this; at what point did you
yourself learn that there had been a problem outside
Leppings Lane and that gate C was in fact opened? - A.
I didn't learn that while after.  I had no idea of what
was actually going on, what had been going on, save for
this;  I think it was at the time when I left the
central tunnel area to go to the fence and there was
something said at that particular time, who by, where
from, I cannot say. Something about an attempted
forcing of a gate but more than that I didn't know.   I
had no knowledge at all.  I think it was some time
considerably after when I leaxned that.  I think it was
after the rescue.

After the rescue? - A. To the best of my knowledge,
yes.

Just a supplemental on that one. This comment that you
heard from wherever it might have been, you are saying
there was no indication of what locality that event may
have occurred? - A. I think it might have been at the
Leppings Lane end. I think so but it never sort of
really registered again because the things that I saw
later - and then when I learned, well, they just didn't
tie up.

Are you saying that you heard it, then you got to the
fence, saw the scene and that was it? - A. Yes. As I
have said there was a marked difference at the front.

At what time did you have an opportunity to actually
speak to Mr. Duckenfield, the overall Commander.  I
know you have spoken to Mr. Jackson, you have told me
that? - A. Yes.

When did you first have your opportunity to communicate
with him? - A. You mean person to person or by radio?

Let us have person to person first and then I will ask
you about the radio? - A. Person to person, I don't
think I saw - clearly there was no opportunity during
the rescue operation. After the rescue operation there
were other problems to deal with in the ground.       I went
to the Control Box later on but I d o n 't think M r .
Duckenfield was there.  I don't think so. It is
difficult to recollect that.

In other words, fairly late on? - A. Oh yes.

Did you have radio communication with him during this
crucial period or him, or indeed Mr. Murray perhaps? -
A. I used my radio to communicate with Control.  That
                                                                  '57
                                                       R. L. GREENWOOD


      is really as much as I can say.  I cannot recall Mr.
      Murray on the radio or Mr. Duckenfield on the radio but
      that is not to say that that did not happen. Whether
B     it was the radio controller in Control I don't know.

    Q. Two more questions which are very straightforward.
       What were you wearing that day? - A. I was wearing a
       hat similar to that one that is over there.

    Q. A flat one? - A. A flat cap, yes, and I was wearing, I
       suppose it is the nearest thing you can get to black,
       an anorak.

    Q. A black anorak? - A. Yes.

    Q. You say you were not at any time on the steps leading
       up to the Control Box, is that right? - A. No.  I have
       heard that said and I mean I have got the greatest of
       sympathy with him but he is mistaken, I am sorry.

    Q. Pardon? - A. He must be mistaken.

    Q. You say you were not there? - A . I never went on those
       Control Room steps at all at that time.

            THE CORONER:    We will pause for lunch.   Two
       o'clock please.
                           LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT    _

                     Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE

    Q. Mr. Greenwood, can you first please go back to the 1981
       incident? Prior to the overcrowding that took place as
       you have described, in the preparation for that match,
       were you expecting that such an overcrowding or
       crushing incident could occur? - A. No.

    Q. When it did occur in the part of the terrace that you
       have demonstrated earlier, did the Police then react to
       the crushing which happened? - A. Yes.

    Q. Who was it actually who opened the gate on that
       occasion? - A. I opened the gate and a colleague of
       mine was there as well.  I am not sure whether that was
       another gate or the same gate.

    Q. Was that reaction in the interests of safety? - A.
       Entirely.

    Q. From that time onwards and from 1979 onwards, did you
       know about tlhe Safety Certificate which has featured a
       lot in the Inquest and did you know that there was a
                                                                     58

                                                       R. L. GREENWOOD


         Safety Certificate in force for the ground? - A. In my
         time at that Division I knew there was a Safety
         Certificate in force.
B
    Q. Did you know that the Safety Certificate included
       capacities which have been worked out for each separate
       part of the ground? - A. Yes.

    Q.   You obviously knew after the 1981 episode   that the
         terrace had been divided up into pens, as   we have heard
         during the Inquest? - A. Yes.

    Q. And further subdivided in 1985? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you believe that the purpose of the introduction of
       those pens had been to prevent any repetition of the
       1981 episode? - A. That was my understanding later,
       yes.

    Q. Also to assist the Police in the segregation of
       different groups of supporters? - A. Yes.

    Q.   So far as you knew since those pens had been introduced
         had there been any repetition of the 1981 problem? - A.
         No, there hadn't.

    Q. Mr. Greenwood, I appreciate these questions are pretty
       obvious but I need to just get on the record your own
       knowledge. Did you know that the ground was regularly
       inspected by representatives of the Officer Working
       Party as it was called? - A. Yes.

    Q . Did you know that an engineer was appointed under the
        Safety Certificate who made regular inspections of the
        ground? - A. Yes, I knew Dr. Eastwood.

    Q. And produced Safety Certificates? - A. Yes, I had met
       Dr. Eastwood.

    Q. Had any of these representatives — and indeed I will
       make it a very wide question — had anyone ever said to
       you over the period that we are talking about, that is
       the ten years leading up to the disaster, that the
       introduction of these pens had made any difference to
       the safe capacity of the terrace? - A. No, no.

    Q. In consequence did you, like everyone else, believe
       before the disaster that the Leppings Lane terrace was
       safe to be occupied by the certified capacity crowd?

    Q.        THE CORONER: Can you just answer the question in
         respect of ybur own knowledge? - A. Yes, I believed the
         terraces to be safe.
                                                                     ' 59
                                                       R. L. GREENWOOD



     Q.        MR. PAYNE: Did you, Mr. Greenwood, expect there
          would be any overcrowding or crushing problem which
 B        would arise on the terrace? - A. No, in fairness, not
          to the extent that we witnessed.  I mean you always get
          localised densities that are different. You always
          will do at every football match, every football ground,
          rugby ground in the country. You will always get that
          but not to this scale, no.

     Q. Did you believe that the 'find your own level' system
        which had been used at the 1987 and 1988 matches was a
        safe system? - A. Yes, I have experienced it in another
        ground as well.  I believe it to be safe.

     Q. Did you also believe that if an emergency of any sort
        did arise on the terrace then the terrace could be
        safely evacuated within the times that had been worked
        out by the Officer Working Party? - A. Relying on
        advice, yes.

     Q. I now come to the events of the day please and come to
        the moment when you walked from your post by the
        players' tunnel down to the Leppings Lane end and went
        towards gate 3 and answer this question; at any time
        up to that point when you made that journey, had it
        ever been obvious to you that there was a risk of
        injury to people on the terrace? - A. No.

     Q. If before that time you had seen or been told about
        overcrowding on that terrace would you have reacted to
        it? - A. Certainly.

     Q. What would you have done? - A. If you have got an
        overcrowded area there are several options that are
        available to you. One option is, and I stress
        dependent on the type of crowd, to open the gates and
        let people out through the front of the pen. Another
        option is to send Officers into the crowd whether it is
        from the side or whether it is from the rear in order
        to move people.

     Q.    Did you regard it    as   the role of the Police thatif
          they became aware of a safety problem, including
          overcrowding, then it was the duty of the Police and
          yourself to react and deal with the problem? - A. Yes,
          you have heard it is our basic and our prime tenet as
          such and that would be the case. We would react to
          that and always will do.

     Q.   I finally ask you this question and it is this;   at any
          time, Mr. Greenwood, were you indifferent to a risk of
          injury...



HI
                                                                      60
                                                         R. L. GREENWOOD



              THE CORONER: Finish the question and then let me
         say a word before you answer.
B
    Q.       MR. PAYNE:     Indifferent to a risk of injury to
         spectators?

    Q.        THE CORONER:    Mr. Greenwood, this is another
         question which may tend to incriminate you and so you
         do not have to answer it if you do not wish. - A. No.
         The answer to that is I was never, and never would be,
         even now as an overall Commander of a football ground,
         indifferent to any risk to the safety of people who go
         into such a stadium.
                          rrnsg-Rvamined bv MR. ISAACS

    Q. Mr. Greenwood, I just want to ask you about the
       briefings that took place on the Saturday and on the
       Friday before that. The Friday briefing given by Mr.
       Duckenfield was a briefing to whom? - A. That was a
       briefing as I recall to Inspectors, Chief Inspectors
       and Superintendents.

    Q. Was that briefing followed by any other briefing to the
       same group of people? - A. Yes, the Friday briefing I
       took my Inspectors and Chief Inspectors on one side and
       talked to them about problems and I think likewise the
       other Superintendents did as well.

    Q. On the Saturday a similar format except that this time
       Mr. Duckenfield spoke to all the men? - A. Yes, he
       spoke to everybody who was concerned with the football
       operation at Hillsborough.

    Q. After that briefing to all the men were there then
       other briefings? - A. Yes, as I said in terms of my
       particular part there, there were Inspectors and I
       think two Chief Inspectors who had not been at the
       Friday briefing and so I spoke to them. There were
       other briefings. The normal practise at Hillsborough
       is that the Inspectors or the Sergeants or both will
       brief their serials on their responsibilities for the
       day.

    Q. I think that on the Saturday after Mr. Duckenfield's
       briefing to all the men, Mr. Murray gave a briefing to
       all the men? - A. Yes, he did indeed.

    Q. Then the men split up into the groups you have talked
       about? - A. No, there was a further briefing.  There
       was an intelligence briefing I think by Detective
       Sergeant Charlesworth on dealing with the supporters.
                                            R. L. GREENWOOD



That is quite right and thank you very much for
reminding me. - A. Then the split occurred.

In either of the briefings that Mr. Duckenfield gave on
the Friday or on the Saturday were they, so far as you
were aware, in accordance with normal practise? - A.
Yes.

Do you recall him using these words:

    "I cannot stress too highly the word 'safety'.
    The ground will be full to capacity today and
    some of you may never have experienced a
    football match of this nature. Our job is to
    ensure the safety of spectators and you must
    make sure you know the escape routes, the
    problem areas and that you are fully conversant
    with your responsibilities should a crisis
    arise. There will be a tremendous atmosphere
    within the ground but you must not be caught up
    in this or the events that are taking place on
    the field. You must remain detached and clear
    headed at all times to respond to events."

Do you remember him saying that? - A. I don't remember
the exact words of what you have just said but it has
always been prominent in my mind that the safety aspect
was stressed both at the briefing; evacuation plans
have to be mentioned as a matter of fact — I do not
know whether that is the Green Guide, I cannot just
remember and more than that I think at the second
planning meeting that I attended safety featured
particularly there and I do know that David Duckenfield
was concerned about the safety aspect, yes.




                          /Q. Then do you remember.
                                           R. L. GREENWOOD


Then do you remember this, and I think this was said on
the Saturday as opposed to the Friday, indeed the text
of it suggests that:

     "All Inspectors who attended the briefing
     yesterday, these Officers will at the end of this
     briefing speak to their respective contingents and
     advise them of what they expect, and of the
     particular problems in their areas".

- A. That would be normal practice.

Quite clearly both the extracts that I have read to you
(and, sir, they come from briefing notes), are couched
in general terms.  From your experience, going back
through the semi-finals that you have told us about,
1988 and 1987 when Mr. Mole, I assume, did the same
job, is that right? - A. Yes, correct.

You would expect no more from the Officer in charge
than to give that sort of general briefing, dealing
with matters that I have just mentioned? - A. Yes, that
is correct, because if you are on a briefing - and you
can imagine a briefing with the number of men that were
actually on this operation - if you go into too much
detail then the whole thing is lost.  You have got to
be concise and you have got to be general.

Of course, he had a team working under him, yourself,
Mr. Marshall, the other Inspectors, who were very
experienced indeed in these matters? - A. Yes.

I am very grateful, Mr. Greenwood.     Thank you very much
indeed.

             Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Mr. Greenwood, in this "find your own level" system you
have referred to, did you understand that careful
monitoring of the crowd was a crucial aspect of that
system?

     THE CORONER:      That is an incriminating question,
Mr. Greenwood.

     MR. KING:      I am sorry.

      THE CORONER:  It is quite all right, you can ask
him, but I have just got to remind him as near as I am
able.

You are free to answer it if you wish, Superintendent
Greenwood.f- A. I think careful monitoring of any crowd
at a football ground is essential.
                                          R. L. GREENWOOD


     MR. KING:   Remember the same warning applies but
I am going to repeat the question.  Can you please be
specific to my question?  In relation to the "find your
own level" system which you say was being, to your
knowledge, employed on the Leppings Lane Terraces in
the 1989 semi-final, it was your understanding that
careful monitoring of the crowd on the Leppings Lane
Terraces, let me be even more specific, was crucial to
the success of that system? - A. I think I have
answered that, in terms of careful monitoring of any
crowd, no matter what system, at any football ground,
is a pre-requisite.

Is the answer yes or no to my question?

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I do think he has given a
perfectly satisfactory answer.

     THE CORONER:   He has given an answer, and I did
stop Mr. Isaacs on one occasion when he wanted to
squeeze an answer out of the Witness.  I said,  "You
can ask the question, subject to the rule, and the
Witness chooses the answer".  He didn't like it, I
think.

      MR. ISAACS:    I remember that, sir, very, very
well.   I did not like it but I abided by your ruling
and no doubt Mr. King will do so on this occasion.

     MR. KING:   I am sorry topress you on the   topic
and I will approach it in this way.  We are not dealing
with any football ground in 1989, we are dealing
specifically with the Hillsborough Ground, all right? -
A. Yes.

You knew in 1989, as I am sure you knew in 1988, that
the Leppings Lane Terraces were divided up into pens by
radial fences? - A. Yes, I did.

You also knew that at the semi-final the system was
going to be employed, as far as fans getting onto those
terraces, of "find your own level", all right? - A.
Yes.

I want to put it in the context not of any old ground,
because not all grounds have pens, do they? - A. No,
they don't, but football grounds I think under any
system, as I have said, whether it is, if you want the
answer to the question, whether it is "find your own
level", or whether it is a pen which is not sub­
divided, one always has to have careful monitoring.  It
is essential.
                                         R. L. GREENWOOD


Did you you did you not understand that because of the
radial fences - you may not have - because of the
existence of the radial fences, which divide the
Leppings Lane Terrace into pens, careful monitoring of
the crowd was crucial to the success of "find your own
level" on the West Terraces?

     THE CORONER:   This is again, I will remind you,
an incriminating question.

     MR. ISAACS:    It is, in fact, just to help my
learned friend out, the same question now a third time,
although you said earlier that he was not to ask it
again.

     MR. KING:   With respect, sir, it isn't because I
am putting emphasis on the pens, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I have given the warning:

Choose whether you wish to answer it or not.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I wonder how far this is
getting us.  The position has been made quite clear by
Superintendent Greenwood - has been made quite clear.
He has not articulated circumstances in which
monitoring would not be essential.  I wonder to what
extent the Jury is going to be assisted by a litany of
all the possible situations that can arise, to
establish whether the answer to those questions is
going to be any different.

     THE CORONER:   You may be quite right, Mr.
Russell.

Do you wish to answer the question or not? - A. I
think, sir, I have already answered the question.   I
don't change the answer:  careful monitoring is
essential regardless of what is the system and I
include in that "find your own level".

     MR. KING:   At the planning meetings which you
have referred to, and I understand - I am not sure -
how many planning meetings were there before the
Friday when you were present at the briefing for senior
Officers? - A. I think there were two.

This is in 1989, I am talking about? - A. Yes, 1989,
that is correct.

At any of those planning meetings was the question of
avoiding overcrowding on the West Terraces in the pens
specifically mentioned? - A. I don't think it was
mentioned in those specific terms, but certainly from
                                              R. L. GREENWOOD


     my recollection it was mentioned in more general terms
     as the safety of the crowd.

Q. I understand the expression safety of the crowd as an
   expression, and I don't want to be unfair, but I am
   specifically using my words carefully.  At those
   planning meetings was any question discussed about
   avoiding overcrowding on the terraces? - A. I think
   again, with respect, I have said it wasn't mentioned in
   such general terms, but certainly the safety aspect was
   mentioned and I think it may have been particularly in
   regard to standing spectators.

Q. Are you saying the word overcrowding was used? - A. No,
   I said not in those specific terms.  I think it was
   mentioned in terms of general safety, but in terms of
   general safety I don't seek to distinguish between the
   use of the word overcrowding.  It means the same to me.

Q. You were the Commander within the Ground for the 1989
   match, weren't you? - A. Yes, correct.

Q. You yourself said quite openly and frankly that you in
   your briefings to Officers, the senior Officers you
   briefed, did not expressly mention anything about the
   job of monitoring the West Terraces, as regards the
   state of the crowd, for overcrowding? - A. Not in those
   direct terms.

Q. You didn't mention anything, even in indirect terms,
   did you, as regards monitoring the crowd?

Q.        THE CORONER:   Just a minute, I am just warning
     you. - A. That is so in specific terms and I think I
     have given the reasons for that, and I have also
     mentioned it in terms of certain aspects.   There is one
     aspect that I have not mentioned about, if you wish,
     overcrowding, which was mentioned in direct terms, and
     that was the question of the Liverpool supporters who
     were on the Spion Kop, and I gave specific instructions
     that none of those supporters would be transferred
     without my authority, because of the very problem that
     you are referring to, that that may lead to
     overcrowding.  Now that was flexible because there is a
     tolerance built in there, and if it was two or three
     supporters then that would have been one thing, but if
     you are talking about 800 to 1,000, which I think we
     may have got somewhere near that, then clearly that
     would be totally out of the question and was never ....




                     MR. KING:   This is in reference
                                                          66


                                      R.L. GREENWOOD




Q.         MR. KING: This in reference to the Spion Kop
     you are talking about? - A. No, it is reference
     to transfer of people, it is from^the Spion Kop but
     it is concerning the question of potential overcrowding
     on the Leppings Lane terraces.

Q. What was your understanding as to who precisely, and
   when I say "what was", shall we say in the morning
   of the 1989 match before it had started, what was your
   understanding as to who if anybody, I don't necessarily
   mean names I mean identity of people by reference
   to status perhaps, who would have specific responsibilities
   for monitoring the West terraces, the Leppings Lane
   terraces for the state of the crowd in terms of numbers
   and overcrowding. Who did you understand would have
   that responsibility? - A. Well I think that responsibility
   lies in several directions. There is a responsibility
   there with the trackside Officers because that is clearly
   one of the reasons why they are actually there. There
   is I think also a role that the Control Box would play
   in that. There is also a role that the Officers in the
   West Stand would also play. There is a role that I
   would play if I noticed anything or indeed any other
   Officer in that football ground.

Q. If as I understand your evidence you would not expect
   anybody to specifically refer to this duty as opposed
   to just expecting it to be known, take the track Officer
   for example, how would the track Officer, what would
   his source of information be that one of his specific
   duties was to monitor for example the pen he was in
   front of for overcrowding. How would he know that this
   was one of his duties? — A. How would he know that?
   Well he does it week in week out.

Q. But he doesn't do it week in week out at a semi-final,
   does he? - A. No, but he does it at other games and
   that is part of the role looking for problems in the
   crowd.
Q. I am not talking about looking for problems in a general
   sense, Mr. Greenwood.  I am asking how would a track
   Officer actually know it was part of his job to be
   looking into the crowd specifically to look for
   problems of overcrowdinq, one pen over another pen
   for example? - A. That is the job that they are there
   for. They are there to identify problems in the crowd
   and if it is a problem in the crowd which is fiqhting
   or whether it is overcrowdinq, I don't divorce the
   two. That is the reason that they are there, problems
   in the crowd.
                r
                                                            67

                                    R.L. GREENWOOD




Q. But would you not agree, you may not, that the purpose
   of any system desiqned for safety reasons as reqards
   overcrowdinq on say a terrace with several pens, is
   to anticipate a problem and to identify a problem
   before it has reached the staqe that it is causinq
   danqer to the people within the pens. Shouldn't that
   be the purpose of a system? - A. I think that is entirely
   so but it is puttinq it in fairly simplistic terms,
   if I may say so. for the following reason and I think
   I have said earlier that you do not get the guideline
   density in all parts. You get localised changes in
   density and it is very difficult, you may look at one
   particular part of it and you say that that is over­
   crowded and it may well be in terms of the density.

Q. But you had a roving commission, didn't you? - A. Yes.

Q. Chief Inspector Creaser who was the Chief Inspector
   in overall charge beneath you of the Serials who wotild
   have regard to the terraces, he had a roving commission,
   didn't he? - A. Yes, he had a roving commission, yes.

0. Inspector Builas up in the West Stand, he had a roving
   commission within the West Stand, didn't he? - A. Yes,
   I think within the West Stand, yes.

Q. So Officers with roving commissions cannot be always
   looking at for example the Leppings Lane terrace, can
   they? - A. No, that is true. There were other Officers
   in the West Stand, of course.

Q. Very understandably your actual opportunity in 1989
   for looking at the Leppings Lane terrace on your
   evidence in fact was relatively small because you
   weren't in a position before 3 o'clock for any great
   length of time to look at it. That is right, isn't
   it? - A. Well I saw it for quite some time but I think
   it was round about quarter-to-3 in fairness.

Q. I understand you saw it specifically at that journey
   you made which I think you embarked on at 25-to-3,
   but leave aside that journey you embarked upon. At
   other times you were dealing with problems in the Spion
   Kop; you were dealing with problems in the players*
   tunnel, you had other things to do? - A. No I don't
   think so because I had walked round that pitch.   I
   had walked from the central tunnel towards the
   Leppings Lane terracing.   I had actually stood there
   for some time as I have already related.   I then moved
   away, walked across the front and then round the North
   Stand and then to the Spion Kop and one is not just
   concentrating on what is immediately in front of one
   in that senise, one is looking at the whole ground from
   time to time.
                                                                68

                                           R.L. GREENWOOD



     Q.    Would you not     agree with me, you may not, that you
           need Officers if you are going to ensure safety on
           a terrace like the West Leppings Lane terrace who don't
 .        have roving commissions but who specifically have the
B|        job of keeping an eye continually on the Leppings Lane
           tferrace to view it for overcrowding, for imbalance
           between the pens, general safety view? - A. I think
           that is true of any part of the ground.

     Q.   So if you are going to have people specifically in that
          position should they not be briefed specifically with
          that responsibility? - A. Well I think I have already
          answered that question that they are experienced
          Officers. That is their role.    If you got fresh Officers
          who were new to the job then they would be briefed
          accordingly but it is part of their role, they are
          experienced Officers and if somebody said to me that
          they weren't briefed specifically as to their role on
          that particular day then that would not entirely
          surprise me in fairness.

     Q. I won't take the matter any further than this point.
        You will agree with me, wouldn't you, that as far as
        you know nobody, and I include in this the track
        Officers, nobody for the 1989 semi-final was given
        the specific briefing or instruction that his job or
        her job was to monitor the West terraces and the pens
        to view the state of the crowd for overcrowding and
        any imbalance between the pens? That is right, isn't
        it? - A. I can say that I didn't do that.  I can't
        say what others did.

     Q. All right, but you can say that you know of no briefing
        to that effect. You can say that much? - A. I don't
        know.

     Q. You know of no briefing within your knowledge to that
        effect. That is right, isn't it? - A. That is true.
        That is not to say that it did not happen.  I don't know.
        I just don't know the answer to that question.

     Q. And it is also true that to your knowledge there was
        no such briefing in 1988, was there? - A. Well in 1988
        I can't answer that, I was outside the ground, sorry.

     Q. No, but you were at briefings, weren't you? - A. Yes,
        but I don't go to the Inspectors' briefings and I
        don't go to the Superintendents' briefings that are
        outside my domain.

     Q. I appreciate that, but at such briefings that you were
        at in 1988 you heard no such briefing along the lines
        I have referred to. That is right, isn't it? - A.
        Well I can't recollect from the main briefing but as
        I say it is outside my scope of operation.
                                                          69

                                     R.L. GREENWOOD



Q. Let me just investigate another slightly allied topic.

         Would you agree with me that the whole idea
   of a system is to provide in advance as to what to
   do in certain contingencies?

        THE CORONER: Be careful with that as well.      That
  may incriminate you too.

        MR. KING: You understand what I am getting at.
  I am looking at the use of the term "system" and isn't
  it important in a system that you work out in advance
  what you are going to do in certain contingencies?

        THE CORONER: Mr. King, I don't want to hinder
  you but if we are going to re-explore the whole issue
  of system, which we have done with Mr. Mole and indeed
  with Mr. Marshall and Mr. Creaser, then we don't want
  to do that.

        MR. KING: Sir, if it helps you I agree. Would
  you look sir at page 47, I hope it is in sequence, of
  Mr. Greenwood's transcript to Lord Justice Taylor and
  you will see what I am getting at.

         THE CORONER:   Which letter please?

        MR. KING:   Letter 'D' sir, just above letter 'D'.




                    THE CORONER:   Why don't
                                                                 70

                                                  R. L. GREENWOOD


          THE CORONER:      Why don't you go to that directly?

          MR. KING:   I will, sir, but with respect I need to
     take it in the two stages.

          THE CORONER:   Yes, all right.      Allow me to
     interject as appropriate.

          MR. KING:      Of course:

Q. Let me start again on this sequence, Mr. Greenwood.
   Wouldn't you agree that if one has a system which is
   designed for the safety of, for example, spectators, that
   if it is to be a system then it should have worked out in
   advance what is to happen in certain contingencies, so it
   could be a system? - A. In general terms, yes.

Q. In 1989, you being the Ground Commander, you had
   responsibility for the concourse area of the Leppings
   Lane end of the ground as well as the pitch area, didn't
   you? - A. I had responsibility for the Serials that were
   operating in there.

Q.   That is the concourse area? - A. Yes, the concourse area.
     You mean the well between the West Stand and the
     turnstiles.

Q. Yes, I mean the turnstiles as you come in them and the
   West Stand. - A. Yes.

          THE CORONER:   Do you want Mr. Griffiths just to
     indicate it so we have no...   Could you just point out
     the concourse area.   That area there:

Q. That is what we are talking about? - A. Yes.

Q. In 1989, in the morning before the game had started what
   did you think were the arrangements which would be put
   into effect on the concourse side which I have referred
   to?   All right? - A. Yes.

Q.   For preventing spectators getting into the centre pens  if
     a decision was taken that they were too full and
     spectators were to be diverted away from them, what
     arrangement did you understand was to come into play in
     those circumstances? - A. I think it would be a question
     of dealing with the options on that one.

Q. Isn't the answer that in the morning of the semi-final in
   1989 you did not know at all of the arrangements in terms
   of what would happen if they got full? - A. I don't think
   there was a specific arrangement that was said to me, if
   the North Wesft terrace gets full, if the centre pens get
   full, if the South West terrace gets full or overcrowded,
                                          R. L. GREENWOOD


no I don't think there was anything specifically said on
that.

It goes further.   If I had put this to you in the
morning of the semi-final in 1989, what would you do if
the information comes to you that the centre pens are
full, what would you as Ground Commander have done about
it?   What would you have said? - A. What would I have
said in relation to them being...   Are you talking about
after kick-off, before kick-off, more people to come...?

I am talking now to you as Ground Commander on the
morning of the 1989 semi-final.   I am saying to you,
"Mr. Greenwood, if the centre pens were to become full,
so you don't want any more spectators going into them,
what would you do about it?" what answer would you have
given? - A. Well, I think the answers that I have already
given in terms of one of the options is use of the
perimeter gate and I have qualified that.   Other options
are putting Officers into the side, along the back.
Putting Serials - not individual Officers - in there with
a view to moving the crowd.

Wouldn't your answer simply have been that it was in
effect a matter for the Police Control in the Police
Control Box? - A. Well, I think the Control Box have a
role, yes, but you asked me what I would have done.

Yes, indeed.   I ask you that because to be fair to you
it isn't the first time you have been asked the question,
you see.   I want to investigate this because I want to
suggest to you that the true answer would have been, and
I remind you the whole time of warnings which have been
given already to you that you are not obliged to answer
these questions if you don t want to, but the true answer
to my question would have been that you yourself did not
have any idea what would be done or what you would do,
save what you would do would simply be to get in touch
with Police Control and leave it to them? - A. Well...

     THE CORONER:   Before you answer, this is clearly an
incriminating question so consider your position before
you answer.

     THE WITNESS:    The role, as I understand it, and
have always understood it in terms of my time at that
football ground, is that yes there is a role for the
Control Box to play and there are roles for other
Officers in terms of the actual pens.    It may well be
that I could be at the back of the Spion Kop engaged on
other matters so it would be impossible for me to take
direct action on that.    However, if I was at the front
of those pensf and I saw that they were overcrowded, then
I would be considering the options that were available to
                                           R. L. GREENWOOD


me and I would do that in co-rordination with other people
and I would probably do it through the Control Box.    The
reason why is that I would probably consider utilising
the reserves that we had got on tap in the gymnasium.

     MR. KING:   I want you to be shown pages 47 and 48
of your transcript to Lord Justice Taylor.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, from letter where to letter
where?

     MR. KING:   Sir, you had better start from just
below letter C, sir, and it goes up to letter C on page
48.

     •THE CORONER:   Now Mr. Greenwood, we will show you
these and I want to explain this to you.    I explained it
to Mr. Illingworth so you probably heard it but I do need
to explain to you.    What I want you to do is to read it
through.    Mr. King will probably ask you one or two
questions about it.    It is potentially incriminating if
you admit that this is a correct record, do you
understand?    You don't even need to do that if you don't
wish to.    You can do, as you have done all along, but
you don't need to.    I want you to understand that you
have the right and privilege to say, "No, I don't want to
have any more to do with that."

     THE WITNESS:   Yes, I understand.

     THE CORONER:   First of all read it through.

     MR. KING:   I don't think I am giving anything away
if I say start with the word "What..." which immediately
follows the word "so." - A. Yes.   How far do you want me
to read?

Letter C on page 48, which ends with the word
"situation". - A. Yes, I have read that.

Remember that to each of my questions you are entitled to
take the stand that if you don't wish to answer the
question that is all right. - A. Yes.

The first question, do you accept that that which you
have read on pages 47 and 48 of the transcript of Lord
Justice Taylor, starting just below letter C, with the
word, "What" on page 47 to just below letter C on page 48
ending with the word "situation", that that accurately
sets out the questions which were put to you and the
answers you gave to those questions to Lord Justice
Taylor? - A. Yes.
                                          R. L. GREENWOOD


The next question, again you don't have to answer it:    do
you stand by those answers today as being accurate
answers? - A. Yes.

In the light of that then can I take you through those
questions and answers and the purpose is to suggest to
you that on the day in 1989 the system was such that you
as Ground Commander did not have a clue as to what
arrangements had been worked out in advance to deal with
the problem if the centre pen had become full and
spectators had to be stopped going in.

     THE CORONER:   You don't have to respond to that,
obviously.

      MR. RUSSELL:   I think you anticipated what I was
going to say.    If we are going to have his evidence read
from the transcript, let us have it.    Don't let us have
the slanted speech made before the transcript is read so
that the jury hear it with that particular echo in their
ears.

     MR. KING:   It is so you understand, because I am
going to give you an opportunity, Mr. Greenwood, to
answer the point, it is so you understand the thrust of
my question.   Can I give you the question and perhaps
you would give the answer? - A. Can I just say you raised
the question before Mr. Russell interjected.   You used
the word "clue".   I don't see that word in here at all.

     MR. RUSSELL:   That was precisely my point.   It was
a slanted observation to the jury.   If we are going to
have the evidence, let us have it.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I said you did not have to
answer that question.   I didn't say you had a privilege.

     MR. KING:   The first question which was put to you
in this passage was this:

     "What did you think were the arrangements on the
     tunnel side, that is the concourse side of the pens,
     for preventing further spectators getting into Pens
     3 and A when they did become full?   What did you
     understand was the arrangement?"

What answer did you give, Mr. Greenwood? - A. Answer:

     "I did not know of the arrangement in terms of what
     would happen if they got full."

Question:

     "You were the Ground Commander?"
                                              R. L. GREENWOOD


Answer? - A. Answer:

     "Yes."

Question:

     "Suppose at 2.45 it had been your view, and these
     are always only value judgments, aren't they, but if
     it had been your view that the pens were full and
     that further spectators coming in would cause
     danger, what would you have done about it?"

What was your answer? - A. Answer:

     "I would have ensured that Police Control were aware
     of that, but I would have expected them to be aware
     of it before me."

Question:

     "The answer to my next question may be that it was
     not your business, but did you have any idea what
     they would then do about it to prevent further
     spectators coming into Pens 3 and 4?"

A. Answer:

     "No, my understanding is that the Control Box can
     view those pens and they co-ordinate that
     situation."

Question:

     "But what does    'co-ordinate' mean?"

A. Answer:

     "Probably the wrong word, 'co-ordinate'.   They
     monitor the filling of those pens and any resultant
     action that needs to be taken is taken by them."

Question:

     "That is what I am asking about.  Did you know, did
     you have any idea what the resultant action would
     be?"

A. Answer:

     "No, because we had never reached that stage."
                                            R. L. GREENWOOD


Question:

     "But you might well have done.   As I say, it may be
     that you do not regard it as part of your business
     to have known what action Control would have taken
     but some action would have to be taken if you had
     reported the pens full."

A. Answer:

     "Yes."

Question:

     "And you have no idea what it was going to be?"

A. Answer:

     "I don't know what action that they would have taken
     as a result of that, no.   It is a flexible
     situation."

Isn't it therefore the case that you as Ground Commander
before the game started had never been briefed or
consulted by those in overall control in the Control Box
as to what plan was going to be put into operation if the
centre pens became full? - A. Not specifically in those
terms, no.

But you were Ground Commander and had a very important
role on ground level, didn't you? - A. Yes, that is
right.    I have worked at that ground for a long number
of years.    It is a flexible situation as I have said
there and there are several options that are open.

Let me move on to something else, but still dealing with
your position as Ground Commander.   You told us that you
did not know before three o'clock, indeed until well
after three o'clock, you did not know of the decision
having been taken by Police Control to open up large exit
gates at the Leppings Lane end to allow in a large influx
of people shortly before kick-off.   You had no knowledge
of that, did you? - A. I had no knowledge of it, no.




            Q. Y»u were, however, Ground Commander
                                             R . T.- ORKKNWOQD



You, however, were Ground Commander obviously? - A.
Yes.
Would you not have expected as Ground Commander to have
been informed by Police Control that the large
concertina gates were about to be opened and you should
expect a large influx of people through those gates
into the ground? - A. Not necessarily, no.

Why do you say not necessarily? - A. Because I think
there are several aspects to that.  Basically I have at
that end of the ground or had at that end of the ground
several Inspectors and a Chief Inspector and if it was
felt as a co-ordinated operation that they could handle
that situation with the resources that they had got
available to them then necessarily I may not be
informed. On the other hand it may well be again that
I could have been right at the Spion Kop and this was
something that was going to be done instantaneously and
in those circumstances I would not expect to be
informed.  I would expect that they would deal with
that situation.

Mr. Greenwood, you did not at all stages let Control
know where you were. They would not know precisely
where you were at any stage, would they? - A. I think
they would probably know for the majority of the time
because they would be able to see me.

You had a radio, did you not? - A. Yes, I had a radio.

I put it to you again. You would expect Control as
soon as a decision is made, because they would not know
precisely where you were, to let in a large number, and
I am talking about over a thousand people, to let in a
large number of people shortly before kick-off into the
ground at the Leppings Lane end where you were in
overall control under the Police Control.  You would be
obviously expecting to be told of that, would you not?
Can you conceive any explanation why you should not be?
- A. No, I have answered that question already.

That has not always been — I am sorry, I had better
rephrase this. Again this is a question you do not
have to answer if you do not want to. Have you always
taken that stance? - A. I have answered the question
and that is what I feel.  I do not think necessarily I
should be told.  In an ideal world possibly.

You are at ground level and Police Control, it is
obvious, are in a position above ground level in the
box, are they not? - A. Yes.
                                             R_   T._ g R F K N w o n n




If some sort of action is to be taken upon the entry
into the ground of this large number of people in a way
which is unusual, can I just ask you once again, would
you not expect to be at least consulted as Ground
Commander? - A. I think in an ideal world where you
have plenty of time on your side and what have you then
that may well be the case but having regard to the
circumstances that prevailed and the emergency that was
before people then the answer to that is no, not
necessarily.

You see, when you personally went to the end of the
Leppings Lane terraces just after kick-off and were
making your assessment and judgment as to what the
position was, you were ignorant, were you not, of a
most important piece of information, that information
being that not long before a large number of people had
been allowed into the ground through those concertina
gates into the Leppings Lane end of the ground? You
were ignorant of that information, were you not? - A. I
was ignorant of it but I don't know why you are
suggesting it was important at the time I went to the
fence.

First of all, it would give you the information, and I
accept you did not know it, that people at around three
o'clock were still coming in and going down the tunnel
and seeking entry into the pens. You would have that
information? - A. When I got to the fence I have
already said the tunnel was clear.  There was no
evidence of anybody going into that pen at that
particular stage and that was not very much longer
after three o'clock.

Mr. Greenwood, I do not want to go through with you
your recollection because that is your recollection and
I accept that.  It is not going to aid this Inquest for
me to say that that should not be your recollection but
you were in a situation where you were having to make a
quick and speedy assessment of the situation, were you
not? - A. Yes.

You at that time had no knowledge at all that a large
number of people had not long before entered the
concourse area and a large majority — I am not saying
all of it but a lot of it — of those people had gone
down the tunnel on to the centre pens.  You just were
not aware of that?

     MR. RUSSELL: Sir, is the answer going to change
with the number of times that the question is repeated?
The answer I believe has been given to this question,
if not twice, certainly once.
                                              R_   T-   f^R K K N W n O D




     MR. KING: Can I suggest to you and I will leave
it at this, what the difference in your assessment
would have been? It would have enabled you to say
immediately straight away and not later that what you
needed to do and to put into operation was to get
Officers round the back on to the concourse area, down
the tunnel, to take people out of the pens from the
back. That would have been the obvious matter which
would have come to your mind had you been given that
information?
     THE CORONER:   Be careful. You do not need to
answer that one either but you may do. - A. I will
answer it. I want to answer that question because I
think it is most important in terms of my assessment.
I do not see a direct correlation in the way that you
have put it in terms of the vast majority of people
supposedly going into the pen or pens that I looked at
at the time that I got to the fence and to support
that, whether it be right or wrong is for people to
decide, I have looked at that situation and asked
myself what was the cause of it. It does not
necessarily follow that the correlation between what
you have said and what I saw is the cause.

     MR. KING:  I understand your explanation for why
you came to the assessment you did and I am not at the
moment dealing with that. Can I just ask you to look
at two photographs, one from afar and one closer of
pens 3 and 4 round about just before and just after
three o'clock? First of all, there is a photograph I
am sure you are well aware of which we know as C.326A.

     THE CORONER:   After these photographs we will
pause, Mr. King.
     MR. KING:   That, Mr. Greenwood, is an aerial view
and I accept it is not the view of someone looking
straight on to the terrace of the Leppings Lane
terraces at 14.59, all right? - A. Yes.

This is indeed before, as I understand it, and I may be
wrong but I will be put right by my learned friend, Mr.
Russell, I am sure.

     MR. KING:  In fact, I will ask him.   Is Mr.
Greenwood on this photograph? No.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Russell says that he is not.

     MR. KING: That was before you had even arrived,
Mr. Greenwood, all right? - A. Correct.
                                                                   '79
                                                      R. L. GREENWOOD



Q. I accept this is an aerial view but it is clear from
   that aerial view, is it not, that those centre pens are
   jammed pack full? - A. I don't necessarily agree with
   this photograph and where it has been taken from and I
   have said that before.  I....

Q. Let me show you one which I am sure your Counsel would
   like you to look at.

             MR. PAYNE:   He is trying to answer.

q   .        MR. KING:   I am sorry, I thought you had finished.
        What I was going to say, I have said it before, and I
        will say it again, when you look at this photograph
        here the sunlight goes across the front of the pen or
        pens and then as you move back you then look at the
        darker area.   I think from my point of view it is a
        misleading photograph this for the following reason;
        that if you follow the branch of sunlight right up to
        the south-west terrace at the back I find it difficult
        to distinguish between the density there.   If you look
        along the back in the darkened area there I cannot see,
        as how I see it, any difference between what must be
        pen 2 and pen 3 and I think there are clearer
        photographs than this which show the actual densities
        that were more accurately reflected.   It is obviously
        taken from a distance.

Q. I am going to be fair to you because I am going to show
   you a photograph which I am sure my learned friend, Mr.
   Russell, would want me to show to you and I will show
   it to you and that is C.354? - A. Yes.

Q. This I think is two minutes past three and I think you
   are seen at the gate? - A. Yes, I cannot see the time
   but, yes, I am on this photograph.

Q. That I think is a view of pen 3? - A. Yes, it shows pen
   3.

Q. The area at the front is clearly very congested indeed,
   is it not? - A. Yes, I have said that.

Q. It goes back for a good third even looking at that
   photograph of the pen, does it not? - A. Yes, I think
   that is reasonable on this photograph.

Q. Where is the space where those third at the front are
   going to be put if the people at the back are not
   actually removed from the back? Where are they going
   to go? - A. this is a photograph that is showing a view
   that I did not have. My view was from the top of the
                                               R. T- GRREMWDOD


fence.  I don't know where this photograph is taken
from.  It may well be taken again from a distance but
it does not accurately reflect the view that I had at
the top of the fence. Whether that is because it is
taken with a telephoto lens or what have you, I can't
say.

The final point before we break, Mr. Greenwood, do you
not feel on reflection that your judgment and
assessment was — and I use the word advisedly — was
fatally affected by your ignorance of the fact that
gate C and the other gates had been opened and a large
number of people had been let in into the concourse
area?

      THE CORONER:   You do not have to answer that one.
- A . No, I said this morning that picture is clear in
my mind.   It will remain with me for the rest of my
time.

     MR. KING:   So be it.   That is a convenient moment.

     THE CORONER:   We will have about quarter of an
hour.
                    (Short Adjournment)
                                          R. L. GREENWOOD


      MR. KING:   Mr. Greenwood, I have to look, and I
will do it as briefly as I can in the light of the
Coroner's earlier overall restriction, but I must look
a little at the rescue situation, of which you have
given evidence, a bit more, because of your evidence
that you thought everything had been done which could
have been done.   I have put to you already that what
ought to have been done at a much earlier stage was
that a serial of Officers should have been sent round
down the tunnel, to actually take people out at the
back.   You have commented on that you don't agree, that
is right, isn't it? - A. That is right.

I want to move on to a second aspect of that ....

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, is that really fair? He did
make specific reference to the evidence of Inspector
Bullas, who has given evidence to this Jury.  I don't
think I need rehearse it.

     MR. KING:   Is it your understanding that
Inspector Bullas sent a serial of Officers round down
the tunnel as a serial, to take people out at the back?
- A. I have heard the evidence of Inspector Bullas and
other Officers, and I think I said this morning that in
another forum it rather surprised me that suggestion
was being made, because it was always my view that it
had actually happened much earlier than had been
suggested.

I don't want to get into bandying the evidence, but
that is just evidence of individual Officers doing
things on their own, i s n ’t it? One person going onto
the terrace as an individual?     - A. No, I did not take
it that way at all.

I don't want to go round the evidence with you.  I am
not talking about an individual Officer going onto the
terrace from the back, perhaps getting to the front,
perhaps trying to help people at the front, I am
talking about a concerted effort by a serial of
Officers to get the people at the back out through the
tunnel to relieve the pressure at the back. - A. My
assessment in the first instance was quite clear and I
will repeat it, I hope for the sake of clarity, that
when I looked over that fence, I have talked about how
I saw it dynamically at the front, and I have talked
about what it was like as I saw it in the middle and
then towards the back, and the assessment based on my
experience of football crowds was that there was room
for that crowd to move back, and I do not move from
that position.  That was the chance, that is what I
thought was possible, and so I acted on that basis.
                                         R. L. GREENWOOD


I understand that; I dealt with that before the
lunchtime adjournment.  It is right though, isn't it,
that when Chief Superintendent Nesbit arrived at about
12-minutes-past, 13-minutes-past-3, he did actually
order a serial to go round the back to take people out
from the back to relieve the pressure there, that is
right, isn't it? - A. I have no knowledge of that.

So be it.  Can I just ask you to look at another
photograph as regards the actions which were being
taken by the Police at this time?  It is C450.   I think
this is a corrected time of 8-minutes-past-3. It shows
pen 2, you can see the gate of pen 2, can't you, to the
left? - A. Yes, it shows pen 2 and pen 3.

This is about 8-minutes-past-3, so two minutes after
the game has stopped.  Do you see this line of Police
Officers on the white line dividing the playing area
from the other area, by the perimeter fence? - A. Yes,
I do.

On this photograph, and I accept it is unfair perhaps
just to take a snap-shot, but on this photograph they
just seem to be standing there doing absolutely
nothing? - A. That is as the photograph would
apparently reflect it - apparently.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, is he of course going to
remind the Witness of the evidence of Sergeant Morgan,
that a number of those Officers standing there were the
serial brought round by Sergeant Morgan, and
subsequently taken away a moment or so later round the
back of the West Stand?

     MR. KING:    I am only asking now about your
recollection.   I am sure my learned friend will re­
examine very properly on all points.   Do you have any
recollection of Officers standing about looking into
the pens around this time, talking about 8-minutes-
past-3, as if frozen on the spot, doing nothing? - A.
No, I don't have any recollection, and I have said this
before.   I might vary it a little bit in terms of what
I have heard since but I have said this before, I don't
think the question of the word frozen, I didn't
recognise any Officers as standing there frozen.    I
think photographs tend to reflect a frozen state.    What
transpired was this, if I can put it in context for
you.  In the first instance there were very few
Officers by that fence, very few, no more than possibly
four or five, and then gradually more Officers
appeared.   Now, it was at that stage when Officers
could be deployed, and you will see, I think, on this
photograph that there are Officers who have already
been deployed into the pen itself at that particular
                                          R. L. GREENWOOD


time, and Officers went round the back,   there were some
before then and there were' some after.

What happened during this operation was that at the
front by the fence not every Officer could react to
that situation, and I am glad in a way that that was
not possible because when casualties were evacuated
they were then dealt with, and if those Officers had
not been there, and supporters, creditable their
actions were, they dealt with casualties as well.
There was also a public order situation rapidly
occurring in the Ground, and I could hear this
occurring behind me and I was not in any position to
deal with that.  That necessitated putting a cordon of
Officers right across the Ground, so they might appear
frozen on this particular photograph as we can see, but
I think their use became invaluable.

When you say frozen, I think it was also put to me
about shock as well, that they were suffering from
medical shock.  I think that in those circumstances, I
have said elsewhere, I don't think people were
suffering from medical sustained shock.  I think
everybody was shocked by what they saw; I think any
reasonable person would be bound to be shocked to some
degree. I was shocked and I now know, again you know
because the recollection is difficult, that there were
some that were traumatised, or whatever the word for it
is, and some of those effects have been very long
standing and still stand today.

So putting it in its context of doing nothing and being
frozen I hope that assists to portray what the scene
was actually like.

Isn't it right, Mr. Greenwood, that what was required
in this situation, by which I mean from the moment you
got to the terrace just after 3 o'clock or 3 o'clock
and you could see that third of the terrace squashed
and crushed up against the fence, that what was
required was co-ordinated action, emanating in the
first instance from the Police Control Box, wasn't it?
- A. No.  I think we all have a role to play in that
scenario.  I don't think you can divorce it just to one
particular part, that would be an abrogation of my
responsibilities.

Of course you have a role Mr. Greenwood, I am not
denying that, and if many of my questions seem a bit
harsh then I apologise to you for that because I know
you too must have been traumatised, but you were only
the Ground Commander, you weren't in overall control of
the situation in the Ground, were you? - A. I think
that is fair comment, yes.
                                         R. L. GREENWOOD


You yourself have already told us that you were
ignorant of the fact I have already put to you, the
important fact of the opening of the gates and a lot of
people coming in? You have already told us that? - A.
Yes, that is right.

Did you hear a message being broadcast from Ground
Control, summoning up all available Officers onto the
pitch because of a pitch invasion? - A. I would not
have heard any messages at that particular time if I
was at the fence.

When was the first co-ordinated communication of any
sort which you received from Police Control to you at
the ground level at the Leppings Lane Terrace after it
all developed? - A. I think the first message that came
through, came through I think it was on the tannoy, and
I have a recollection that it was a tannoy announcement
asking people to stop pushing.

That, Mr. Greenwood, isn't my question and I am sorry
if I phrased it badly.  I want to know when was the
first communication you received as Ground Commander,
if any, from Police Control about the situation, co­
ordinating what was going to happen as far as rescue? -
A. I think probably round about the time of ambulances,
when I was wondering where they were.  I think it was
probably round about that time.

Did you initiate the inquiry? - A. I had initiated an
inquiry earlier on, yes.

So the ambulances arrived; we know, I think,   that the
first ambulance arrives at 12-minutes-past.

     THE CORONER:   I think about 15-minutes-past.

     MR. KING:   15-minutes-past, sorry. - A. No, I
think it was before   then.  It is difficult to
recollect.  One of the things that I did substantially
later, and it is a good marker for the future on
something like this, I took on board somebody who was a
runner, communications officer, everything.   If I had
the time to come again then that is something that I
would do, and as I have already said this morning, I
don't know P.C. Packer, I didn't know him when I saw
him, and there were   other people there.  What you have
got is a situation,   and let's be fair about this, that
this situation was one, it was chaotic, and if it had
been anything else I would not be being honest with
you.

Mr. Greenwpod, this is not a criticism of you, this
line of questioning.  I was trying to elicit what was
                                            R. L. GREENWOOD


emanating, coming to your ears, from Police Control
over the developing situation, and you have told me
that it looked as if it was roughly about 3.15 when you
heard something about ambulances? - A. No, I didn't say
that.  I didn't say that it was 3.15.  It was prior to
that when I had been discussing the question of
ambulances, and the communication obviously was before
then because that is when I dispatched an Officer to go
down to the Spion Kop and the North Stand for that
ambulance.  So it was sometime prior to that when the
question of ambulances was discussed.

Do you see no merit at all then in the criticism which
I put to you, and again given it is a criticism you
don't have to answer the question, that initially there
was a total failure here of co-ordination, of
leadership, emanating in particular from the Control
Box to take control of the situation at the Leppings
Lane end?

     THE CORONER:   I am sorry, I hesitate to stop you,
but apart from the fact that it may be incriminatory, I
don't think it is a fair question.

     MR. KING:      So be it, sir.   Let me move on then.

     THE CORONER:   In fact, I will put in "Coroner-
ese", I don't think it is a proper question.

     MR. KING:   So be it, sir.   Sir, what I don't want
to do because I must not, is go into each and every
detail of the rescue attempt.   I have to steer a line.

     THE CORONER:     Yes, I appreciate that.

     MR. KING:   Can I go back in time to something
else, please?  You told us that on the journey round
the Ground between 20-to or 25-to and quarter-to-3, you
did not notice anything untoward about the Leppings
Lane end at all? - A. Nothing that concerned or alarmed
me.

Were you aware yourself, you may not have been, of the
provisions of the Green Guide as to the ensuring of
distribution, even distribution of spectators across a
viewing area? - A. I am in some difficulty with that.
Could you give me the date of the Green Guide?

The one I am looking at is dated 1986. - A. 1986,
because during my time I worked from an earlier
edition.  I now work from a different one, but I think
that would be fair, to say that I had read it at some
stage.
                                        R. L. GREENWOOD


Who did you understand on the day, in the 1989 semi­
final, had the responsibility of monitoring the build­
up of the crowd in the West Terrace, in the sense of
distribution? Who would have that job of monitoring
the distribution of the spectators? - A. Are you
meaning in terms of potential overcrowding?

I am talking at the moment about one pen becoming far
more full in comparison to another pen.   In other
words, disparity of distribution, build up in that
sense, who would have that job of monitoring that? - A.
I think that would fall on the people that I have
already said in relation to monitoring the crowd.

Just tell me again then, who would have the primary
role in that respect? - A. Who would have the primary
role?

Yes, the main role? - A. I don't know whether you could
define it as a main role.  I think I said it was a co­
ordinated role involving several people.

Wouldn't Control have the main function, the Control
Box, in monitoring the build up of the crowd from that
view they had in the Control Box? - A. No.  On the
occasions when I was stationed in that Division, I
have, I think, on one occasion actually worked in the
Control Box some years ago, and it is not something
that you can deal with in isolation.  I think what you
do is you co-ordinate it.  It is co-ordinated between,
I think, the Officers on the track, Officers in the
West Stand, the supervisory Officers that are at that
end of the Ground.  That is as I have always seen it.

You see you yourself apparently did not notice, such as
it is in your recollection, any marked disparity
between the wing pens and the centre pens at any time
up to 3 o'clock? - A. No, I don't think I have said
that.  I think what I said is I don't recollect seeing
anything that alarmed or concerned me.  Now that is
something different, I think.

Yes.  If you were concerned for, and it may be that you
weren't concerned for it, but if you were concerned for
ensuring even distribution of spectators across a
terrace, you would be concerned if you saw a marked
disparity between pens, wouldn't you? - A. No, not
necessarily.  I think it would be false of me to say
that a ground fills up evenly.  You do get disparities.
You get disparity on the Spion Kop.



                 /Q. Have you been at the Inquest
                                                         87


                                     R.L. GREENWOOD



Q. Have you been at the Inquest when you have heard
   evidence from a number of people commenting at various
   times up to 3 o'clock on the marked disparity which
   they noticed and concerned them between the wing pens
   and centre pens? - A. Yes I have, yes.

Q. Can I take it in stages, first of all, did youyourself
   noticed a marked disparity which those witnesses have
   referred to? - A. I am not sure about that because that
   is why I answer in those terms.  I saw nothing which
   concerned or alarmed me but it would not have surprised
   me if I had seen the disparity and I can't say that
   I didn't see it, I may have seen it.

Q.   Did you ever walk past on your walk round up to about
     quarter-to-3 Pen 6? - A. Yes, as I have said I walked
     down in front of the South Stand; I turned right at
     the bottom by Gate 1; in front ofPen 1; in front  of
     Pen 2; in front of Pen 3, 4, 5, 6 etc.

Q. Could you understand an observation to this effect:
   that Pen 6 was so empty at that stage that it almost
   looked as if it had been set off for segregation
   purposes? — A. No, it didn't look like that.  I mean
   I know the case from photographs and I would accept
   that there clearly was a disparity within my recollection,
   but to talk about segregation purposes that is not right,
   that is not fair comment.

Q. I won't spend too much time on this, but would you agree
   with me thata safe capacity for a terrace is based on
   the assumption that there will be within reason, and
   I accept it is within reason, an even distribution of
   people across the terrace? - A. I think yes, but you
   have got to qualify what you mean by "within reason".

           My experience goes beyond football grounds and
     goes into a racecourse.  I used to be a football
     supporter.  I go into rugby grounds quite a lot and
     when you talk about "even distribution" I rather find
     that those words are something that I do really not
     see reflected generally at all.

Q. Mr. Greenwood, I can't take it any further with you
   save to put it to you that if you had noticed a marked,
   I don't mean slight distribution or slight differences,
   but if you were to observe 15 minutes before kick-off
   a marked disparity between pens, at a semi-final where
   a capacity game is expected, that would immediately
   sound questions in your mind as to why that had come
   about. No? - A. No, I think that it is very easy
   to say so after.  It would certainly if it was kick-off
   time or very close to kick-off time there would be some
   reasons rushing through my head, but I am often
                                                                88


                                      R.L. GREENWOOD



     astonished at  the speed at which people can get into
     a football ground and I say> that from recent experience
     as well on all ticket matches.

           I have heard the figures that have been quoted
     here and I would venture to hesitate it could even
     be in excess of those the figures that have been
     mentioned on 1,000 an hour.   I would treat that as
     being not the ceiling as to the turnstile flow that
     people can get in on.  X have known it be more than
     that and I think it is very easy to look at an area
     and say:  "Well yes there is a marked disparity". You
     will always get an element of people coming later
     to a football match and I think it is a question of
     how you judge  it at the time.

           I think you might say now:  "Well look there is
     a vast space there". All I can say within my experience
     people do go very quickly into a football ground unless
     there is something of course.  It might be a train that
     is late or it may be coaches that are late, but it is
     very easy afterwards to say:  "Well oh yes there is
     a marked disparity".  There is a disparity but within
     experience I think it does not say people are not going
     to get in.

Q. The final question on this aspect of it. Were you
   aware, you might not have been, that the planning for
   this semi-final was based on the presumption that
   fans were to be expected to come early? - A. I think
   the planning of it was based on the fact of what
   transpired at the 1988 semi-final and what transpired
   at the 1987 semi-final and what normally would transpire
   at any large major event.

Q. Can I now just return, I must put this to you, to your
   evidence that you did not accept from me, that the
   Control Box in your view, the Police Control Box had
   the primary role in monitoring the terraces as regards
   the crowd because that is what you said to me? - A. I
   said it was a co-ordinated, yes.

Q. Yes, I know, and I just, and it is sir the final point
   on it look, it is important though, sir I have referred
   the witness to page 29 of his transcript at letter F
   to page 30 at letter A? - A. Yes, I have read that.

           THE CORONER: The same warning as I have given
     you before.  It is clear to you, isn't it?

Q.         MR. KING: Again, Mr. Greenwood, do you accept
     that that accurately sets out at page 29, letter F
     to page 30fletter A just beneath, the questions you
     asked and the answers you gave to Lord Justicfe Taylor?
     - A. Yes, I would accept that.
                                  R.L. GREENWOOD



Are   you prepared to say to this Inquest that you stand
by those answers? - A. Yes,- I think it is    something
I would like the questions and answers read.

Yes, certainly. Well if I ask the question, again
you give the answers. Question:

      "You would simply expect the individual
      Officers to keep their eyes open?"

A. The reply:
      "Well yes. I think the role of the       Serial
      of menand the role of the Inspector      is
      supplementary to the role of the Control
      Box, in my view, in terms of monitoring
      the crowd and I would not give them a
      specific briefing the Inspector, or I would
      not expect him to give it to his Serial
      to say:   'Look, we have got to be watching
      for the build up in the terracing because
      that is our job'. What I was trying to
      explain to you earlier on is they
      would not be doing it specifically but
      if they saw something that caused them
      concern, any incident, any problem,
      then that would be a supplementary
      means in addition to the Control Box
      of notifying the problem, but not a
      specific role."

The question from Lord Justice Taylor:

      "But your understanding is that the
      Control Box would be specifically
      looking for that on their screens.
      Is that it?"

A.     "That is right, my Lord, yes."

And you stand by that? - A. Yes, I don't think it is
exactly the same as how you put it to me.

So be it. Let me deal with something totally different.
Let me go to 1988 if I may when you were outside the
ground? - A. Yes.
Just one matter as regards the way people entered the
turnstile area, that is the area between theperimeter
gates and turnstiles A-G? - A. Yes.

And indeed the perimeter gates in turnstiles 1-16? -
A. Yes.   r
                                                                  90


                                         R.L. GREENWOOD


Q. I wonder if I could just show you, I don't know whether
   they have been exhibited sir, a small bundle of
   photographs?

             THE CORONER:   They have indeed.

              HR. KING:  It is the short bundle of photographs
        showing the 1988 scenes at Leppings Lane.

              THE CORONER:  It is C332. This is one of the
        things I was referring to this morning.

q   .         MR. KING:  Just acquaint yourself with the
        photographs, Mr. Greenwood.  For example look to the
        one which is at 14.30 and xhen there is another one
        at 14.40 which is about four photographs in. Do you
        see there that apparently from the photographs that the
        perimeter gates outside the turnstile area A-G, that
        the ones which are to your right if you are looking
        towards the turnstiles, that is the riverside gates
        and the next set of gates, they appear to be shut and
        the only ones which are open are the ones which lead
        directly into the turnstile area in front of A-G.
        If it helps when you have looked at those photographs
        go a bit further back to 14.10 and you see it much
        more clearly? - A. It is certainly not very clear on
        them.

Q. Look to 14.10, 10-minutes-past-2? - A. Yes, I have got
   the 14.10.

Q. Clearly the perimeter gates there, the ones I have
   described are shut. The only ones which are open are
   the ones which lead directly into the turnstile area.
   That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, I think so by and
   large.  I was just looking to the left of the gentleman
   at the gate there.  I can't see who they are, whether
   they are Stewards or what have you, but that gate looks
   to be slightly open although there is nobody coming
   through it.

Q. If you look again at 14.30 doesn't that help you to see
   that it is the same situation, 14.30? - A. Well you can
   certainly see that it looks as if the gates immediately
   in front are shut and I am not too sure about the side,
   I can't see.

Q. Can you help yourself as to the reason why in 1988
   the practice was apparently adopted certainly at
   10-past-2 and I would suggest 2.30 and beyond and I
   am told by my learned friend Mr. Catchpole if one looks
   at 3 o'clock you see the same situation, that in fact
   throughout that period the perimeter gates save the ones
   leading directly to A-G were kept closed? - A. No, they
   appear closed*  I can't make any other observation on
   them.  I don't recollect it.
                                                            91

                                   R.L. GREENWOOD



Q. Isn't it a very good way, part of a way of filtering
   the crowd into the turnstile area, to control the
   numbers going in? — A. Yes, that is a possibility.
   Any demarkation is a way of not necessarily controlling
   but persuading people, deflecting people into an area.

Q. It also gives you a much better means of control
   because you have got a small area dealing with
   of the numbers actually going into the turnstile
   area, doesn't it? - A. Potentially it may do but whether
   it does in practice is another matter because any lines
   of demarkation can be broken.  Lines of demarkation
   can become dangerous.

         I mean I remember the crowd in 1988 and I think
   you are talking about contingent factors as to whether
   a crowd will respond in the first instance to achieve
   their objective of getting into a football ground or
   getting out of a football ground dare I say as well.
   Those problems have been experienced.




                        Q. Mr. Greenwood
                                                                      92

                                                        R. L. GREENWOOD


        Q. Mr. Greenwood, I won't go into that any more because my
           purpose was simply to concentrate on that one aspect
           rather than go into all aspects of that.   Can I come
           back to 1989?   You have told us that you didn't notice
    B      any marked disparity which caused you concern on the
           terraces at any time before three o'clock?   You have
           told us that? - A. Yes.

        Q.   At any time when you were walking on the journey you have
             referred to, you say you kept always on the perimeter
             track as I understand it between twenty-five or quarter
             to? - A. Yes, either on the track or the grass.

        Q. Did you at any time, especially when you were near the
           Leppings Lane terraces, perhaps in the area of the
           Control Box, did you at any time hear shouts from the
           crowd seeking help, trying to draw your attention? - A.
           Are you meaning the first journey or the second journey?

        Q.    Let me take it in stages.   Let me take the   first journey
             which is between twenty five minutes to and    quarter to. -
             A. Yes.
D
        Q. Did you hear any? -A. None whatsoever, no. There was a
           disparity on the Spion Kop at that time, incidentally.

        Q. I am sorry to come back to disparity again in the light
           of what you say.   Are you saying that at no stage prior
           to kick-off, unless it was kick-off, would you be
           concerned about a marked disparity on a terrace such as
           the Leppings Lane terrace? - A. At no stage prior to
           kick-off?

        Q. Yes. - A. No, I am not saying...

        Q. When would the time come when you would be concerned? -
           A. I think obviously as it borders the time when you
           would have expected people to be in on a capacity crowd.

        Q. When would that be, according to you, for a capacity
           semi-final, when you would expect people to be in? - A.
           Well, I think if you look....    The photograph that
           clearly shows pen 6, which is it, 14.59, then I think I
           obviously would be concerned about that because there is
           obviously a marked disparity at that particular time.

        Q. Mr. Greenwood, this is important.    The question was:
           when would you have expected at a capacity game, semi­
           final, the majority of the people to be in?   What time,
           roughly? - A. The majority of people in the ground?

        Q. No, the Leppings Lane terrace, what time would you expect
           the people to be in? - A. Well, I think the majority of
           people?   Well, I would certainly...




H
                                                   R. L. GREENWOOD


      MR. RUSSELL:   Can we be sure?   By "majority" does
my   learned friend mean more than half?

        THE CORONER:       It is difficult.

        MR. KING:      Let me take it in stages:

First of all, I ask you this question, Mr. Greenwood:
when would you be concerned as to the sight of a
disparity between pens on the Leppings Lane terrace?    At
what stage would you be concerned? - A. I think I have
answered that question, when I certainly would be
concerned.   I would be asking, I think, "Have they all
come?   Is it under capacity or is it over capacity?"

At what stage would you ask that question to yourself? -
A. Well, I think on the basis of how many - what size the
disparity was and I think I have answered that in terms
of when I saw the disparity on that photograph, then yes.

At what stage?   Why would you start questioning it?    At
what time in relation to the kick-off would you start
questioning it? - A. Well, I think you would have to be
talking about...   You would have to tell me what the
disparity was for a start, and I think you would be
talking, dependent on the size of the disparity.  If the
West Stand was empty at ten minutes to three then I
should begin to start thinking where was everybody at
that particular stage.   If the terraces were empty then
I would.   If you have got wing pens where you have got a
disparity between the centre and the wings, then
certainly as...   Looking at pen 6 you would be getting
up to kick-off time.

I may   have been wrong, but I thought your earlier answer
to me   was you would get worried at the stage when you
would   have expected everybody to have arrived? - A. Is
there   a difference?

Therefore, that is my question:  when, at a capacity
semi-final, would you reasonably anticipate and expect
everyone to have arrived - spectators? - A. Everyone to
have arrived?

Yes, in the ground. - A. After the kick-off.

After the kick-off? - A. Yes.

So are you saying that the notion that you could expect
the majority of people to have arrived early at a semi­
final is a mistaken one? - A. I am sorry, I don't know
what you mean by the word "early"?
                                             R. L. GREENWOOD


     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, is there a distinction here
being drawn?   One moment the witness is being asked to
say when he would have expected everyone to have arrived
and then he is asked whether the notion that the majority
of people might be expected to arrive early, in some way
they are being expressed in the same voice.   Clearly...

     THE CORONER:     You are saying it   is a non sequitur?

     MR.   RUSSELL:   Of course.

     MR. KING:   Let me take it in stages.   You have a
capacity crowd expected at a semi-final, don't you,
Mr. Greenwood? - A. Yes.

You have a terrace where you have sold 10,100 tickets? -
A. Yes.

You have a terrace which is divided into individual pens,
subject to radial gates at the back.  All right? - A.
Yes.

The capacity, that safe capacity, is to be distributed
across the whole terrace, isn't it? - A. Yes.

At what stage... - A. Well, when Isay yes, it is not
possible to distribute it in terms of the even
distribution.   I must make that point again.

I am talking, as you know, within reason.    At what stage
would you as somebody monitoring the build-up of the
crowd start having questionmarks, warning bells in your
mind, given that background, when you saw, if you did
see, a marked disparity between centre pens and wing
pens?    You wouldn't wait until just before kick-off,
would you? - A. Well, I don't know if you are talking
about...    Can you be more concrete when you say a
"marked" disparity?

Let me show you for the moment, and I accept it isn't
what you necessarily saw, but let me show you C.511,
which is 14.54.

     MR. ISAACS:   In fairness to the witness, warning
bells about what?   Where they were?   Where they were
standing?   Why they had not come?   I think that is also
important, with respect.

     MR. KING:  If I get an answer that warning bells
would have sounded, I would have asked that question,
certainly.

     THE WITNESS:     Yes, I have got the photograph.
                                                            95

                                               R. L. GREENWOOD


Q.        MR. KING:   Do you agree that it shows in pen 6, at
     six minutes to three a marked disparity compared with the
     centre pens? - A. Yes, from the corner I can see on the
     photograph here.   I cannot see what is behind it.

Q. To help you, if you look at 326.A, which is five minutes
   later, I don't think anybody would suggest that it would
   be any better than this position.   It might have been
   worse in terms of emptiness, I doubt if it would be any
   better. - A. Yes, I have got that, 2.59

Q. Let me go back to 2.54.   If you were able to see a
   disparity such as seen in 511, in terms of what is in pen
   6 for the moment compared with the centre pens, first of
   all you agree that would be a marked disparity? - A.
   Sorry, which photograph?

Q. C.511, assuming that 511 extends back as in 326.A,
   because we can t see that far back. - A. Can you give me
   the time again?

Q. Yes, six minutes to three. - A. Six minutes to three?
   No, on the disparity there on those two photographs,
   accepting that they would be the same at six minutes to
   three - I stress on the photographs there - that would
   not trouble me.

Q. So if the position was that pen 6 was as empty as we can
   see at 326.A at five minutes to three, if it was the same
   emptiness as six minutes to three, it would not bother
   you? - A. No.   I said, and I will qualify it again, I
   said "on the photographs".   I can't see the whole of pen
   6 on that photograph.   It is masked.   There is a
   diagonal line down the pen from corner to corner.   From
   the people who are on there that would not cause me any
   concern at six minutes to three, with all the various
   turnstiles operating, as they normally would be.

Q. You would not even start to ask the question, that maybe
   here we have an uneven distribution of a capacity crowd?
   - A. No, I would not, because looking at that photograph
   and looking at that terrace, as I did on that day, it is
   obviously unevenly distributed but I don't know how many
   people are outside the turnstiles.   What I am saying is
   if those people are outside the turnstiles, then there is
   adequate time for them, in my view, in my experience, to
   get in and get into that pen and it would not concern me.

Q. Get into which pen? - A. Into the pens...    Into that
   particular pen.

Q. Into which pen? - A. Well, any pen where there is room.
                                                            96
                                             R. L. GREENWOOD


Q. Well, there is certainly no room in the centre pens, is
   there? - A. The centre pens are quite full.   I have
   already dealt with that photograph in terms of how I see
   it there.

              Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

Q. Mr. Greenwood, can I just follow up that last point, and
   it is really the only question I want to ask you.   You
   have described the system of monitoring that you expected
   from all your Officers on the day to be in operation.
   We have heard it from other Officers as well.   You
   expected a system to be operating? - A. Yes.

Q. Is it fair to say that the primary purpose of that
   monitoring is to ensure the safety of the crowd?   I am
   not talking in specific terms, just the safety of the
   crowd in general? - A. Yes.

Q. We know that there can be any number of incidents that
   can cause threats to the safety of the crowd? - A.
   Certainly, yes.

Q. One of the roles that you would expect an Officer on the
   day to be able to fulfil is to anticipate problems and if
   possible avert possible threats to the safety of the
   crowd? - A. Yes.

Q. You had a lot of questions just now by my learned friend
   Mr. King about what you would do seeing a situation, the
   words "marked disparity" - whatever. - A. Yes.

Q. I think it would be fair to you if we put it in slightly
   more specific terms.   You have explained to us the
   Officers working in the West Stand and on the perimeter
   track and the Control Box, all very experienced? - A.
   Yes.

Q. We know at league matches, and I am sure you are aware of
   the system, pens were filled until they were comfortably
   full and then fans would go elsewhere?   The sequential
   filling of pens? - A. Yes, I remember that some years
   ago.

Q. So a judgment has to be made.   If there comes a time
   when either you or one of your - and this is a hypothesis
   - either you or one of those Officers had come to the
   conclusion that any pen had reached the level of
   comfortably full, would you have expected him to have
   said to the Control Box, because they are the ones with
   the information, "I think this pen is comfortably full"?
   - A. Yes, I think that is fair comment.   Any question of
   fullness and rsafety.
                                          R. L. GREENWOOD


To be fair to you, when you are looking at that terrace
you don't know what the information is in relation to the
numbers outside, numbers still to come, hold-ups on the
motorway, or anything like that? - A. Quite correct.    I
am not in possession of the full information.

When you were talking about co-ordinating this monitoring
for safety purposes, you are channelling the information.
The eyes and ears of the Control Box, or whoever, all
work as a team together? - A. Yes.

To provide information? - A. Yes, it is a team role.

My learned friend was asking you lots of questions but he
did not actually put to you the situation where if those
Officers are faced with a pen which they, in their own
judgment, have come to the conclusion is reasonably full,
would you expect them to take action by informing
someone, whether it be the Sergeant or the Control Box,
would you expect them to actually let someone know that
they had reached that judgment? - A. I would think so.
If it got to a stage of what the next stage would be,
then I would expect them to shout, as in fairness I would
expect the stewards on the corner of the West Stand,
anybody who is overlooking that.




          Q. But the point about it
                                               R - T.- (GREENWOOD



The point about it is that it is an anticipation of a
problem.  It is trying to get to the stage before it
becomes dangerous? - A. Yes.

But it is providing the information that is necessary
which is important? - A. Yes.
     THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, before you start we
will go on for about another ten or fifteen minutes but
I just want to say one thing.  I do not like
interrupting you and saying that he cannot answer the
question.  I just want you to know that. On the other
hand, I do have to do it when I think you are straying
too far.  It is not because I enjoy doing it.  On the
contrary, I find it quite a painful thing to do.  I
just wanted you to know that. Try, if you possibly
can, to help me not to have to do it.

      MRS. McBRIEN:  Sir, I would have welcomed the
 opportunity to have this evening to collect all this
 information together so that I would be able to put the
 questions in a more concise form.  I will do it today
 but it could be in rather a muddled form and I think
 you would probably be telling me, "No, Mrs. McBrien,
 not that way".
      THE CORONER: We are very short of time, Mrs.
 McBrien, and although it would be nice to say let us do
 that, it is not possible. Miss Addleman, have you got
 any questions?

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   Sir, no.

      THE CORONER:  I think you have got to go, Mrs.
 McBrien, I am sorry. You start and do your best.

      MRS. McBRIEN: All right, I will try.   I have
 completely miscalculated today because I did not
 realise we would be going on until 4.30. Perhaps I
 didn't hear.
      THE CORONER:  I did give a warning about that
 earlier this week. Actually we will not go on until
 4.30 but we will go on until about twenty past.  So
 start.
              Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN

. Superintendent Greenwood, I would like to refer to the
  crushing incident that took place that year. You told
  us that fans managed to... - A . I am sorry, when did
  you say? I did not catch when.
                                               p.   t .-   CTK K Nw nnp



In 1981. You told us that fans managed to get over the
perimeter fence at that match? - A. Yes.

We know the perimeter fence was different to the one
that there was in 1989? - A. Yes.

You told us that you opened the perimeter gate yourself
for fans to get on to the pitch? - A. That is correct.

For their safety? - A. Yes.

On that occasion I believe about 150 fans were able to
escape? - A. I cannot remember how many but the fans
managed to get out.

There were no serious injuries? - A. Not within my
knowledge, no.

Were you aware, in spite of that, that the Club were
not very happy that this incident had taken place, that
relations between the Club and the Police after that
incident were not very good? - A. I think I would
prefer to put it in these terms; that I think there
was a lack of understanding by some people as to what
had taken place which coloured their judgment
immediately.  I was an Inspector at that time.  I
wasn't in a senior position.  I wasn't in liaison with
the Club because I was serving in a different
Subdivision but I think there was a lack of
understanding on behalf of some people as to what
exactly had happened.  I put it no stronger than that.

You felt that you had acted quite promptly at that
time, I am sure, didn't you? - A. I knew that, yes.

But the Club did criticise the Police I believe in
spite of that, didn't they? There were criticisms
made? - A. Can you enlarge on that?

     THE CORONER:    Is it relevant, Mrs. McBrien?

     MRS. McBRIEN:    It is in the Taylor Inquiry.

     THE CORONER:  That may be so.  I am not denying
that but is it relevant to establishing how — and I
will put it very directly — your son died?

     MR. CATCHPOLE: Would it assist, sir, if I said
that my understanding is that there was a letter from
the then Secretary of the Club to the Police about
allowing fans on to the pitch area?   The Chief
Constable wrbte back, as I understand it, and I think
we may have seen the letter, saying that he thought the
                                                 p. t .- aRiraNwnon



action was appropriate in the circumstances and it was
explained. As far as I am aware from that stage on
there has been no criticism of the co-operation between
the Club and the Police. This is immediately
afterwards and I think that ties in with what
Superintendent Greenwood is saying. That is my
understanding for what it is worth.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you, Mr. Catchpole.

My understanding of it was that the Club said the
Police did not open the gate fast enough.  I have got
it here but I would have had to make my notes this
evening on that particular issue. - A. I can't recall
that.  That was never addressed to me.  I cannot recall
that, not from the Club.

There is something in the Taylor Inquiry to that
effect.
     THE CORONER:  I think, Mrs. McBrien, you have
misunderstood what is in the Taylor Inquiry Report.   I
know what you are thinking about.  I have read it
myself and you have misread it, with very great
respect, and I do not think it is relevant.  I am
terribly sorry. Even if it were true that the Club and
the Police were at loggerheads immediately after this
it does not actually make any difference as to what the
relationship is later.

     MRS. McBRIEN: The way I had understood it when I
read it yesterday, this was in the evening, I felt that
the Club were annoyed because fans had got over the
perimeter fence rather than just being allowed to use
the perimeter gate and the Police would be in control
of the perimeter gate.

    THE WITNESS:   I think as I recall, and it is going
back a long time, No. 1, I was quite satisfied those
gates were opened with due reason, due cause.    I think
there was a misunderstanding on some people's parts as
to why it had been done because we were the people at
the gate. We could see the problem.     I think what
happened, and I am talking generally now about people
and their misunderstandings, I am sure it might have
applied to the Club, I am sure it might apply to others
that were in the ground as well who did not realise
probably what was happening.   That led to a lot of
people sitting around the pitch and I think it
escalated from that. There was a chain reaction and
this has always been my experience.    People will come
over perimeter fences and I know they were different
then.   I think there was no angle on the top but, sad
                                             P. T.. RRRR W Wn OD


to say, even with an angle on the top fans from time to
time will come over those perimeter fences and they
will be injured coming over those perimeter fences.
They come over for their own reasons and, as I say,
will be injured in the process, not to get out of
anything but to get on to the pitch.

In 1981 they did go over the perimeter fence because of
the crushing that year? - A. There might be some but I
think you have got to be careful there because one of
the problems as I recall it was that people went
further over where there wasn't a crush to get on to
the pitch to see the match.  It wasn't a pitch invasion
per se. It was to obtain a better view as I recollect
and it set off a chain reaction if you understand me.

So two things were going on at the same time? - A. One
and then the other.

One followed on? - A. One followed the other I think,
yes.

As a result of that crushing incident radial fences
were installed, weren't they? - A. Yes.

Going back to the relations with the Club, I understand
that relations were not good until Mr. Lock joined the
Club.  I do not know if I am right about that.

     THE CORONER:  Do not answer that question. We
have dealt with it with other people and it is not
appropriate.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  I will go to 1988 now and just deal
with that. Did you personally escort crocodiles of
fans, you know what I mean by that, long lines of fans,
down Leppings Lane that year? - A. I supervised the
Police Officers who escorted them down. Whether I was
on foot, I don't think so. I think I would probably be
in the Land Rover at that particular time.

But you supervised that means of escorting them? - A.
Yes.

Were there lots of fans down in that way? Was that a
continual way of the fans arriving at the perimeter
gate that year? - A. Was it a continual way?

Yes. - A. No, I don't think so.  I think the record
will say that there were probably less special trains
in 1989 as opposed to 1988 but I cannot remember the
numbers for 1988. Taken as a whole I do not think it
                                                             102

                                               R ♦ L - GRKhlNWOQD


was anything significant in terms of the total
allocation to Liverpool.

What I am really getting at is that when I have looked
at the photographs showing people arriving at the
ground in 1988 everything looked very orderly.   The
numbers of people who were coming down were not at any
time vast.  They were just kept to the width of the
pavement which I would call a crocodile anyway, the
width of the pavement? - A. I can relate to 1988
because I was there.  I can only relate to 1989 from
what people have told me and from what I have seen on
video and photograph and there is a massive distinction
between the two. Elsewhere I have described what I
have seen in 1989 as a phenomenon.  It is unique within
my experience.
Would you say you have seen that sort of crowd leaving
a ground with numbers so great? - A. Having seen a
crowd leaving a ground in so many numbers?

Yes. - A. In comparison with 1989?

      THE CORONER:    I think Mrs. McBrien was asking you
whether the 1989 crowd, which you did not see and which
you are basing entirely upon hearsay, is a comparison
with a leaving crowd at the match? - A. Yes, a leaving
crowd when you have got the gates open, and it is
different as well in the sense that you would have gate
A open, gate B, gate C, and what have you, and you get
a mass exodus.    It is different in one sense because
you get a cross-flow, as I explained this morning, with
the filter that comes altogether.    So I think the mass
exodus is greater in its impact at that particular
time.

     MRS. McBRIEN: Once the fans go through the
perimeter gates they are dispersing to all kinds of
areas, aren't they? They are going home, they are
going to their coaches? - A. Immediately they are
dispersing in two ways I think, aren't they? They are
dispersing to the right to Wadsley Bridge if they have
got a train or a coach up there and if they are
dispersing to the left that is because they have parked
a car up there or what have you. Of course, you have
got people in the North Stand who aren't necessarily
going for a train, who are neutral supporters, the
buffer zone and what have you.

This enormous crowd that is leaving, there is going to
be plenty of space for them to go wherever they are
going, isn't'there? They have got the whole place out
there.
                                                               103

                                               P.   T._   GREENWOOD



     THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, we will stop now. We
are not going to get into a discussion of the mechanics
of what happens to leaving crowds and we are not going
to get into a discussion as to what the 1989 crowd was
doing with Mr. Greenwood. He was not there.   I have
allowed him and you a little bit of liberty to say that
he had seen photographs but that is as far as we are
going to go in that field. What I would like you to
do, Mrs. McBrien, is work tonight. Work on your
questions. Get them as tight and as good as you can so
that I am spared having to interrupt you if I can
possibly avoid it. Also so that we can make some
progress.
Will you be good enough to be back tomorrow.   You know
that you are on Oath? _ A. Yes.
     MR. PAYNE: Sir, just before you adjourn for the
evening, in the context of the repeated warnings
against self-incrimination, particularly in the context
of reading out passages from Lord Justice Taylor's
Inquiry, I think it is fair that the Jury should know
that it was not thought necessary at Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry that such warnings should be given and
this witness, and no other witness, was given a similar
warning in the context of either the passages that were
read out or anything else.

     THE CORONER: Yes, that is a very fair point.    I
should explain that to you because otherwise you may
not understand why I am so fussy about it. Two things
happened at Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry. First of
all, no warnings were given at all and secondly the
evidence was not taken on Oath.  That does not mean
that because you do not take evidence on Oath it is a
lie. Of course, it is not.   It does not mean that.    It
may elevate the evidence to a different category if it
is repeated on Oath and that is why I am so fussy.

    The witness at Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry may
have answered an incriminating question without
realising he was imperilling himself so to speak and,
secondly, if he now realises it but does not understand
that there is a difference in degree because of the
Oath aspect, if you like, if I do not explain to him
that he still does not need to reply he may fall into
the same trap again about the warning.  So that is why
I do that and why I am so fussy over it. I am not in
any sense criticising what Lord Justice Taylor was
doing in his Inquiry but it is very important for the
Inquest thatf we get it right. That is right, is it
not? Have I got it right?
     MR. ISAACS:    I think that is entirely right,
sir.  Indeed, I was going to address you upon this at a
later stage, though I should also say this, as I
understand it, witnesses at the Inquiry, unlike this
Inquest, were asked to give evidence for periods of up
to three hours at a time, and so there is that added
disadvantage that witnesses after a period of time
became very tired, as I understand it.  They were not
given the opportunity to refresh themselves by hourly
breaks.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, and some of mine, particularly
in the beginning, did not have quite the same
indulgence but I learned, like all of us do.

     MR. KING:   Can I say, sir, that I agree entirely
with what has been said and that is why I have always
been careful to ask the witness, before putting it,
whether he accepted it.

     THE CORONER:   I realise that.  I think Mr. Payne
very correctly --- you understood it, he understood it,
I understood it but I had never explained it to the
Jury and he was quite right.

     MR. KING:   Because so far we have given all the
witnesses the opportunity to say they don't accept it
if they don't wish to.

     THE CORONER:   Indeed, yes.  I don't think there
has been any problem on that at all.  9.30 tomorrow, I
am afraid.

    (In the absence of the Jury and the Witness)

     THE CORONER:     Mr. Russell, any indication ofhow
long you think you   are likely to be?

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I hope that with the benefit
of the evening I will be able to be shorter and better
structured than I would otherwise have been.   I don't
anticipate a great deal of time, and unless I don't
start, say, before   half-past-12, I think it is unlikely
that I will prejudice the normal finishing time on
Friday.

     THE CORONER:   I should hope that you will start
very much earlier than that.  I think we ought to have
Mr. Murray here because it is quite likely that we will
be getting to him.

     MR. MANNING:   Whilst it is an unenviable position
to start evidence, even anticipating hopefully a
relatively short cross-examination to follow, Mr.
Murray is here and hears what you say and will be here
and available to start his' evidence tomorrow.

     THE CORONER:   Clearly I don't think we will
finish Mr. Murray tomorrow, I think that goes without


     MR. MANNING:   It would be a blessing and a mercy
so far as everybody is concerned but I anticipate you
are right, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I assume we will not, shall we say,
but if we can make a reasonable start then I would
prefer that.

     MR. ISAACS:    Will we have our normal finishing
time tomorrow, sir?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I think so. I think we need
it. We will review the timings for next week tomorrow,
just before we finish.

     MR. HALE:   Can I say I apologise for coming out
of sequence, I wonder if I might ask Mr. Greenwood just
one question tomorrow?  I promise not to be more than
five minutes at the outside.

    THE CORONER:    Certainly.

       (The Inquests were adjourned until the
           following morning at £.30 a.mTl
