       oO

-rjf

!p
to -
' ■'cfr
          ti)
0602 879002




                                              13th December 1992


Mr. C.P. Dorries,
H.M. Coroner,
Medico Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
Sheffield,
S3 7ET


Dear Chris,

              Re: Hillsborough Inquest - Mr. B. Devonside.

I refer to your letter of 1st October 1992 and my subsequent
telephone conversations with Pauline.

Pauline sent on some correspondence which she found relating to my
correspondence with various people following the Hillsborough
Inquest.

When I looked through it I noticed that Schedule C of my letter to
the then Home Secretary (Kenneth Baker) dated 1st May was not
included nor was the reply from the fire service to whom I
also wrote. If Pauline could have another look for these and send
me copies so that I can have a complete set.

I have however today spoken to Mr. Devonside and briefly outlined
to whom I had written and the subject matter.

He asked me if it would be possible for him to have copies of my
letters to the various parties together with their replies.

I indicated that these copies would have to come from you as I was
no longer in post.

I explained that as far as I was concerned I had no objection to
the release of the correspondence to him but that it was also a
matter for you. I also said that you would have to consider whether
assuming that you had no objection you would be willing to release
the replies from the third parties as they might not be happy.

Mr. Devonside assured me that the copies would be for his and his
wife's use only. He said that he would write to you to give you
the necessary assurances.

I think that it would be much more appropriate that you should
release any copies if you feel that you may do so and that you
should. Obviously this is a matter entirely for you as is the
question of whether it is necessary to consult with the writers of
the replies to my letters. As I have already indicated I have no
personal objection to letting Mr. Devonside have copies of the
correspondence but of course I am no longer in the seat of
                          Page 1
authority.

As I am writing at Christmas time I take this opportunity of
wishing you a very happy Christmas and a prosperous and successful
New Year. I would be grateful if you could convey to those who
still remember me at the Medico Legal centre and particularly the
staff in your office and at Barnsley my wishes for a very happy
Christmas and New Year.



Yours sfincerelv




                          Page 2
                                                                23rd July      91




          HILLS/SLP/JT.
          FEP/89  35/48/106.




          P.E. Bolton,
          (Fire and Emergency Planning Department'),
          Home Office,
          Queen A n n e ’s Gate,
          London. SW1H 9AT.




         Dear Mr. Bolton,



          Thank you for your letter of the 15th of July and have noted what you say.




         Yours sincerely,




         S.L.Popper,
         H.M. Coroner.




                                            ViQ.


                                \ p                W cxv„

     ^         «•   vvoXs^ '              <\a        \ a^ « ^
    '*'^ ps.        \ qj   X s 'V     '




BAKAAD
                                                                3rd May           91




     SLP/JT.




     Dear Dr. Muir,

     Re: HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM DISASTER/MANCHESTER AIR CRASH
         INVESTIGATIONS.______________ __________________________ __ __________


         In the events which happened I never had an opportunity of meeting you, a
         matter which I regret.

         However I did view the video which you had prepared of people escaping from
         an aircraft, with very great interest.

         As you will see, I have written to the Chief Fire Officer and made a number
         of comments, and I have mentioned that I am sending a copy of my letter to
         him to you.  This is enclosed and I hope will be of interest to you.



         Yours sincerely,




         S.L.Popper,
         H.M.Coroner.




BAGABE
                       SCHEDULE— A         lst




S L P /JT/HO/LICENCE




SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS - NATIONAL LICENCING AUTHORITY.




At the present time, the licencing of designated sports grounds rests
with the local authority.  It is my view that a better system would be
to have a national authority to deal with appraisal, licencing,
supervision, enforcement, training as well as various other activities,
rather than what is in fact the current practice of having local
authorities responsible for the licencing of sports grounds.

My primary reason .for making this suggestion is that each local
authority by its very nature, has responsibility for only a limited
number of sports grounds.   It follows that however adequate and
competent, individuals within each local authority have of necessity
limited experience in this field.   In addition, the individual role in
relation to these matters can only form a small part of his total
d u ti es .

Furthermore because of the large number of local authorities involved,
the level of competence will inevitably vary and the standards which may
be acceptable to one authority may not be accepted by another.
Differences in safety requirements throughout the country will therefore
tend to become apparent.

It seems to me that there are sufficient number of stadia within the
United Kingdom to justify the setting up of a national licencing
authority (hereafter referred to as the Authority) capable of
appraising, inspecting, licencing and enforcing .the .provisions relating
to the safety of sports grounds.  Such an authority could also perform
various other functions, some of which will be indicated later.

It should be possible to staff such an Authority with highly qualified
and capable individuals who would be able to build up a considerable
amount of expertise on this subject within a relatively short period of
time .

Such an Authority would be able:-


           To apply safety standards and criteria as far as possible
           uniformly throughout the country, though of course individual
           variations for local circumstances might have to be allowed
           for.




BAGAAZ
                                2


    b.   To provide expert guidance to holders of safety certificates
          and others involved in the running of events.

    c.   To provide the proper training programme for parties   involved
          in staging of events.

    d.   To ensure that knowledge, perhaps painfully acquired was not
          lost because of breakdown in communication or changes of
          staff.

    e.   To have sufficient authority to be able to effectively enforce
         any breaches of safety certificates.

    f.   To enable the dissemination and sharing of information relating
         to safety aspects which may have been gleaned in one field
         and to apply the same in different circumstances.

With regard to paragraph f. for example I came across some very
interesting work which had been undertaken by ____________________|the
Department of Applied Psychology at the College of Aeroneutics,
Cranfield, Bedford arising out of the Manchester Air Disaster.    A short
video film has been prepared which makes very interesting viewing.

My suggestions are not intended to exclude from an active role the local
organisations who at present constitute advisory groups.  It seems to me
essential that not only should the police, fire and ambulance and indeed
almost certainly the local authority be involved, but that their views
should be actively sought and carefully evaluated by the Authority.
Indeed I would go further and say that it is essential that the views of
the owner/occupier/organiser of events as well as those of other
interested parties (supporter clubs spring to mind) should be sought,
considered and evaluated.

I think however that it is desirable that the final enforcing Authority
should be distinct from the holders of the safety certificate with whom
the primary responsibility for safety should rest, but also from the
parties constituting the advisory group.

There are of course problems.

    i.   Divorcing the enforcers from the effectors ensures a degree
         of impartiality but may also generate expectations
         in the application of conditions which from a practical point
         of view are unrealistic.     On the other hand there is a
         danger that if you allow the people who are running a show
         to play too large a part in its regulation, even given the
         best will in the world, there may be sufficient blurring of
         the edges for proper independent thought not to be given to
         proposals put before the licencing authority.

   ii.   The other side of the coin is of course that the stronger
         the supervising body becomes, the tighter the regulatory
         function, the less scope there is for the holder of the
         certificate to have any input into the safety standards




BAGAAZ
         at the venue.        Apart from making him in effect a spectator
         within his own ground, there is also a danger that it removes
         the h o l d e r ’s initiative for safety and in addition, his
         responsibility for the safety of the premises and the
         invitees.

  iii.   A corollary from the foregoing point follows, namely that
         the supervisory authority may find itself with a measure of
         liability (be it civil or criminal) in the event of something
         going wrong.

My impression is that there is already a tendency to try and spread the
net of liability further and wider.   At some stage the issue of where in
the public interest one should draw the line will have to be faced.   I
am doubtful on the whole whether individuals or organisations whose
objective is to seek to help and improve public safety are likely to
function any better if they are under potential threat of say criminal
proceedings in the event of something going wrong-   Indeed I think there
is an argument for saying that such risk may be against the public
interest as it may deter people of outstanding ability from seeking
appointments in what quite often are high risk and very responsible
positions.  If that is so, then the staffing is likely to be by persons
of possibly a lower calibre which is unlikely to be in the long term
interests of the safety of the public.

I appreciate that this is an exceedingly difficult problem and there are
of course arguments which could be put the other way on the issues of
liability.

The Authority would also of course be in a position to undertake
educational training functions with a view to ensuring as far as
possible, that standards of safety are maintained and appropriate
research e.g., crowd behaviour or evacuation procedures.




BAGAAZ
                             SCHEDULE B.



                                             1st May 1991.



SLP /JT/HO/POL




POLICE INVOLVEMENT WITHIN FOOTBALL STADIA.

It was clear-to me from my involvement with the Hillsborough Disaster
Inquests that a very substantial police presence was involved, not only
outside the ground but also within it.  At the conclusion of the
inquests I commented that one had to ask oneself the question as to
whether or not the involvement of the police and the activities within
the stadium was a proper use of both their training, expertise and
abilities.        ,
                  •

There are in fact two ways of looking     at this namely, (a) are the   police
competent to cope with   safety aspects   within thestadia and (b)
irrespective of their competence, is it a correct and proper use of
police resources to employ them in this capacity.  It was with the
latter point in mind that I was making the comment though there is as in
most cases an overlap.

At any function where a substantial number of people are expected to
attend, problems are likely to be encountered both away from the
location as well as at or within it.

OFF SITE A C T I V I T Y .

From a practical point of view it may be difficult if not impossible to
expect organisers of an event to undertake control of law and order,
traffic safety etc., on the public highway and approaches to a venue. If
that is so and if as is the underlying assumption of this letter, the
event is going to take   place, then it   seems thatthe only body of    people
capable of mounting anoperation are in fact the   police and there may
therefore be no alternative but to continue deploying them for these
p ur poses.



ON SITE ACTIVITY.

The position however within the venue seems to me rather different.

Simply because someone enters another’s premises for the
purposes of watching a football match or for any other reason
does not of course absolve him or her from exercising proper
care for their own safety, nor does it absolve them from




BAGAAH
responsibility to act and behave reasonably and in a
responsible and civilised manner.

Nevertheless there are certain matters for which an
owner/occupier/organiser of an event (for convenience here after
referred to as "organiser") has to take some responsibility e.g., it
would not be reasonable to expect someone entering a stadium to have to
satisfy himself that staircases are properly constructed and will bear
the weight of a reasonable influx of people over them.

It is therefore a complex relationship between what is required from the
organiser and what can and should be expected from members of the
public.

As far as football stadia are concerned, it seems to me that
what has happened is that because law and order problems have
unfortunately featured heavily over the past few years, the police
involvement within a stadium has become more pronounced and they have in
addition to their conventional functions, also become heavily involved
and committed in the general management and running of major events.

One of the consequences of police status is that their relationship to
the organiser differs in many respects from the relationship which an
organiser might have to either his staff or indeed other independent
contractors.  A consequence of this is that the organiser has tended in
respect of many police activities to take a back seat and not to seek to
interfere with the organisational matters of police activity.  This may
be entirely understandable but it has a consequence of shifting the
responsibility for invitees from the organiser.



It is therefore necessary to first of all establish the basic parameters
and reasons for the involvement of organisations such as the police and
to clearly define the extent and scope of their responsibility.  It is
my view that a football match in principle is no different from any
other large social gathering and the general responsibility at such
gatherings for management and control within the venue rests with the
organiser.  If that is so, then the responsibility for the event and for
the safety of the invitees (subject to the qualification mentioned
above) should be seen to be and should be executed by the organiser
whose responsibility it should be to provide not only the necessary
facilities but also the staffing which is required to achieve this.

If the responsibility is firmly placed on the organiser, this would have
the added advantage of concentrating the organiser’s mind on the safety
requirements which he has to meet and would go some way to ensuring that
staff and premises are adequate for their purpose.

It could be argued that utilising the police would be one way of
fulfilling this obligation, but I do not favour it.



Police training and expertise in my view is more directed towards the




BAGAAH
 maintenance of law and order and the preservation of the Q u e e n ’s Peace
 rather than stewarding, packing, crowd control and general management
 and supervision of private premises and crowds within them.

 In general, police do not attend other functions e.g., theatres, cinema
 performances in large numbers in order to effect these matters, but
 merely attend if they are called in to deal with a specific problem. In
 principle I see no reason why similar considerations should not apply to
 gatherings such as football matches.

 It may well be that if the police are withdrawn from these activities
 that organisers will have to employ additional staff, including possibly
 security staff in larger numbers and deploy them in a different manner
 in order to ensure not only safety but also order within the crowd.



 I am not ruling out for one moment that if a situation were to develop
 m which law enforcement becomes an issue or which goes beyond the
 capacity of the staff to handle, that the police should not be called
 in; on the contrary I think that is precisely the role which they should
 fulfill.


It may be argued that visible police presence is desirable not only to
provide a quicker response but also to act as a deterrent and as a
preventative of a situation getting out of hand. I would have no
objection to this and indeed arrangements could be made for officers to
be deployed strategically, so that their presence was visible.   What I
am arguing is that their role should be clearly understood and properly
defined and not extended.

I appreciate that if one puts responsibility entirely on the organisers
this may involve considerable increase in the cost of running an event
which no doubt would then have to be reflected in the price of the
admission ticket but that is an unfortunate consequence for ensuring
that the quality and standard of safety is maintained.

I appreciate that if this view were adopted it would make a considerable
difference to the way in which football matches are run and controlled
and in particular, the police function from their control box would
either cease or would be very substantially diminished.



It would still be necessary of course to have proper lines of
communication between the organiser within the ground and the force
without, in order to ensure that the former is aware of any difficulties
or problems which may be being encountered for example, major holdups on
motorways and so on.

Such a change in emphasis would have the benefits of:-




   a.    Putting responsibility for the ground and what occurs in it




BAGAAH
         where it ought to be i.e., with the organisers of the particular
         ev en t,

   b.    Release police resources for purposes for which they are better
         equipped, suited and trained and,

   c.    Avoid a situation where the organiser becomes sandwiched between
         on the one hand the enforcing authority under the safety of
         sports ground legislation and on the other the police (the latter
         in fact also forming part and not an unimportant part of the
         advisory group of the safety of sports ground arrangements).

I appreciate that there is a strong argument for saying that people who
are running matches should be playing an active role in decision making
regarding safety and that by divorcing the advisory group and the police
from the actual management of the match, the effect of practical
experience may be lost. This is a valid point but I feel that proper and
appropriate arrangements can be made to ensure that those who have the
responsibility for staging events have a direct and easily accessable
means of communication with on the one hand the advisory group under the
safety of sports ground legislation and on the other the police in their
capacity as enforcers and preservers of the Queen's Peace.

The comments in this letter have been written on the basis that in the
society in which we live sporting events will continue to take place,
notwithstanding that there must be an inevitable risk whenever a very
large number of people are brought together in a relatively confined
space.

Perhaps however it is worth saying that it is also a legitimate question
to ask why the staging of football matches should be permitted when an
event such as the semi-final at Hillsborough at which 54,000 people were
expected required an allocation of up to 38% of the total police force
of the county of South Yorkshire.  If that were the sort of committment
for other similar sized events associated with different activities,
then perhaps one would not question it,  but if in fact it is correct
that major football matches require a substantially larger police
presence for the safety and security of the public at large as well as
the crowd attending, then one ought at least to ask the question whether
the advantages and benefits of allowing the matches to proceed in the
conventional way outweigh the risks and costs associated with them.

Before one totally discounts this thought, it should be borne in mind
that probably the vast majority of people who actually watch a match do
so these days not at the stadium but in the privacy of their own homes
by means of television.  This is a medium which was not available in
bygone days and its use should not be underestimated nor its impact on
social behaviour.  It is of course true that watching a match on T.V.
does not produce the same atmosphere as being present at a stadium.   On
the other hand it is likely to be considerably safer.
In the final analysis it is a matter of balance.




BAGAAH
                  SCHEDULE   C

                                                    1st May 1991.




Ref:   SLP/JT/HO/INQ




INQUESTS AND PUBLIC INQUIRIES.

You will be aware that I have recently concluded a series of inquests into
the Hillsborough Disaster which took more than 90 days to complete in the
presence of a jury. In addition, there was a major public inquiry under Lord
Justice Taylor which sat for 31 days, apart from the criminal investigation
undertaken by the D.P.P.  and the civil process which has also been
involved.

Thus you will see that without taking into account the police
complaint procedures or other internal and private investigations and
inquiries, there were four major investigative procedures and which because
of a lack of definition, tend to overlap and repeat to a large extent the
work of each other.

I suppose that if one wanted to approach the matter logically, one could
argue that the role of the inquest is to establish how a person came by his
death, a public inquiry to establish what can be done in order to avoid a
repetition of such an incident, the civil aspects to determine the questions
of negligence and compensation payments if any and the D .P .P/Criminal Courts
to deal with the issue of criminal liability and punishment insofar as it is
deemed necessary or appropriate.

Unfortunately although lip service tends to be paid to the principle that an
inquest is not concerned with issues of civil or criminal liability the
fact remains that particularly with regard    to criminal matters, the powers of
the coroner have only been modified to the    extent that he no longer is in a
position to name someone who may or may not have committed a criminal
offence.  As one of the possible verdicts remains that of unlawfully killed,
it unfortunately follows that in order to enable a jury to intelligently
apply their minds to the possibility of this verdict, a comprehensive amount
of evidence has to be taken in order to enable them to form a judgement.
Similarly public inquiries, e.g.,the Sheen report and Lord Justice Taylor’s
report have been framed in such a way as to not only overlap with the coronal
jurisdiction but have also tended to be critical of individuals.(See for
example the comment by Lord Justice Bingham in R-v-H.M.Coroner for East Kent
ex parte Peter Alan Spooner et al, Quee ns ’s Bench division, 6th of October
                                 2



      1987). Quite apart from the difficulties which this may create should a
      prosecution subsequently be brought, it tends to impinge on the D . P . P ’s and
      the civil litigation aspects, quite apart from the impact which it may have
      on an inquest.


      The main purpose of this letter however is to draw to your attention the
      urgent need to sort out the inter-relationship between coroners inquests and
      public inquiries.

      I do not need to say that I fully appreciate that I am not the first to note
      this.  Indeed Mr.  Justice Bingham in the case referred to says "one might
      suppose that one inquiry of this magnitude even into a disaster on this scale
      would be enough but the law required Her M a j e s t y ’s Coroner for East Kent to
      conduct an inquest with a jury pursuant to Section 3 of the Coroners Act
      1887".  That was of course precisely the situation in which I found myself as
      well.

      There are many options and I mention five:-

              To make no change, which I consider to be unsatisfactory.

              To recognise that an inquest is in fact a judicial public
              inquiry of a limited nature but that coroners each day
              throughout the country deal with sudden violent death which
              to those individuals who are involved are just as important,( even
              though they are only singletons) as a major disaster is to those
              persons who are involved in that.

              To broaden the base of inquests in appropriate circumstances, possibly
              by direction from the Home Secretary, so that where it
              is felt necessary to undertake a more extensive inquiry and in
              particular to look at prevention and improvement to authorise the
              coroners inquest to deal with these matters.

              If it is felt that 3 is not an appropriate choice
              in any particular event and a public inquiry (whether statutory
              or departmental) is the appropriate way of dealing with the matter
              then that Inquiry could also be given the task of performing the
              appropriate coronal function with or without the appointment of the
              coroner to sit as a member of the Inquiry.


• »           If that were the preferred option, consequential amendments
              would have to be made to primary legislation in order to remove
              the duty to hold this type of inquest with a jury.

              Another way forward might be to extend the provisions of Section
              16 of the Coroners Act 1988 so as to permit say the Home Secretary in
              appropriate circumstances e.g., (a Public Inquiry)
              to give a notice or direction which would enable the coroner
              to deal with the inquests in the same way as he at present
              is entitled and empowered to do where a person has been
              charged before Magistrates Court with certain offences or where the
              D.P.P. gives the appropriate notice under Section 16 (1) (b).

       I want to make it quite clear that I am not seeking to reduce the powers or
       the authorities of coroners, on the contrary, there may be an argument for
       enhancing them.  What I am not happy about is the apparent duplication of effort
                                  -   3 -



      and evidence inherent in the present arrangements.

      I understand that there are high level discussions going on in relation to
      this issue.

      Over the recent years there has been several major disasters.

                    Bradford Fire Disaster.
                    Zeebrugge Ferry Disaster.
                    Kings Cross Fire.
                    Kegworth Air Crash
                    Clapham Train Disaster.
                    Marchioness Sinking.
                    Hillsborough Football Disaster.

      I believe that not one coroner involved in any of these disasters has been
      invited to participate and contribute to the discussions, a situation which I
      find quite extraordinary and regretable.




* »
                                                             3rd May             91




         SLP/JT/HO/INQ.
         802350/42/MM.




         Mr. P.J. Tomlinson,
         H.M.Coroner for North Leicestershire District,
         80 & 81 Wood Gate,
         Loughborough,
         Leicestershire. LE11 2XE.

         Dear Mr. Tomlinson,


         Re:   INTER-RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN INQUESTS & PUBLIC INQUIRIES.


         Thank you very much indeed for your letter of the 30th of April.  I was aware
         that in your particular case, there had been no public inquiry as there had
         been say at Bradford or Hillsborough.

         Nevertheless you were involved in what turned out to be a major tragedy and
         as you very rightly point out, apart from your own investigations, very
         extensive work was also done by the A.A.I.B.

         I had overheard a snippet on a radio programme where the Attorney General
         commented that high level discussions were taking place regarding the
         inter-relationship of inquests and public inquiries and I felt that if that
         were the case, it might have been helpful if someone or more coroners who had
         had something to do with a major disaster had been invited to input into
         these discussions.      As far as I have been able to ascertain, none of the
         coroners who have been involved in the recent major disasters, (Bradford,
         Zebrugge, K i n g ’s Cross, Clapham, Marchioness, Kegworth and Hillsborough) have
         in fact been invited to do so.

         I note what you say regarding making comments to the Home Office, and
         obviously if you feel that you would like to make a direct contribution,     I
         can see no reason why you should not do so.

         Finally, may I thank you very much for your kind words in the final paragraph
         of your letter.

         Yours sincerely,




         S .L.Popper,
         H .M.Coroner.




BAGABH
         H.M. CORONER FOR                            8 0 & 81 WOOD GATE,
NORTH LEICESTERSHIRE DISTRICT                         LOUGHBOROUGH,
                                                       LEICESTERSHIRE,
                                                            LE11 2XE
               TEL. 0509 217770

                 -------------                        ourref, 8 0 2 3 5 0 / 4 2 / m m
      CORONERS OFFICER TEL. 0509 31111                YOUR REF..

                                                      3 0th April 1991



   Dear Dr. Popper,

   You have spoken to my secretary about the inter-relationship
   between inquests and public inquiries.  I didn't know that the
   Home Office were looking into this matter.  If you have any informa­
   tion on this point I shall be very interested to read it.

   In the case of the Kegworth matter, there was no public inquiry
   as such but the A.A.I.B. under their own rules carried out an
   inquiry and as you are probably aware, reached certain conclusions.
   This inquiry, however, was certainly not a public inquiry; it
   didn't sit in public; it received submissions and its report
   was then produced to the relevant parties for comment.  My
   situation, therefore, was rather different.

   At my pre-inquiry meeting I was urged by a number of parties
   to delay the inquest until the A.A.I.B. report was to hand.   Other
   parties vigorously sought that the inquest should go ahead as
   soon as possible.  I took the view that as the A.A.I.B. report
   was not a public matter and could be delayed for a very long
   time then I would not therefore hold the inquest in abeyance
   and this was not challenged.

   I think that the inter-relationship between the inquest and the
   public inquiry is a very difficult one in that:

   (a)       facts are given at the public inquiry which usually precedes
              the inquest which are then given a second time at the
              inquest itself;

   (b)       the public inquiry makes recommendations and it       is certainly
              open to the coroner to make recommendations;

   (c)       the coroner's function almost inevitably with a jury goes
              far beyond mere recommendation and is based on evidence
             which has already been given in public and a jury is likely
              to have read about the matter in question, recommendations
              and criticisms at a public inquiry.
     r                                         "1
             Dr. S.L. Popper,
             H.M. Coroner,
             Medico-Legal Centre,
             Watery STreet,
             SHEFFIELD, S3 7ET
     L                                         J


                                                       contd                   /2
Furthermore there does not seem to be any uniformity in the calling
of public inquiries.  It was never suggested, as far as I am
aware, that there should be a public inquiry into the Kegworth
case.  I would be very happy to give my comments to the Home
Office either through yourself or directly.  It is certainly
a topic that is going to come up again in the future whenever
there is a disaster and it certainly should be tackled.

I was sorry to read of your retirement and can well understand
the impact which the Hillsborough inquest had.  I hope that you
will be very happy in whatever you choose to do though I imagine
you will turn to medical circles.

Yours sincerely,




P.J. TOMLINSON, H.M. Coroner
                                                             1st May               91.



         SLP/JT.




         The Right Hon. Mr. Kenneth Baker, M.P.
         Home Office,
         50 Queen A n n e ’s Gate,
         London. SW1. H9AT.




         Dear Sir,

         I have recently concluded the Hillsborough Inquests.  I am of course aware
         that Lord Justice Taylor has presented a report in two parts incorporating a
         substantial number of recommendations, many of which I believe have already
         been implemented or are in the process of being acted on.

         Nevertheless at the conclusion of the inquests I indicated that there were a
         number of matters which I was intending to raise with you.

         For convenience I have dealt with    these matters as schedules to this letter

            1.     Schedule A deals with the issue of a National Licencing
                   Authority for sports grounds.

            2.      Schedule B deals with the issue of police involvement within
                    football stadia (and no doubt any other major venue).

            3.     Schedule C deals with the inter-relationship of inquests and
                    Public Inquiries with some reference to other investigations which
                    may follow a major disaster.

                   Also attached as Appendices are:-

            4.     Photocopy of Page 11-14 of the closing session on 28.4.91 of the
                   Inquest hearings (Appendix A ) .

            5.     A copy of a letter which I wrote to the Chief Fire Officer,Sheffield
                   drawing his attention to evacuation difficulties and location of means
                   of escape (Appendix B ) .

         If I can be of any further assistance in relation to any of these matters,
         please let me know.



         Yours faithfully,




         S.L.Popper,
         H.M.Coroner.
BAGABC
t




                                                                               23rd July   91




         HILLS/SLP/JT.
         FEP/89  35/48/106.




         P.E. Bolton,
         (Fire and Emergency Planning Department),
         Home Office,
         Queen A n n e ’s Gate,
         London. SW1H 9AT.




         Dear Mr. Bolton,


         Thank you for your letter of the 15th of July and have noted what you say.




         Yours sincerely,




         S.L.Popper,
         H.M.Coroner.




                                             * <s^v-v&b          ^   \ko<»s>
                   ----- ’S'SCJ          ^          \ j ^        ^

     s* '^> 5 s.iv                                -trN rirj



    ^        'A>           'k/'oX s> ^          v V*        «,

                             \s> V s ^   -




BAKAAD
          7.15/popper.peb
                                                   HOME OFFICE
                                          Queen Anne’s Gate LondoruSkWUl 9AT
                                                  Direct lin e : G lim
                                                Switchboard: 07/273 3000



Our reference:    FEP/89 35/48/106            15 July 1991
Your reference:   SLP/JT




    S L Popper Esq.,L L .B,B MED.Sci,BM,BS,MRCGP
    HM Coroner
    South Yorkshire (West District)
    Medico-Legal Centre
    Watery Street
    SHEFFIELD     S3 7ET




    Dear Mr Popper

    I have been asked to reply to your recent letter to the Home
    Secretary concerning several issues which arose out of the
    inquests into the deaths at the Hillsborough Stadium disaster.
    I apologise for the delay in replying to you.

    The Home Secretary has noted your observations and is grateful
    to have received them. I would like to comment on each of your
    suggestions individually.

    Schedule A of your letter recommends the establishment of a
    national licensing authority to replace local authorities as the
    certification body under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
    (the 1975 Act).   One of the principles of the 1975 Act is that
    the conditions of a safety certificate for a designated sports
    ground are determined by the local authority.        However, in
    determining the conditions of a safety certificate we expect the
    local authority to comply with the guidelines set out in the
    Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (The Green Guide).          In
    addition, departmental guidance has been issued to local
    authorities advising them on what particular things should be
    looked at during a ground inspection.    Consequently there will
    already be some degree of uniformity in all safety certificates.

    Lord Justice Taylor recommended in his Final report on the
    Hillsborough stadium disaster, that there should be a national
    inspectorate and review body to supervise the local authorities'
    responsibilities under the 1975 Act.        Under the Football
    Spectators Act 1989 the Football Licensing Authority (FLA) was
    created.  As from 3 June 1991 the FLA has had the function of
    reviewing the exercise by local authorities of their functions
    under the 1975 Act in relation to sports grounds at which
    designated football matches are played.

    In schedule B of your letter you raise the issue of the role of
    the police at football matches and whether they should be
    carrying out tasks that are more appropriate to stewards. As you
    suggest the role of the police is to preserve the peace, uphold
the law and prevent the commission of criminal offences.
Football has unfortunately become the focus of a minority of
hooligans who see the game as an opportunity to confront rival
groups of fans.   As long as this potential for violence and
disorder continues, the police will have a role to play in
preventing serious public disorder at matches.

Where the police have become engaged in duties more fitted to
stewards it is because the level and standard of stewarding at
Football Clubs is inadequate.    Justice Popplewell and Lord
Justice Taylor both criticised the standard of stewarding,
commenting that stewards are often insufficiently young, fit,
trained and rewarded.

The responsibility for the safety of spectators lies at all times
with the ground management. This includes the responsibility for
providing effective stewarding.    The Government considers that
better stewarding is the key to reducing the current dependence
on the police.   As well as being more appropriate to have club
employees rather than policemen conducting stewarding tasks, such
a change would help to reduce the considerable burden on police
resources.   The Government is therefore encouraging Football
Clubs to recruit fit young stewards and to train them
effectively.   One of the areas which is being explored is the
possibility of a national standard for approved training courses.
The Home Secretary has asked officials at the Home Office to meet
with the Football League, the Football Trust and the Association
of Chief Police Officers to see how best this might be taken
forward.

It is too early to predict the extent to which the improvement
in stewarding will enable the police presence inside football
grounds to be reduced, but we hope it will have a sufficient
impact. The commitment of the clubs themselves will be crucial
to the success of the initiative. We hope that they will become
more enthusiastic than they have been hitherto about providing
effective stewarding.

Schedule C of your letter has been noted and we are grateful for
your helpful and constructive comments on the relationship
between inquests and public inquiries into major disasters. You
are correct in your understanding that officials are exploring
the issues arising from the overlap between these two forms of
inquiry. Consideration of these matters is at a relatively early
stage and I understand that coroners such as yourself, who have
held inquests into deaths arising from recent disasters will, by
now, have already received a letter from the Chairman of the
Working Group seeking views on the problems and possible
solutions.   The comments you have made in the light of your
experience in conducting the Hillsborough inquest will be passed
to the Working Group for their consideration.

Once again I would like to thank you for your suggestions and
apologise for the delay in replying to you.

                                         Yours sincerely



                                         P E BOLTON
                                         (Fire and Emergency
                                         Planning Department)
                                       APPENDIX                   B

                                           OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                            WATERY STREET
                                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                            SHEFFIELD
                                                        (West District)
                                                                            S3 7ET
              STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                            CORONER


                                       Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721   —Lsfe-May..................... 19 -.91.




          SLP/JT/Hills/Escape.




          The Chief Fire Officer,
          South Yorkshire County Fire Service.
          West Division H.Q.,
          Wellington Street,
          Sheffield. SI 3 F G .



          Dear Sir,

          Hillsborough Inquests/Evacuation Procedures and Means of Escape.

          You may well be aware that I have recently concluded the inquests into the
          Hillsborough Disaster and you will also be aware that Mr. Seaman came and
          gave evidence at the inquests.

          Although there were various matters which arose during the course of these
          inquests which gave me some cause for concern e.g., the possibility of
          closure of the tunnel exit gates in order to prevent ingress on to the
          terracing.   I expect that you will be considering this problem.
          However, part from that, the matters which I felt I wanted to raise with you
          in this letter are:-

    1.     For whatever reason, the terracing at Hillsborough were not evacuated within
           the notional evacuation time which had been calculated in respect of them.
           I have no doubt that there were many causes but one factor which has occured
         _ to me is that evacuation times are calculated as I understand it by applying
           flow rates through specific apertures.  This of course   assumes that   the
           people who have to leave a specified area are:-

                (a)        Aware that a life-threatening emergency exits and that it is
                           in their interests to go.

                (b)        Realise where the exit points are and the routes are unobstructed.

                (c)         Do not have some motivation which makes them hesitate not to
                            give up their position and

                 (d)       Are prepared to be distracted from the object of their attention.

          A crowd which attends a football stadium is of course intent upon watching
          the match.   Their attention will therefore be towards the field, i.e.,
          forward and away from exits which may be located at the rear or to the side
          of them.   Clearly, if there were to be a raging inferno immediately in
          front of them the natural instinct of people will tend    to make them    back away
          from the apparent problem and move towards exit points    located behind them.



R86Q6

BAGABA
If however the problem which presents itself is not so obviously apparent,
and if attention is focused towards the front, there may be considerable
reluctance for people to move away from their viewing positions and out of
the viewing area particularly if they have some fear that they may not
subsequently be allowed back, or that they might lose a vantage point if in
the events they were mistaken about the need to go.

The point I am trying to make is that simple flow rates may not be a
sufficient basis for calculating evacuation times in certain circumstances.

Another matter which occurred to me whilst listening to the evidence was that
on the terrace in question, the means of escape were all situated at the
rear.  I am of course aware that there were little gates in the perimeter
fencing, which in fact turned out to be one of the primary routes of escape
on the day in question, but I also understood that these had never been
contemplated as forming a major escape route in the calcuations which had
been m a d e .

I am less concerned with that happened to Hillsborugh on the
15th of April 1989 but more concerned with the general principle as to
whether it is wise to locate the means of escape and the secondary means of
escape in the same general area.  I say this because it does not take too
much imagination to be able to contemplate a situation where the rear exits
are all blocked.  To take one scenario, if there was a collapse of the upper
tier of the stand across the back of the terracing.

I appreciate that if exits or escape routes are located forward, then
particularly if a panic arises, there may be substantial risks of these
routes becoming blocked by a movement of spectators forward, and this
difficulty is compounded by the possible problem of distinguishing a safety
movement from a pitch evasion at football matches.

The purpose of this letter is not to suggest solutions to you or to be
critical but simply to draw to your attention two matters which gave me some
concern.  Whether there are any solutions which could usefully be applied,
at Hillsborough or elsewhere is of course a matter for you.



During my preparation for Hillsborough I learned of some very interesting
work which had been done by Dr.  Helen Muir at the Research
Establishment, Department of Applied Psychology at the College of
Aeroneutics, Cranfield, Bedford.  Her work was based upon the Manchester Air
Disaster and she has undertaken some experimental work to try and demonstrate
problems with egress and crowd behaviour from a confined space.   I have seen
a short video of some of this work and I was struck by the fact that problems
which appeared to me to have arisen at Hillsborough were not dissimilar to
those which she was demonstrating in her experimentation.

It may be that you might feel that it would be helpful for you to get in
touch with her so that there could be an exchange of information which may be
of interist and use to all.




I am sending a copy of this letter to her so that she can be aware of what is
going on.

As I indicated on the last day of the inquest,   I am interested in the
possibility whether there is scope for the pooling of information regarding
safety from separate disciplines.

Finally, I am sending a copy of this letter to the Home Secretary for his
information.




Yours faithfully,




S .L .Popp er ,
H .M.C or on e r.



c . c , Home Secretary Mr. Kenne th B ake r
                                                         frO




           S H E F F I E L D   C I T Y   C O U N C I L




           SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 (AS AMENDED!




                     GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE




                  SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB,
                  HILLSBOROUGH SPORTS GROUND,
                  HILLSBOROUGH,
                  SHEFFIELD.
                  S6 1SW




                                            ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL
                                            D EPARTMENT,
                                            TOWN HALL,
                                            SHEFFIELD,
                                            SI 2 H H .




SC2AAA/1
                      PREFACE TO THE SAFETY CERTIFICATE

    The standards of safety to be achieved as laid down in this certificate
    are based on recommendations contained in the Guide to Safety at Sports
    Grounds (new edition 1986 published by H.M. Stationery Office)
    applicable to designated sports grounds and the final recommendations
    of Lord Justice Taylor in his final report on the Hillsborough Stadium
    Disaster.

    OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

    It is an offence for the Holder or any responsible person to:-

    (a)    Contravene any term or condition of this certificate,

    (b)    Admit spectators to the sports ground at any time when a Safety
           Certificate is not in force;

    (c)    Admit spectators to the sports ground in contravention of a Court
           Order.

    The penalty is, on summary conviction, a fine not exceeding the
    statutory maximum (£2,000) or, on conviction and indictment, a fine or
    imprisonment not exceeding 2 years or both.

I   It is an offence to:-

    Fail to give notice of an alteration orextension to   thesports ground
    or obstruct an authorised officer carrying out hisduties   under the
    act.

    The penalty is, on summary conviction, a fine not exceeding the
    statutory maximum.

)   POWERS OF ENTRY AND INSPECTION

    In accordance with Section 11 of the Act a person authorised by

    (a)      the local authority;

    (b)      the Chief Officer of Police;

     (c)   The Secretary of State

    may, on production if so required of his authority, enter a sports
    ground at any reasonable time, and make such inspection of it and such
    enquiries relating to it as he considers necessary for the purposes of
    this act, and in particular may examine records of attendance at the
    ground and records relating to the maintenance of safety at the ground,
    and take copies of such records.

0   ALTERATIONS AND EXTENSIONS

1    In accordance with Section 8 of the Act, if while a General Safety
     Certificate is in operation with respect to a sports ground, it is
     proposed to alter or extend that sports ground or any of its
     installations and the alteration or extension is likely to affect the
                 safety of persons at the sports ground, the Holder of the certificate
                 shall, before the carrying out of the proposals is begun, give notice
                 of the proposals to the local authority.

       4.2       Sub-Section 1 above in   particular requires notice when it is proposed
                 to alter the entrances   to or exists from a sports ground or any part of
                 it including any means   of escape in case of fire or other emergency or
                 the means of access to   any such entrances or exits.

           5.0   RIGHT OF APPEAL

                 The act makes provision for appeal against decisions of the local
                 authority or against the inclusion of any terms and conditions imposed
                 by the certificate.  The time limit within which appeals must be lodged
                 and the procedures to be followed are set out in the Safety of Sports
                 Grounds Regulations 1987.




SC2AAA/3
                            S H E F F I E L D   C I T Y    C O U N C I L




                          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 (AS AMENDED)

                                    GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE



       Address of premises for                    Sheffield Wednesday Sports Ground,
       which this certificate is issued           Hillsborough,
                                                  Sheffield S6 1SW

       Occupier of the premises and               Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Pic
       holder of the certificate

       Use of the premises in respect             Football Matches; Rugby Matches
       of which this certificate is               (Union and League); Hockey; Marching
       issued.                                    Band Displays and entertainment
                                                  ancillary to any of the above.

                                                  (N.B. Pop Concerts; Religious
                                                  Conventions are specifically excluded.
                                                  A special Safety Certificate is
                                                  required for these events.)

           1.   This certificate is issued by Sheffield City Council in respect of the
                premises described above, being a Sports Ground designated by Order
                under Section 1 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (As iynended) as
                a ground requiring a Safety Certificate.

           2.   The terms and conditions set out in the Schedules attached hereto are
                hereby imposed.

           3.   The terms and conditions hereby imposed are those which the Sheffield
                City Council consider necessary or expedient to secure reasonable safety
                at the sports ground when it is in use for an activity in respect of
                which this certificate is issued.

           4.   The words used in the certificate and the schedules attached hereto have
                the meaning assigned to them by Schedule 1 to this certificate and
                Section 17 of the Act.

           5.   The schedules and plan attached hereto all form part of the certificate.

           6.   The certificates commences on      day of       i one thousand nine
                hundred and ninty and will expire on 31st July, 1991 unless surrendered
                or revoked.




           Date                                    Signed . .<> . . . .v*
                                                          Head of A'      TSTration and
                                                          Legal Department on behalf and
                                                          duly authorised by the
                                                          Sheffield City Council.

SC2AAA/4
                                          S C H E D U L E



                               S H E F F I E L D   C I T Y    C O U N C I L



           Interpretation of General Safety Certificates issued by the Council

       Word/Phrase                                  Meaning

           The Act                                  The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
                                                    including any modification or
                                                    re-enactment thereof and any
                                                    subordinate legislation made
                                                    the reunde r .

           Authorised Officer                       Any Police Officer, any Officer of the
                                                    South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence
                                                    Authority, any Officer of the
                                                    Sheffield City Council who is
                                                    authorised in writing.

           The Certificate                           The written General Safety Certificate
                                                     issued by the Council under the Act to
                                                     the holder of which this *
                                                     interpretation document forms part.

           The Council                               The Sheffield City Council.

           The Guide                                 The current edition of the "Guide to
                                                     Safety at Sports Grounds" published by
                                                     H.M. Government or any succeeding code
                                                     or guidance produced by H.M.
                                                     Government.

           The Holder                                The person to whom the General Safety
                                                     Certificate has been issued.

           Specified Activity                        Football matches; Rugby Matches
                                                     (Union and League); Hockey; Marching
                                                     Band Displays and entertainment
                                                     ancillary to any of the above.

                                                     (N.B. Pop Concerts, Religious
                                                     Conventions are specifically excluded.
                                                     A special Safety Certificate is
                                                     required for these
                                                     eve nt s.)

           Spectator                                 Has the meaning assigned to it by the
                                                     Act.

           The.Sports Ground                         The Sheffield Wednesday Sports
                                                     Ground.

            Safety Standards                         A safety steward is a steward who has
                                                     the responsibility specified in clause
                                                     5.3 of Schedule 2 to the Safety
                                                     C ertificate.



SC2AAA/5
                                          S C H E D U L E     2

                          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

           1.0   GENERAL SAFETY

           1.1   The Holder shall appoint,    in writing,   at least one Safety Officer who
                 has full authority to:-

                 (a)   take responsibility for safety at the ground, and

                 (b)   implement and supervise safety measures.

                 A Safety Officer or his approved nominee shall

                 (a)   be in charge of the sports ground and the H o l d e r ’s employees; and-

                 (b)   be in attendance at the sports ground and in direct personal
                       communication with a central control point during a specified
                       activity.

           1.2   The Holder (and the Safety Officer(s)) shall take all necessary
                 precautions for the reasonable safety of spectators admitted to the
                 sports ground and shall ensure that all responsible persons (as defined
                 in Section 12(2) of the Act) are completely familiar with their duties
                 under that Act and this certificate.

           1.3   The Holder shall provide and maintain such signs or notices of such
                 type, size and design as the Council may from time to time reasonably
                 require for reasons of public safety.

                 (a)   The Holder shall ensure that the signs or notices so required are
                       clearly legible so that they can easily be read at all times;

                 (b)   The Holder shall, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph
                       12.0 of Schedule 7, conduct a survey of the sports ground and
                       where in the opinion of the Holder the signing requires alteration
                       or amendment submit a scheme to the Council for approval detailing
                       the proposed amendments.

           1.3   The Holder shall take all possible steps to ensure that no materials
                 that are capable of being used as missiles are accessible to
                 spectators.




SC2AAA/6
                       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

       2.0   MEDICAL SERVICES

       2.1   (a)    The Holder shall provide and maintain at the sports ground to the
                    satisfaction of the Council a suitably equiped First Aid Room and
                    shall arrange for attendance of such number of qualified First Aid
                    Attendants as the Council may require, but in any event there
                    shall be in attendance at least one First Aid Attendant for every
                    1,000 (or part thereof) spectators.  The Attendants duties shall
                    only relate to the administering of first aid.

             (b)    The First Aid Room shall be capable of being lit by both the^
                    general lighting and the emergency lighting and shall be easily
                    identified by means of signs.

             (c)    The     First Aid Room shall be designated a ’No   Smoking Area*   and at
                     all    times be kept clean and tidy.

             (d)    The   First Aid Room shall be clearly identified as a first aid
                     room, its location publicised and made known to staff and
                     stewards.     1

             (e)    The Holder 3hall ensure that the equipment and medical supplies
                    specified in Schedule 6 are available for use at all times during
                    a specified activity.

             (f)    The Holder shall employ at least one medical practitioner (in
                    addition to any medical practitioner employed to treat players) to
                    be present at each specified activity and available to deal with
                    any medical exigency at the sports ground.  He/she shall'be
                    trained and competent in advance first aid.  He/she shall be
                    present at the sports ground at least one hour before kick-off and
                    must remain until half-an-hour after the end of the specified
                    activity.  The medical practitioner must be immediately
                    contactable and his/her whereabouts known to the Police Control
                    Room.

              (g)    (i)     The Holder shall arrange with South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                             Ambulance Service for the attendance of at least one fully
                             equipped ambulance at a specified activity where between
                             5,000 and 15,000 spectators are expected to attend.

                     (ii)    Where more than 15,000 spectators are expected to attend the
                             specified activity, the Holder shall arrange with the South
                             Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service for a second fully
                             equipped Ambulance and where appropriate at the instigation
                             of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service the
                             provision of a major incident equipment vehicle.

                     (iii) The holder shall after consulting with the South Yorkshire
                           Metropolitan Ambulance Service; the South Yorkshire Police
                           and the South Yorkshire Fire Service designate a specific
                           parking place for Ambulance(s) at the ground during a
                           specified activity.  This area shall be marked out and
                           signposted accordingly and shall at all times remain
                           unobstructed.




SC2AAA/7
       2.2. In the event of a spectator being injured in the sports ground, the
            Holder shall -submit to the Council a full written report in accordance
            with the Reporting of Injuries; Diseases and Dangerous Occurrence
            Regulations, 1986 regulating in the circumstances of the injury.   The
            Holder shall supply such additional information as the Council may
            require.

           2.3   In the event of a fatality occurring at the ground the Holder shall as
                 soon as possible and in any event within 24 hours inform the Council
                 and provide a written report in accordance with the Reporting of
                 Injuries; Diseases and Dangerous Occurrence Regulations, 1986
                 regulations.




SC2AAA/8
         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

ALTERATIONS

(a)   Without prejudice to the provisions of Section 8 of the Act, the
      Holder shall not cause or permit the sports ground or any of its
      installations to be altered (which term shall exclude minor
      remedial works which do not in any way affect the safety of the
      sports ground) in any manner whatsoever without the prior written
      consent of the Council.

(b)   The Holder shall supply the Council with copies of such plans,
      specifications and calculations as the Council may reasonably
      require to enable any application for such consent to be
      considered and shall comply with any conditions attached to that
      consent.

(c)   Where an application to alter any part of the sports ground may
      result in the amendment of the certificate the Holder shall submit
      with such an application a formal application for certificate
      amendment in accordance with the provisions of the 1975 Act (as
      amended) and any Regulations made thereunder.
              SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

PLANS

(a)   The Holder shall provide to the Council when so requested, such
      plans and technical details as the Council may require, as
       detailed by the Council and drawn up in accordance with the plans
       regulations approved by the General Purposes Panel of the Council
       at its meeting on 5th March, 1990.

(b)   Where the Holder is required to submit a plan/s to the Council
       under the terms of the Certificate.  Those plans must be drawn up
       and submitted in accordance with the plans regulations detailed in
       Schedule 8 attached.

(c)   Where approved alterations have been made to the Stadium the
       Holder shall arrange to supply a new set of plans of the Stadium
       (in accordance with the plans regulations) incorporating the
       details of the alterations.  Such plans must be submitted to the
       Council in line with the requirements specified in the plans
       regulations detailed in Schedule 8 attached and be accompanied
       with an application to amend the Certificate (unless an      t
       application for certificate amendment was submitted with the
       original application for alteration).                     ^
              (h)   Be capable of recognising potential fire hazards and suspect
                    packages, reporting such findings immediately to the nearest
                     Police Officer or the Chief Steward or the Safety Qfficer.   In the
                     event of no Police Officers being pre.sent for a specicified
                    Activity Police Oficer shall be substituted by Authorised Officers
                     of the Council).

              (i)   Comply promptly with any instruction given in an emergency   by a
                     Police Officer, the Chief Steward or the Safety Officer.    (In the
                     event of no Police Officers being present for a specified   activity
                     Police Officer shall be substituted by Authorised Officer   of the
                     Council).

              (j)   Remain at their allocated locations as instructed unless
                     Authorised or instructed to do otherwise by a Police Officer, the
                     Chief Steward or the Safety Officer.   (In the event of no Police
                     Officers being present for a specified activity Police Officer
                     shall be substituted by Authorised Officer of the C ou ncil).

              (k)   Report to the Safety Officer any damage or defect which is likely
                     to pose a threat to spectator safety e.g. a damaged crush barrier.

              (1)   Open the exit doors/gates and secure them in the open position on
                    the initiation of the emergency procedure or when instructed to do
                    so by the Safety Qfficer, the Chief Safety Steward or a Police
                    Officer.  (In the event of no Police Officers being present for a
                    specified activity Police Officer shall be substituted by
                    Authorised Officer of the Council).

        5.4   Training exercises organised by the Safety Officer relating to the
              duties of Stewards shall be held at least once every three mo'nths.     A
              written record of the exercises shall be kept.

        5.5. All exit doors and gates for use by spectators in both ordinary
              evacuation and emergency evacuation situations shall be manned by
              Stewards in accordance with Schedule 4.   The other duties detailed in
              Schedule 4 shall be carried out by Safety Stewards.

        5.6   The Holder shall arrange with the South Yorkshire Metropolitan
              Ambulance Service for the training of all Safety Stewards specified
              in Schedules 3 and 4 attached in First Aid procedure.




SC2AAA/12
         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

POLICE

The Holder shall make arrangements with the Chief Constable of the
South Yorkshire Police for the provision of special police services on
the occasion of a specified activity at the sports ground for the
purposes of maintaining lawful and orderly behaviour amongst
spectators, and the services provided (if any) shall be determined by
the Chief Constable and he and his Officers shall be allowed full
access to all parts of the sports ground.

The Holder shall, where possible, notify in writing, the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire Police at least 28 days before any
specified activity takes place.

The Holder shall be responsible for limiting the number of spectators
entering each self-contained pen or area in accordance with the
capacity figures detailed in Schedule 5.

The Holder shall arrange for a computerised system to record the number
of persons passing through each turnstile.

The Holder shall arrange to inform the Police Control Room when a
particular pen or area is approaching capacity.  The Holder will be
responsible for closing off further access to a pen or area when its
maximum capacity is about to be reached.

Before each specified activity the Holder shall arrange to liaise with
the South Yorkshire Police on the following matters;

(a)   The anticipated number of spectators expected;

(b)   The method of crowd segregation (if any)   intended to be used;

(c)   Provision of information in relation to potential crowd control
      p roblems.

(d)   The number and location of turnstiles to be made available to each
      crowd group.

(e)   An estimation of the time it will take each crowd group to pass
      through the turnstiles.

(f)   Where tickets are to be used, that the information on those
      tickets corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting
      spectators to the ground.

(g)   To consider whether the specified Activity is to be open only to
      spectators having purchased tickets in advance of the Specified
      Activity and to specify the date and time of commencement of the
      Specified Activity.

The Holder shall comply with any request from the Police Ground
Commander to postpone the commencement of the specified activity.
        6.8   The Holder shall enter into a written agreement with the Chief
              Constable of the South Yorkshire Police setting out the respective
              responsibilities of the Club and the Police for crowd safety and
              control.  The agreement shall specify responsibilities for the filling
              of all terraced areas of the sports ground and the monitoring of
              spectators in such areas to avoid overcrowding.  A copy of the
              agreement shall be lodged with the Council; any alteration or variation
              of the agreement shall be agreed in writing in advance and the Council
              notified in writing of the alteration/variation.

        6.9   The Holder shall provide and maintain to the satisfaction of the
              Council in consultation with the South Yorkshire Police

              (a)   A Police Control Room; and

              (b)   A Police Detention Room.

        6.10 The Holder shall provide and maintain to the reasonable satisfaction of
             the Council in consultation with the South Yorkshire Police a system of
             closed circuit television at the Sports Ground.

        6.11 The Holder shall (in close consultation with the South Yorkshire
             Police) undertake a survey of the closed circuit television system in
             operation at the Sports Ground.  The Holder shall arrange to forward to
             the Council a written report outlining the survey and its conclusions
             by 31st October, 1990.  In compiling the written report the Holder
             shall have due regard to any technical information that may be
             available from the Home Office.  The Holder shall consult with the Home
             Office on this matter before submission of the report.




SC2AAA/14
                      SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

        7.0   FIRE SAFETY

        7.1   The Holder shall provide and maintain a public address system which
              shall be audible in all parts of the sports ground to the satisfaction
              of the Council.

        7.2   The Holder shall institute and maintain a fire warning system to the
              satisfaction of the Council.

        7.3   The Holder shall provide and maintain at least such fire fighting
               equipment in such locations as the Council may from time to time
               specify.

        7.4   The Holder shall not permit the storage in the sports ground of any
               flamable, explosive, toxic or corrosive liquid or compressed substance
               (except fire extinguishing and drinks dispensing apparatus) without
               first obtaining a relevant licence before applying for any licence the
               holder shall apply to the Council for permission to permit the stoarage
               of such sustances on the premises.

        7.5   The Holder shall at all times maintain the sports ground in a clean
              condition and shall not permit any accumulations of rubbish or any
              other materials whether combustible or not.

        7.6   The Holder shall arrange with the South Yorkshire Fire and Civil
              Defence Authority for the training of all Safety Stewards as
              specified in Schedules 3 and 4 attached in the operation
              of fire fighting equipment; and general fire prevention procedures.




SC2AAA/15
                             SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

        5.0   STEWARDS

        5.1   The Holder shall arrange for the attendance at every specified activity
              of a Chief Safety Steward and such number of Safety Stewards as are
              specified in Schedule 3.

        5.2   The Holder shall ensure that the Chief Safety Steward and other Safety
              Stewards ares-

              (a)    fit and capable to carry out their duties;

              (b)    properly trained and instructed;

              (c)    readily identifiable by dress;

              (d)    provided with written instructions as to their    tasks/duties;

              (e)    aged between 18 and 55 years or such age as is considered
                      appropriate by the Council in individual circumstances.

        5.3   The written instructions given to the Chief Safety Steward and other
              Safety Stewards must include the following tasks and duties.
              Safety Stewards must:-

              (a)    Under the direction of the Safety Officer or' the Chief Steward
                     prevent overcrowding by ensuring that the crowd limits in various
                     parts of the sports ground are complied with.

              (b)    Prevent spectators, as far as possible, from climbing fertces and
                      other structures (e.g. flood light pylons) and from standing on
                      seats.   Where by virtue of the scale of the incident Stewards are
                      unable to prevent this, they must immediately report the matter to
                      the nearest Police Officer or the Chief Steward or the Safety
                      Officer.   (In the event of no Police Officers being present for a
                      specified Activity Police Officer shall be substituted by
                      Authorised Officer of the Council).

              (c)    Ensure that gangways and exits are kept clear.

              (d)    Identify and investigate any incident or occurrence among the
                     spectators which may affect spectator safety, reporting their
                     findings to the Police Officer, Chief Steward or the Safety
                     Officer.   (In the event of no Police Officers being present for a
                     specified activity Police Officer shall be substituted by
                     Authorised Officer of the Co uncil).

              (e)    Know the location of and be able to operate effectively the       fire
                     fighting equipment at the sports ground.

              (f)    Know the location of the First Aid Room and any first aid
                     equipment kept elsewhere.

               (g)   Be fully conversant with any methods or signals    used to alert
                      staff that an emergency has arisen.




SC2AAA/11
                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

         8.0    LIGHTING AND ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS (FIRE SAFETY)

         8.1    The Holder shall ensure that all parts of the sports ground to which
                spectators are admitted are illuminated to a sufficient standard to
                enable such persons to enter or leave the sports ground safely.

         8.2    The Holder shall provide to the satisfaction of the Council a system of
                emergency lighting which shall, in the event of a failure of the
                general lighting be sufficient to enable spectators to leave the
                stadium safely.

                The emergency lighting shall



•               (a)   be powered by a source independent of the mains electricity
                      supply, and

                      come into operation immediately on the failure of the mains
                (b)
                      lighting, and

                (c)   remain in operation for at least three consecutive hours when
                      activated.

          8.3   The electrical installation for the sports ground shall be constructed
                and maintained in a safe and satisfactory condition.  No alteration
                without the prior written consent of the Council which significantly
                affects the installation shall take place.

          8.4   Throughout each specified activity the electrical installation shall be
                supervised by a competent electrician who shall investigate, rectify
                (if possible) and report to the Safety Officer any defects which arise
                in the installation.




' SC2AAA/16
                      SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

        9.°   PRESS AND TELEVISION

        9.1    All press and television personnel shall be capable ofimmediate
              identification.  Those members of the press and television personnel
              who have access to the public and playing areas shall be identifiable
              by means of distinctive dress (coloured tabards) with the word PRESS in
              bold letters written on the back of the tabard.

        9.2   The Holder shall ensure that the equipment brought into and used by
              photographers, television and sound personnel shall not cause an
              obstruction or hazard or interfere with the public address and closed
              circuit television systems in operation at the Sports Ground.

        9.3   The Holder shall ensure that only those structures and locations which
              have been approved by the Council are used for photographic, television
              and sound equipment, except where it is a hand held camera or
              microphone not connected to any cables.

        9.4   The Holder shall ensure that all persons associated with such equipment
              undertake to comply with any instruction given to them, in the interest
              of safety and good order, by a Safety Steward the Safety Officer or a
              Police Officer.  (In the event that no Police O f f i c e r ’s being present
              for a Specified Activity Police Officer shall be substituted by
              Authorised Officer of the Council).




SC2AAA/17
                     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

        10.0 ENTRANCES EXITS AND GANGWAYS

        10.1 The Holder shall ensure that all doors, gates and turnstiles throughout
             the sports ground are maintained in good working order at all times.
             Particular attention shall be paid to doors, gates and turnstiles in
             spectator ingress and egress routes and also to any pitch perimeter
             gates. The Holder shall not cause or permit any exit doors or gates to
             be altered, in type, design or method of operation without the prior
             written consent of the Council.

        10.2 The means of ingress and egress and the gangways in the sports ground
             shall at all times be kept unobstructed whilst spectators are within
             the Stadium for a Specified Activity.

        10.3 All floor   surfaces and steps throughout the sports ground which are
             available   for use by spectators shall have even and non-slip surfaces
             and shall   be kept unobstructed, unrestricted and free from trip
             hazards.    Adequate drainage shall also be provided where necessary.

        10.4 The entrances to and exits from the sports ground and the means of
             access to those entrances and exits shall be as specified in the plan
             which forms part of the certificate.

        10.5 The Holder shall ensure that all gangways on standing terraces  are
             painted in a conspicuous colour whether they are sunk or not; nosing
             to gangway steps in seated areas are to be painted in a conspicuous
             colour.

        10.6 The Holder shall ensure that during the performance of a specified
             activity, spectators are not permitted to stand in a gangway for the
             purpose of viewing the specified activity.




SC2AAA/18
                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

        11.0 BARRIERS

        11.1 The Holder shall maintain to the reasonable satisfaction of the Council
             such number of crowd control barriers as are thought necessary to
             ensure the safety of spectators on standing terraces within the sports
             ground.

             (N.B.  In accordance with Final Recommendation 23 of the Final
             Taylor Report into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster:

             "The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed
             immediately (if this has not already been done following the Interim
             Report) to ensure that it complies with the criteria contained in
             Chapter 9 of the Green Guide.  If it does not, the assessment of the
             maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, in accordance
             with Recommendation 8 above, should reflect the fact".

             If the barrier layout does not comply with the Green Guide criteria the
             capacity figure for that standing area will be amended appropriately
             taking full account of the* Final Recommendations of Lord Justice
             Taylor).
                                       0
        11.2 The   Holder shall provide crowd control barriers in accordance with the
             plans attached (Schedule 9) all barriers shall be constructed tothe
             satisfaction of the Council.

        11.3 All barriers shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of
             Chapter 9 of the Guide to Safety of Sports Grounds (The Green Guide) or
             any revised or amended addition of the Guide.

        11.4 All barriers shall be painted in a distinctive colour.

        11.5 All barriers shall be numbered and shall prominently bear the
             appropriate barrier number.




SC2AAA/19
                    SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

       12.0 CAPACITY

        12.1 The maximum number of spectators that may be admitted to each part of
             the stadium at any one time shall not exceed the number specified in
             Schedule 5 .




SC2AAA/20
                     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

        13.0 INSPECTIONS AND TESTS

        13.1 Where any condition in this certificate requires written records to be
             kept such records shall be produced on demand to an Authorised
             Of ficer.

        13.2 The Council may at any time by notice in writing, for reasons of public
             safety, require the Holder to carry out such works and inspections or
             provide proposals for work with a prescribed timetable as may be
             specified in the notice.  The Holder shall comply with any reasonable
             requirement or condition specified in such a notice.

        13.3 If a significant defect is suspected or discovered pursuant to the
             normal use of the sports ground or any inspection or test carried out -
             under the terms of this certificate, the Holder shall immediately
             notify the Council and take steps to correct the defect.

        13.4 The Holder shall arrange for the test and inspections listed in
             Schedule 7 to be carried out and for records to be kept or reports to
             be supplied to the Council in accordance with the terms of the
             Schedule.  Where reports are required to be supplied to the Council,
             they shall be supplied as soon as possible on completion of the
             inspection/tests.

        13.5 Without prejudice to Section 6 of the Act or any regulations made
             thereunder, the Holder shall maintain written records showing:-

             (a)   The number of spectators admitted to each part of the sports
                   ground for each specified activity; and

             (b)   The names and addresses of all the Stewards employed by the
                   Holder;

             (c)   The names of all the Stewards on duty at each specified activity
                    and details of their duties; and

             (d)   The details of the training exercises organised by the Holder for
                    Stewards in accordance with Conditions 5.4 and 7.6.  The records
                    shall show which Stewards attended each exercise and the content
                    of those exercises.




SC2AAA/21
                         SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

       14.0 EMERGENCY PROCEDURE

        14.1 The Safety Officer or his approved nominee shall be responsible for the
             evacuation of the ground or any part thereof at any time during a
             specified activity.  Nevertheless, he shall comply with any
             requirements of the Police and Fire Service or an authorised Officer in
             the event of Police Officers not being present for the Specified
             Activity to evacuate all or any part of the ground promptly.

        14.2 In the event of a fire or any Suspicion of a fire,   the emergency
             services shall be summoned.

        14.3 The Holder shall prepare in accordance with Chapter 2 of the Guide to
             Safety of Sports Grounds (The Green Guide) a written  contingency plan
             detailing the action to be taken in the event of various emergency
             situations (e.g.  fire, bomb scare, structural defect, possible crowd
             trouble; coping with exceptionally large numbers of spectators arriving
             at the ground etc.).  A copy of this plan/s shall be lodged with the
             South Yorkshire Police; South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence
             Authority; South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Services and the
             Council.

        14.4 The Holder shall ensure that all Safety Stewards are fully aware of the
             action they must take in the event of an emergency.




SC2AAA/22
                          SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

        15.0 SAFETY MANAGEMENT

        15.1 The Holder shall in compliance with Chapter 2 of the "Guide to
             Safety at Sports Grounds" the Green Guide prepare a written safety
             management programme for the sports stadium.  The programme shall
             encompass all areas of ground, spectator and staff safety.   The
             programme shall specify particularly training procedures for
             Safety Stewards and staff, maintenance schedules, inspection and
             test records.  A copy of this document shall be deposited with the
             Council.

             (N.B. The Director of Health and Consumer Services should be
             approached to aid preparation of this d o c u me nt ).




SC2AAA/23
                             SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

        16.0 MISCELLANEOUS

        16.1 The Council reserves the right to exclude from the ground any
             vehicle and/or trailer.

        16.2 The Council may from time to time issue written guidance to
             Holders on safety matters.  The Holder must pay due regard to any
             such guidance.




SC2AAA/24
                        SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS

       17.0 CERTIFICATE EXPIRY

       17.1 This Certificate shall, unless previously surrendered cancelled or
            revoked remain in force until 31st July, 1991 (the date of
            expiry).

        17.2 An Applicant for the renewal of the certificate:-

             (a)   shall give not less than 3 months notice of his intention to
                    make such an application (or such shorter period of notice
                    as the Council p er mit);

             (b)   the application referred to in (a) above shall be in
                   accordance with the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (as
                   amended) and any regulations made under that Act.

        17.3 Where before the date of expiry of  this Certificate, an
             application has been made for its renewal it shall be deemed to
             remain in force notwithstanding that the expiry date has passed
             until withdrawal of the application or its determination by the
             Council.




SC2AAA/25
                       SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - CERTIFICATE CONDITIONS



        18.0 WEST (LEPPINGS LANE) TERRACE NORTH WEST TERRACE

        18.1 That part of the Sports Ground known as the West or Leppings Lane
             Terrace and the North West Terrace Lower Section may not be used
             by spectators at any specified activity.

        18.2 That part of the Sports Ground known as the North West Terrace
             Upper Section may only be used by spectators on the express
             permission of the Chief Constable, South Yorkshire Police, his
             nominated Deputy or his nominated Sports Ground Conunander.




SC2AAA/26
                                   GENERAL SAFETY CERTIFICATE

                              S C H E D U L E    3   (CONDITION 5.1)

           1,   The number of safety stewards (excluding the Chief Safety Steward)
                duty at each specified activity shall not be less than:-  81




SC2AAB/1
                          S C H E D U L E   4   (CONDITION 5.5)

           The safety stewards shall carry out the duties set out below*-

           Number of Safety Stewards              Duties

                                                   Manning Final Exit Gates

           14 (one per gate)                       All final exit gates

           Relief safety stewards must be provided.  At no time, whilst spectators
           are within the Ground, must a final exit gate be left unattended.

                                                   Control and direction
                                                   of spectators

            5                                     Spion Kop -     one per exit

            1                                     Spion Kop stairway to Penistone
                                                  Road

           12                                     South Stand     - one per vomitory

            3                                     South Stand (concourse)        - one
                                                   per stairway

           11                                     South Stand (lower seated area)
                                                   one per vomitory plus one for
                                                   emergency exit at Kop end and
                                                   one for emergency exit at West
                                                   Stand end

            8                                     West Stand - one per vomitory
                                                   (six) plus one for each
                                                   emergency exit gate

            2                                     West Stand (concourse)    - one
                                                   per stairway

           18                                      North Stand    - one per vomitory

            3                                      North Stand (upper concourse) -
                                                   one each end plus one central

            3                                     North Stand (lower concourse)  -
                                                   one each end plus one central

            2                                      North Stand (disabled section)
                                                    - one at ramp and one at gate

            3                                      Upper North West Terrace - one
                                                    each exit (when in use)




SC2AAB/2
               Patrolling Sports Grounds and
               Dealing with Emergencies, etc.

           2   South Stand

           2   North Stand (one at each level)

           1   West Stand

           1   West Stand external concourse

               Manning Internal Gates

           1   Spion Kop/South Stand Corner

           1   South Stand/West Terrace Corner

           1   West Stand/North Stand Corner

               Monitoring standing terraces to
               deal with emergencies

           1   Sited in front of the viewing
                terrace




SC2AAB/3
                               S C H E D U L E   5   (CONDITION 12.1)

       1.   The number of    spectators admitted to a specified activity shall   not
            exceed 37,323.

       2.   The number of spectators admitted to each part of the sports ground
             listed below shall not exceed the maximum numbers shown:-

            SPION KOP TERRACE                         - 15,399

            WEST TERRACE UPPER                        -   1,400

            WEST STAND                                - 3,840

            NORTH STAND                               - 9,199

            DISABLED ENCLOSURE (NORTH STAND)          -     120

            SOUTH STAND (UNCOVERED SEATS)             -   2,699

            SOUTH STAND - (COVERED SEATS)             -   4,666



            TOTAL GROUND CAPACITY                    - 37,323




SC2AAB/4
                          ADDENDUM TO SCHEDULE 5

CAPACITY

The capacity of the sports ground has been calculated with due
reference to the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds and Recommendations
(7-10) and (32 and 33) of the Final Report of Lord Justice Taylor into
the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster.

Recommendations 7 to 10 state:

Maximum Capacities for Terraces.

7.     Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are
       self-contained, the Safety Certificate should specify the maximum
       number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

       A pen or area is to be deemed "self-contained" notwithstanding
       that it has a gate or gates affording access to another pen or
       area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

8.     Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance
       with Chapter 16 of the Green Guide ("the Green Guide Figure")
       subject to the following qualifications:-

       (a)   the maximum density permitted under paragraphs 221 and 222
             of the Green Guide (when the terrace or viewing slope is in
             good condition) should be 47 not 54);

       (b)   the minimum figure specified in paragraphs 221 and 222 (when
             the terrace or viewing slope materially derides from the
             recommended) guidelines, so as to constitute a possible
             hazard to individuals closely packed) should be 0 not 27;

       (c)   in arriving at "the Green Guide Figure", proper and
              realistic allowance must be made for all factors which
              should reduce the permissible density including those
              specified in paragraphs 220 to 224 inclusive of the Green
              Guide.

9.     Arrangements should be made:-

       (a)   to limit the number of spectators entering each
              self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity figure
              assessed in accordance with Recommendation 8 above either
              electronically, mechanically, by a ticketing arrangement, by
              counting or otherwise; and

       (b)   to close off further access to such pen or area when its
              maximum capacity is about to be reached.

 10.   The maximum notional rate at which spectators can pass through a
       turnstile should be 660 persons per hour, not 750 per hour as
        stated in paragraph 47 of the Green Guide.  The maximum rate for
       any particular turnstile must take full account of all
       circumstances including those given as examples.
       3.0       Recommendations 32 and 33

                 32.   Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow
                       measured (if this has not already been done following the Interim
                       R ep ort). Thereafter, regular inspections should be made to ensure
                       that each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators at the
                       rate anticipated.

                 33.   The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and the
                       turnstiles serving it should be such as to ensure that all the
                       spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass
                       through the turnstiles within one hour.    If that cannot be done,
                       the capacity of that viewing area should be reduced accordingly.
                       Since this Recommendation includes terms and conditions within the
                       scope of the original section 2 (2 )(c)(1) of the Safety of Sports
                       Grounds Act 1975, it should be given effect in the Safety
                       Certificate (see Recommendation 24).

           4.0   Capacity Calculation

                 1.    Floor/Seating Area          - Figure supplied by Building
                                                     Surveyor.

                 2.    Emergency Egress            - Figure supplied by Fire Service.
                       and Ground Egress

                 3.    All capacities and in        - Figure supplied by the Club.
                       particular turnstile
                       flow rates.  Number
                       serving particular
                       Pen/Area.

                       (Flow Rate per
                       Turnstile 660 p.h)




SC2AAB/6
                  S C H E D U L E   6   (CONDITION 2.1)

The minimum provision of first aid equipment to be available for use at
the sports stadium and contained within the First Aid Room (where
appropriate) shall be:-

FIRST AID ROOM (EQUIPMENT MATERIALS)

(1)    3 x standard examination couches with steps
(2)    12 x green sheets
(3)     3 x sets of stretcher poles
(4)     1 x scoop stretcher with carrying straps
(5)     2 x carrying chairs
(6)     2 x trolley stretchers
(7)     6 x cellular blankets
(8)    4 x pillows with plastic covers
(9)    Disposable paper sheets
(10)    3 x buckets with lids
(11)    3 x washing-up type bowls
(12)    1 x size F trolley mounted oxygen cylinder with variable delivery
       and key.    (To be provided at the holders expense by the St. John
       Ambulance Brigade)
(13)   1 x E.C.G. Monitor
(14)   1 x Sphygmomanometer and stethascope
(15)    1 x lockable cabinet with contents  asspecified in   1.2 below
(16)    6 x snatchbags with contents asspecified   in1.3 below
(17)   1 x infusion/intubation case with contents as specified in 1.14.
       below
(18)   1 x mobile 'dressing' trolley

CONTENTS OF FIRST AID ROOM LOCKABLE CABINET

(1)  Triangular bandages - short life            10
(2)  Sterile dressings: B.P.C.
           extra large                            5
           large                                 10
           medium                                10
           small                                 10
(3) Eye pads                                      5
(4) Adhesive tape                                 2   rolls
(5)  Lint (500g)                                  2   packets
(6) Gauze                                         2   packets
(7) Cotton wool                                   2   packets
(8) Mezolin squares (cartons of 100)
           5cm x 5 cm                             1 carton
          10cm x 10cm                             1 carton
(9)  Bandages: B.P.C.
           1"                                    20
           2"                                    20
           3"                                    20
(10) First Aid Dressings (Adhesive Plasters)     20 of each
     Various sizes
(11) Medi-wipes                                    1 drum
                                                  (contents 100)

(12)   Disposable Sterile Containers              2
       1.3    CONTENTS OF SNATCHBAG

                    No. 1 Dressings                          6
              (1)
              (2)   No. 2 Dressings                          6
              (3)   No. 3 Dressings                          6
              (4)   20 x 10cm Waterproof Adhesive Dressing   4
              (5)   Lar§e burns dressings                    4
              (6)   Large scissors                           1
              (7)   Pairs of disposable gloves               6
              (8)   Petzel type caving lamp                  1
              (9)   Brook type airway (Professional Model)   1

       1. k   CONTENTS OF INFUSION/INTUBATION CASE

              (1)   Carrying case
              (2)   Laedal Resuscitation
              (3)   Laedal Adult Mask
              (4)   Laedal Child Mask
              (5)   Airway Size 1
              (6)   Airway Size 2
              (7)   Airway Size 3
              (8)   Laryngoscope + 4 H.P. Batteries
                    (Batteries to be replaced every
                    3 months)
              (9)   Laryngscope Blade Size 3
              (10) Laryngscope Blade Size 43
              (11) Laryngscope Spate Bulb
              (12) Endotracheal Tube (Cuffed) 6mm
              (13) Endotrachael Tube (Cuffed) 7mm
              (14) Endotrachael Tube (Cuffed) 8mm
              (15) Endotrachael Tube (Cuffed) 9mm
              (16) Catheter Mount (antistatic)
              (17) Catheter Swivel Connector
              (18) Adaptor or Female
              (19) Lubricating Jelly
              (20) Syringes 10ml
              (21) Stethoscope
               (22) Sphygmomanometer
               (23) Needle Box
               (24) Scissors/Shears
               (25) Magill Forceps
               (26) Spencer Wells Forcepts
               (27) Aspirator
               (28) Catheter (Suction) 14fg
                                                             M is?




               (29) Catheter (Suction) 12fg
               (30) Yankaner Sucker
               (31) Tourniquet
               (32) Catheter Mount Connector                  1
               (33) Syringe Needles (19g)                     2
               (34) Syringe Needles (21g)                     6
                (35) Cannulae 16g                             5
                (36) Cannulae 18g                             5
                (37) Cannulae 20g                             4
                (39) Administration Set                       2
                (39) Hartmanns Fluid IVI SOOmls               1
                (40) Haemaccel Fluid IVI 500mls               1
                (41) Pre-injection swabs                     10
                (42) Tape Adhesive/Hospital 20metres          1
                (43) Tape Sleek 2.5cm                         1
                (44) Tape Sleek 5.0cm                          1

SC2AAB/8
                 (45) Vecafix                                     5
                 (46) Arm splint 18"-4"                           1
                 (47) Cotton Wool                                 1
                 (48) Gauze metre                                 1'
                 (49) Trinagular bandages                         2
                 (50) 5.0cm Bandages - 5 metres                   2
                 (51) 7.5cm Bandages - 5 metres                   2
                 (52) Gauze Swabs                                 2
                 (53) Mucas Extractor (Infant)                    1
                 (54) Oxygen Mask                                 1
                 (55) Oxygen Tubing 3 metres                      1
                 (56) Gloves - Disposable                         2
                 (57) Antiseptic Solution                         2
                 (58) Waterproof Sheet                            1
                 (59) Micropore Tape 2.5cm                        1
                 (60) Patient Repeat Form Pad                     1
                 (61) Headlamp and Battery (Battery
                      replaced every 3 months)                    1
                 (62) Surgical Cloth                              1
                 (63) Security Stamp (and 2 keys)                 1

           1.5   Hypochlorite Disinfectant should also be provided effective against
                 HIV, Hepatitis B etc., for cleaning of blood and body fluids.
                 Reconmended concentrations for use a r e :-

                        10,000 p.p.m. to deal with spillages;
                         1,000 p.p.m. for general washing purposes.




SC2AAB/9
                                      S C H E D U L E       7   (CONDITION 13.4)

                                        INSPECTIONS AND TESTS REQUIRED

                                                                                         WRITTEN
                                                                              WRITTEN    REPORT
           GENERAL                            INCIDENCE                       RECORD     R E Q ’D TO BE
           REQUIREMENTS                                                       REQUIRED   SUPPLIED TO
                                                                                         COUNCIL

 1.0       A competent person shall        At least once every 12             NO         YES
           inspect the structures          months,
           which form part of the
           sports ground

 2.0       A competent person shall
           carry out the following
 ^         inspections:

 2.1       Seating inspection              Every 4 months beginning           NO         YES
           (condition and security         1st November, 1990
           of all seats)

 2.2       Steps, stairways, gangways               "             "           NO         YES
           (nosings, covering,
           condition of surface etc)

 2.3       Standing Terraces              '         "             "   N   O              YES
           (condition of surfaces,
           nosings etc)

 2.4       Concourse areas                          "             "   N   O              YES
           (condition of surfaces)

 2.5       Perimeter walls                          "             "           NO         YES
           (condition)

     6 Turnstiles     (general                       "            "            NO        YES
        condition,    condition of
        surrounds,    condition of
        mechanism,    operation)

■ 2.7 Doors and gates                                "            "            NO        YES
       (general condition,
       operation (particular
       attention to the
       operation and condition
       of panic bar/bolt devices))

 2.8 Identify and inspect                            "            "            NO        YES
      any void beneath
      a stand access or egress
      route (condition,
      accumulation of debris,
      rubbish)

     2.9    Identify, sign and check all                "         "           NO          YES
           Storerooms (general
           condition, maintenance,
           Accumulation of rubbish etc.)

  SC2AAB/10
                                                                              WRITTEN
                                                                   WRITTEN    REPORT
         GENERAL                        INCIDENCE                  RECORD     R E Q ’D TO BE
         REQUIREMENTS                                              REQUIRED   SUPPLIED TO
                                                                              COUNCIL____

2.10 West Stand reinforced         Every six months                NO         YES
     concrete columns.  Affix      beginning 1st November,
     and maintain tell-tales over 1990
—    cracks in the corners of the
     cantilever landings to both
     stairway entrances to the West
     Stand. Provide results of any
     movement - survey columns and
     Stand for cracks.

3.0      A competent person shall       Before and after each
         carry out a general            specified activity.        YES        NO
^        inspection of the Sports
"        Ground to ensure
         compliance with the
         relevant Safety Certificate
         Conditions.       1

4.0      A competent person shall       At least once every
         examine the electrical         three years or such        NO         YES
         installation of the sports     lesser time if specified
         ground and provide a written   in the Inspection
         report in accordance with      Certificate.
         the current I.E.E.
         Regulations.

5.0      A competent person shall       At least once every 12
         test and inspect all fire      months.                    NO         YES
         app1ianc e s (includ ing
         extinguishers, hydrants
         and water supplies).

    .0   The emergency lighting         At least once every 12     NO         YES
         and fire warning (including    months.
         the public address systems)
         shall be tested/inspected
         by a competent person.

7.0      The emergency lighting         Not less than 3 hours      YES        NO
         system shall be tested by      and not more than 6
         a competent person.            hours prior to a •
                                        specified activity
                                        taking place.




SC2AAB/11
                                                                               WRITTEN
                                                              WRITTEN          REPORT
       GENERAL                      INCIDENCE                 RECORD           R E Q ’D TO BE
      •REQUIREMENTS                                           REQUIRED         SUPPLIED TO
                                                                               COUNCIL


8.0   All fire warning detection    Not less than 3 hours     YES              NO
      public address and other      and not more than 6
      communication systems         hours prior to a
      shall be tested by a          specified activity
      competent person.             taking place.

9.0   All exit and entry doors,     Not more than 24 hours               YES             NO
      gates,turnstiles throughout   prior to a specified
      the stadium shall be tested   activity taking place.
      by a competent person.

 U 0 25 Z of the crush barriers     25Z of each period of     NO               YES -
     and hand rails in the          12 m o n t h s . Once a                    Report to
     stadium shall be tested        barrier or hand rail is                    include
     by a competent person in       tested it shall not be                     details and
     accordance with the Guide.     tested again (unless                       results
     The Council shall be           specifically required
     notified in advance of the     by the Council) within
     dates for testing.             3% years after first
                                    testing, but shall be
                                    tested again within 4^
                                    years of that date.

11.0 A competent person shall       At least once every       NO               YES
     conduct a survey of all        12 months (Initial)
     spectator information          Survey to be prepared
     signs within the Stadium       for 1st November, 1990)
     with a view to maintenance
     and improvement of signing
     at the Sports Ground.




SC2AAB/12
                                      SCHEDULE 8 (CONDITION 4.1)

        1.0         PLANS   REGULATIONS

        1.1         Plans shall be drawn up by appropriately qualified persons
                    acceptable to the Council.

        1.2         Plans shall be executed or reproduced in a clear and intelligible
                    manner with suitable and durable materials.

        1.3         Plans, sections, elections and details shall be to scale.     The
                     scale(s) shall be indicated in all drawings.

        1.4         All plans shall bear a number and date.   Any revisions to the
                     Plans shall be stated on the Plan and the date of each revision
                     shall be stated.

        1.5         Plans shall include:-

                    (a)     Drawings;
                    (b)     Schedules;
                    (c)      Specifications;
                    (d)     Calculations;
                    (e)     R e po rt s.

        1.6         The number of copies of Plans submitted to the Council shall be
                     three in respect of structural calculations and nine in any other
                     case.

        1.7         Plans must have where appropriate a key; the symbols adopted for
                     the key should be as specifried in British Standard 1635. •

        1.8.1       The Club shall provide such number and type of photographs as may
                     from time to time be reasonably required by the Council

        1.8.2       When a proposal is submitted to the Council in respect of a
                    proposed alteration to the stadium the Certificate holder shall
                    provide such number (sets) of photographs as may be required by
                    the Council to aid consideration of the proposal.

        2.°         APPROPRIATE SCALES

        2.1         Identification Plans - not less than 1:1250.

        2.2         General Arrangement Plans - not less than 1:500.

            2.3     Detail Plans:-

            2.3.1   Layout Plans of terraces - not less than 1:200

            2.3.2   Local areas of terraces/seated areas - not less than 1:100.

            2.3.3   General Arrangement of buildings/structures    - not less than 1:100.

            2.3.4   Details of new structures - not less than 1;25.

            2.3.5   Details of new structural connections - not less than 1:5.

                     (The Council reserve the right to require additional plans at a
                     scale to be determined should they consider it appropriate to do so.

SC2AAB/13
        3.0          PLANS TO BE ATTACHED TO SAFETY CERTIFICATE

        3.1          Identification Plan - a general identification plan of the
                     location of the ground in relation to the surrounding area must be
                     provided.

        3.2          General Arrangement Plan - this must indicate

        3.2.1        Full extent of the Sports Ground.

        3.2.2        Positions of all buildings.

        3.2.3        Positions of all means of ingress and egress.

        3.2.4        Names and positions of all adjacent roads and footpaths.

        3.2.5        Access routes for emergency vehicles.

)       3.3          Detail Plans - these must be prepared to include the following
                      information on invidivual plans or a combination of information
                     may be incorporated in a single plan provided that the detail is
                     clear and relevant.                                   1

        3.3.1        Full extent of individual terraces areas/viewing slopes.

        3.3.2        Positions of crush barriers and supports.

        3.3.3        Numbering of crush barriers and sections of crush barriers

        3.3.4        Full extent of individual seated areas.

        3.3.5        Referencing of all seat rows and numbering of all seats.

        3.3.6        Referencing    of all gangways.

        3.3.7        Referencing    of all vomitories.

}       3.3.8        Referencing of all stairways.

        3.3.9        Referencing    or naming of all rooms.

        3.3.10       Referencing of all doors, gates and turnstiles throughout the
                      Sports Ground (turnstiles must be numbered).

            3.3.11   Full extent and use of all rooms and void spaces.

            3.3.12   Position of all steps.

            3.3.13   Positions     of all balustrades, handrails and fences.

            3.3.14   Positions     of all doors, gates and turnstiles throughout    the Sports
                     Ground.

            3.3.15   The swing     or direction of travel of all doors and gates.

            3.3.16   Statement     of the clear opening measurement of each door    and gate.

            3.3.17    Positions where headroom is less than 2.4. metres in any part of
                      the ground to which spectators have access.

SC2AAA/14
        3.3.18      Positions of First Aid Rooms and other first aid and emergency
                    equipment.

        3.3.19      Positions and descriptions of all exit and other route
                    identification signs.

        3.3.20      Positions of emergency lighting points.

        3.3.21      Positions of fire alarm sounders and call points.

        3.3.22      Postions and descriptions of all fire extinguishers and other fire
                    fighting appliances.

        3.3.23      Positions of safety stewards.

        3.3.24      Gradient of all ramps, viewing slopes and terraces areas.

        3.3.25      Positions of Police Control Room and Police Detention Room.

        3.3.26      Position and referencing of all catering, merchandising and
                    franchised outlets within the Sports Ground.

        3.3.27      Any other details which are specifically required    by theCouncil.

        4.0         PLANS FOR PROPOSALS

        4.1         Identification Plans - these should indicate  theposition,    level
                     and extent of the proposal in relation to other existing
                     identifiable features of the Sports Ground.

        4.2         DETAILED PLANS

        4.2.1       Sufficiently detailed plans to satisfy appropriate statutory
                    legislative requirements; provisions of appropriate British/CEN
                    Standards, and appropriate statutory guidance documents.  Where
                    it is proposed that any such matter is not to be complied with, a
                    sepcific reference must be made including a statement of the
                    extent of such proposed non compliance.

        4.2.2       Plans must have where appropriate a key; the symbols adopted for
                     the key should be by reference to British Standard 1635.

            4.2.3   Plans must indicate that the proposal has been designed to be
                     suitable for its intended purpose.

            4.2.4   Plans must include any proposal to change any information included
                     in the plans for the purposes of anything in Schedule 2, paragraph
                    1. 2.

            4.2.5   Where conditions of usage or loading may vary, designs must be
                     carried out to suit maximum anticipated use and/or loading.

            4.2.6   Where any proposal has, or is likely to effect the spectator
                     capacity of the Sports Ground or part thereof, the estimated
                     spectator capacity (subsequent to the implementation of the
                     proposal) shall be stated.

            4.2.7   Such additional detail as the Council may require.




SC2AAB/15
        5.0    AMENDMENTS

        5.1.   Consequential upon the carrying out of     any works which affect the
               details shown on any plans attached to     theSafety Certificate, the
               holder shall prepare and submit to the     Council such number of
                revised plans as the Council reasonably    require.

        5.2    Amendments to plans for the purpose of 1.1 above must be produced
               within a reasonable period but not more than three months after
                the relevant works have been carried out.




SC2AAB/16
                                                           3rd May            91




         SLP/JT.




         The Secretary,
         Sheffield Wednesday Football Club PLC,
         Hillsborough Football Stadium,
         Sheffield.



         Dear Sir,

         I enclose a copy of a letter which I have written to Mrs. Gordon,   the Chief
         Executive of Sheffield City Council, the contents of which are
         self-explanatory.



         Yours faithfully,




         S .L .Poppe r,
         H.M.Coroner.




BAGABD
                                                            17th of June      91




     SLP/JT.
     GP/262/WJD.


     Mark Webster, City Solicitor
     Head of Department,
     Town Hall,
     Sheffield. SI 2HH



     Dear Mr. Webster,

         Re: Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (As Amended), Sheffield Wednesday
         Football Club. Hillsborough Football Stadium - Safety C ertificate^------



         Thank you for your letter of the 21st of May.  I note what you say and am
         grateful for the information which you have supplied to me.



         Yours sincerely,




         S.L.Popper,
         H.M.Coroner.




BAJAAK
         Telephone:     (0742) 7 2 6444

             I    ,
     .    Facsimile:   (0742) 735003


Telecom Gold 79: ^LLA 30 20


             Telex:    265871 MON REF G (quote ref LLA 3020)
                                                                                                                                                                                     C O U N C I L

  Y our reference:


   Our reference:        GP/262/WJD
                                                                                                                                                                                     Administration & Legal
              Date: 21st May, 1991                                                                                                                                                   Department
                                                                                                                                                                                     Head of Department
                                                                                                                                                                                     Mark Webster,   c ity so licito r


                 Dr. S. L. Popper,                                                                                                                                                   Town Hall
                 South Yorkshire Coroner (West District),                                                                                                                            Sheffield
                 c/o Medico Legal Centre,                                                                                                                                            S1 2HH

                 Watery Street,
                 SHEFFIELD.
                 S3 7ET

                  Dear Dr. Popper,

                  Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (As Amended)
                  Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
                  Hillsborough Football Stadium - Safety Certificate

                  I refer to your letter to the Chief Executive (Sheffield City Council)
                  dated 3rd May, 1991, which has been passed to my Chief Licensing Officer,
                  Sports Grounds (Mr. Derricott) for attention.

                 The points you raise in the letter have been noted and the letter itself
                 is to be placed before the next General Meeting of the Council's Safety of
                 Sports Grounds Advisory Group, for discussion.

                 For your information, alterations are currently being undertaken at the
                 Leppings Lane End (West Stand) of the Hillsborough Sports Ground.  The
                 Council have approved a scheme which details a new line for turnstiles and
                 a proposal to seat the lower terrace area,  I enclose a plan of the scheme
                 for your information.

                 You will note that the new line of turnstiles allows a much greater
                 freedom of movement in this area.  This coupled with the lower number of
                 spectators accessing the West Stand, I feel provides for improved
                 spectator safety in this area.

                  I will write to you again when your letter has been formally discussed and
                  reported to the Licensing Panel of the ,Council,

                 Y n ^rs si n e e rp .lv




                 City    rici^tfr and
                 Head of Administration



                 MS2/AA
      Keith Trelfa
      Senior Assistant Head                                                                                                                                                                                          Elizabeth Bashforth
      (A dm inistration)                                                                                                                                                                                             Assistant Head (Legal)




                                                                                                734264 - Mr, Derricott
                                                      For te l e p h o n e e n q u ir ie s on
                                                           this m a t te r please r in g :      ........................................................... (STD C o d e 0 7 4 2 )
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NOTES




                                                                                                                                                                                                         \

                                                                                                                         EXISTING GATES                                                 \
                                                                                                                         10 BE REMOVED




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               \


                                                                                                                             HOME SUPPORTERS
                                                                                                                             DNLY IN THIS AREA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    \



                                                                              VISI1ING           SUPPDR1ERS
                                                                                  DNLY   IN T H IS   AREA
                            NEW     GA                                                                                                 'v


                                                                        6 UNITS                               6 UNITS



                                                                         / 1M
        R E - U S E EXISTING SLIDING                                     EXI T                                EXIT
        GA1E A C C E S S ONLY                                           DOOR 5                                oaoRL
        HORSES SERVICE V E H I C L E S                                                                                                                                      O P E N I N G / G ' A I E 10 W L O
                                                                                                                                                                                      5 FOB A W A Y F A N S
                                                                                                                                                                              OM N.W. CORNER
                                                                                                                                                                                     WHEN AWAY

                                                                                                                                                              n             FANS LEAVE N.W. CORNER



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ACCESS GATES TO SOUTH STAND-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              REPOSITIONED . STEPS IN TUNNEL REMOVED SGH 17-4:91
                                                         REFRESHMENTS                                                                  S U B - STATION
                                                                                    LADIES                                                                                                                                                     B O U N D A R Y W A L L AND
                                                                                                                                                                                  po si h q n X w u en   aw ay     fans
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FENCE LAYOUT REVISED                   ^ lu 5-3*91
                                                                                                                                                 LADIES TOILETS                   ENTER N . W W N E R        AMD                              TURNSTILE LAYOUT REVISED               KP 28-2* 91
                                                                                                                                                 TO BE DEMOUSED
                                                                                                                                                         I—   l                   DURING                                                REV               DESCRIPTION                   SIG I DATE



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY F.C. PLC

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PHASE 1 S U M M E R 91.
                                                                                                                                                                  REFRESH                                        NE                           READY FOR 1 9 9 1 - 9 2
                                                                                                            NEW STEEL                                             MEHTS                                          GENU
                                                                                                             1AIBCASES                                                                                                                        FOOTBALL S E A S O N .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     r\



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LEPPINGS LANE REORGANISATION

                                         NEW FENCE Nol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EASTWOOD & PARTNERS
                                                                                                                                                                                                             NEW •                                    (Consulting Engineers)
                                                                                                                                                                                                             LADIES       101 LET                       ST ANDREWS HOUSE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        23 KINGFIELD ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SHEFFIELD S11 9AS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TEL: (0742) 554564        FAX: (0742) 654330

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DRAWN             KP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1200
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CHECKED                                DRAWING No.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DATE               , 1--HI           1 3 1 9 8 / 5 c.
7 OJQ
              APPENDIX        A
                                                                                      11




         ij._th- McGrath
       Ia
       P a u l D a v i d Bra
       B a r r y Si dn e y Bennett

        I h a v e a l r e a d y reminded you, and g i v e n y o u
fi nd i n gs so I do not propose -t o .r epeat them-.

         N o w I ex pl ai ne d to you, ladies and g e nt l e m e n , that you
w e r e n o t a l l o w e d to add any riders t o y o u r ve rd i c t.
Indeed, I am not allow ed to do that either , b u t u J d e ^                             _
R u l e 43, if I think there is any m a t t e r w h i c h I shou ld refer
to s o m e o n e for their co ns id er at io n then I a m _ e n t i t l e d to do
that.         W h a t I pr opo se to do is that I do t h i n k there a r ®
o ne o r two ma tt er s w h i c h I think c o u l d u s e f u l l y b e thought
a b o u t by v ari ou s bodies.         Indeed, they m a y a l r e a d y have
th ou gh t a bo ut them.          I make no r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s w i t h regara
to them b e c a u s e mo s t of these are m a t t e r s of e x p e r t i s e as
o p p o s e d to m e r e com mo ns en se and t he re m a y be p r o b l e m s w ic
I am not expe rt enough to be able to d e a l with.                           Ho we ver , I
feel t h e r e a r e one or two matters w h i c h I do w a n t to d r a w to
c e r t a i n persons' at tention so they can a p p l y the ir mi nd to
 them.        W h i l s t I would not wish to add r i d e r s or, indeed,
m a k e re co mm e n d at io n s, I just propose to o u t l i n e the m a m
 topics w h i c h ha v e occurred to me as I h a v e h e e n s i tt in g
 listening, to gether wi t h you, to e v i d e n c e w h i c h we have
heard.

           T h e first mat te r that I think c o n c e r n s me is the
 p r o b l e m w h i c h I think was il l u s t r a t e d ^ b y the fact that if
 you h a v e pe o D l e looking in one d i r e c t i o n p a r t i c u l a r l y
 i n t e n t ly to wa tc h an event, as indeed o n e w o u l d get at a
 f oo tb a ll m a t c h or, indeed, at o t h e r major events, it may
 pr ove ve ry di ff i cu lt to turn them round, if I can use that
 term, so that they use escape rou te s w h i c h a r e at the ba ck
 or at the sides.               That is the first thing.

          T h e sec on d thing is that I know, b e c a u s e w e m a d e _
 inqui rie s, that a lot of work has b e e n d o n e in c on ne ct io n
 wi t h a i r c r a f t disasters, pa rt icu lar ly a r i s i n g o u t of the
 M a n c h e s t e r air disaster, on peo pl e e s c a p i n g from aeropla nes
 in stress situati ons and what h a pp en s w i t h r e g a r d to ga
 and wh e n they mo v e forward and so on.               A g r e a t deal of wor.
 has be e n don e by Dr. Hannah Mui r and o t h e r s at their
 r e s e a r c h establishment.

           I t hi nk it would be benefi cia l if o ne could bri ng^
 to get her i n fo rm at io n from dif ferent sources w h i c h may have
 a p p l i c a t i o n s in other fields and so I in te n d to w r i t e to the
 a p p r o p r i a t e authorities, for example, the F i r e ^ S e r v i c e and,
 indeed, Dr. Mu ir and see whether or not t h e r e xsn t some
 sco pe w h e r e b y in fo rm ati on can be poo le d and perhap s
 i m p r o v e m e n t s ma d e with regard to f u t u r e safety.
                                                                                                      12




                           The s e c o n d thing that con cerns me is the Saf et y
                 Certi fi ca te.         I am, of course, aw ar e that there is a n e w
                 one in force, and we have not been c o n c e r n e d w i t h that,
                 but one of the factors w h i c h we all b e c a m e a w a r e of was
                 not only that there we r e problems on the ter ra ce s but that
                 there w e r e p r o b l e m s w i t h i n the turn st il e areas, and it
                 seems to me that some a d d i t i o n a l thought m a y b e is r e q u i r e d
                 to see w h e t h e r there is no t some way of m o r e e f f e c t i v e l y
                 c o n t r o l l i n g ingress, be c a u s e at the moment, of course,
     B           there is no sy s t em of counting, as far as I un d e r s t a n d ,
                 into the t u r n s t i l e area, so one is in fact left w i t h
                 exact ly the same po si t i o n as one was before, n a m e l y that
                 you ha v e to e s t i m a t e the numbers w i t h i n that a r e a by eye.

                          W h e t h e r that is a si tuation w h i c h can be o v e r c o m e or
                 not I do n o t know, but I do intend to w r i t e b o t h to the
                 Local A ut ho ri ty , as the en forcing author it y, and in d ee d
                 also to the Club, to a s k them to a pp ly their m i n d s to that
                 par t of the Ground.           We have tended to th ink of sim pl y the
                 terraces an d the pens but .1 think o n e. ha s to go a lit tl e
                 furth er and think ab ou t the area wi thout.             T h e r e ma y be no
                 solution, I d o n ' t know, but I feel that it is a m a t t e r
                 w h i c h I w o u l d like to think I had dr aw n to s o m e b o d y ' s
                 attention.
    D
                           Wi t h r e g a r d to the Safety Certi fi ca te , I am of c o u r s e
                 a wa re that Lo r d J u s t i c e Tay lo r spent a g r e a t de a l of time,
                 in fact m u c h mo r e time, wi t h r e ga rd to r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s
                 than I have done, and he did ma k e r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s w i t h
                 rega rd to inspecto rat es , but it seems to me, and I int en d
                 to w r i t e to the^Home S e c re ta ry on this, that w i t h a m a t t e r
                 s u c h a s sa fe t y in sports grounds it m i g h t p e r h a p s be w o r t h
                 looking at not simply an i n s p e c t o r a t e but p o s s i b l y an
                 hom og enous, national, licensing, apprai sa l, i n s p e c t i n g
                 o r g a n i s a t i o n or service, becau se at the m o me nt , of course,
                 the Saf et y C e r t i f i c a t e s are issued by local a u t h o r i t i e s ,
                 there are m a n y of them, and each one of them has a
                 r e l a t i v e l y small nu mb e r of sports gr ounds.     H o w e v e r hard
                 the pe o p l e w i t h i n the a u t h or it ie s may try and h o w e v e r
                 competent, their ex pe r i e n c e will be l i mi t e d and I w o u l d
                 like some thought to be given to w h e t h e r it w o u l d not be
                 bet te r in the in terests of safety if a body of e x p e r t i s e
                 could be b u i l t up wh ic h (a) appli es m o r e u n i f o r m
                 standards, and (b) w o u l d be in a mu c h b e t t e r p o s i t i o n to
                 assess ri s k and so on at any p a r t i c u l a r stadiu m, so my
                 inten ti on is to w r i t e to the Home S e c r e t a r y and ask him to
                 c o n s i d e r that.

                           In a d d i t i o n such a body w o u l d have - and this is a
                 f u rt he r p o i n t w h i c h I w i s h to d r a w to his a t t e n t i o n - or
                 ma y b e some ot he r body, the facility for e n s u r i n g that
                 there is b o t h p r o p e r training and the e s t a b l i s h m e n t of
                 c o n t i n u i t y of in f o r m a t i o n from one per so n to ano ther, in
                 order to try and ens ur e that pr ac t i c e w h i c h is g o o d and
    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
sound is pas se d on and co ntinues to be a p p l i e d and be
developed, but even if such a body was n o t set up, of
course, w i t h i n each o r ga ni sa ti on that m a y be i n v o l v e d in
staging m a j o r events w he re loads of p e o p l e co m e to ge the r
gr ea t ef f o r t should, I am sure, be put into b o t h training
and the n e e d for c on ti nu it y of some sort or an ot he r.

          T h e r e is an o t h e r aspect w h i c h I w a n t to w r i t e on - it
all h a p p e n s to be the Home Se c r e t a r y b e c a u s e it h a p p e n s to
be his de pa rt me nt , in cluding the first point.                    O n e has to
ask o n e s e l f the questi on as to w h e t h e r or n o t the
i n v o l v e m e n t of the Pol ic e in the a c t i v i t i e s w i t h i n the
S t a d i u m is a pr op e r use of both their training, e x p e r t i s e
and a b i l i t i e s ,' and I w o u l d like to s u g g e s t to the Home
S e c r e t a r y that this is something w h i c h needs, in my view,
a d d r e s s i n g as a ma t t e r of re la ti ve urgency, to m a k e some
d e c i s i o n s as to who, in fact, on the saf et y side shou ld
ha v e (a) the u l t i m a t e authority, (b) the e x p e r t i s e and (c)
the r e sp on s ib il i ty .

         It is a m a t t e r of c o n s i d e r a b l e r e g r e t to me to say
that w h i l s t we we r e sitting du r i n g these I n q ue st s, and
wi th o u t me m a k i n g any effort to keep a b r e a s t of events, I
read in the pa per of one football d i s a s t e r in S o u t h
Africa, w h e r e about 40 people di ed as a r e s u l t of cr us h
injuries.       T h e r e we r e at least two o t he r n on fo o t b a l l
situati ons that I remember, one was a b r o a d w h e r e n u mb er s
of peop le w e r e injured and killed, and a l t h o u g h in the
event n o b o d y was se riously hurt, just last S a t u r d a y in the
town in w h i c h I live there was a cr u s h i n g i n c i d e n t at a
football match.           So alt h ou gh it w o u l d be n i c e for me to
say we have had all this inquiry, we ha v e d i s c u s s e d it and
eve ry th in g else, it will never hap pe n again, u n l e s s there
is co ns id era ble , continu ous v i g i l an ce and p e r h a p s even a
cha nge of a t t i t u d e with regard to matche s, I fe a r it will
hap pen ag ai n and it will be, of c o u r s e --- well, you know
ho w awful it has been once but to have it a g a i n w d u l d be
just that m u c h worse.          How you solve it - the on l y safe
stadium, in my view, is an empty one.                         As soon as you
bring a s u b s t a n t i a l number of pe o p l e t o g e t h e r y o u run
risks, and w h e t h e r it is po ss ib le to have t e r r a c e s w h e r e
p e op l e stand w i t h o u t risk I have doubts.                 So I i n t e n d
again to d r a w these thoughts to the Ho m e S e c r e t a r y and see
what, if an ything, he can or w i s h e s to do.

         Finally, and I am cheating a little b i t b e c a u s e this
is not a c t u a l l y a safety matter, I do i n t e n d to w r i t e to
the Home S e c r e t a r y and ask him to s e r i o u s l y a p p l y his mi n d
to the i n t e r - r e l a t i o n s h i p betwe en c o r on er s' i n q u e s t s and
pu b l i c i n q ui rie s in ma jor d i sa st ers of this type, b e c a u s e
I think so me b o d y has got to g ra sp the n e t t l e a n d sort out
the situation, w h i c h I do not think is e n t i r e l y
satisfactory.
                                                                                                          14




                           T h a t is the b ro ad outli ne of the m a t t e r s w h i c h oc cu r to
                 me at the moment.             If so mething el s e w e r e to c o m e to me at
                 some time in the future and I thought it right, then of
                 c o u r s e I can always write.         Indeed, a n y b o d y can w r i t e to
                 the Ho me S e c r e t a r y if they wish.

                 \----- 1-wa nt to— t u r n -to you)— la d i e s - and gon -fcl G m e n -.           1 want---
                       say first of all that you h a ve h a d an i n f i n i t e l y h a r d e r
    B             t^sk than I h a d imagined.                I k n e w it w as g o i n g to be p r e t t y
                 h a r d for y o u but in fact it has b e e n h a r d e r .                   I w a nt to
                  thatvk y o u for y our perseve ra nc e, for y o u r i n te r e s t, for y our
                 a t t e n t i o n , for y our c o u r a g e in r e a c h i n g d e c i s i o n s and
                 a n n o u n c i n g them,    I a d mi r e you.         W h a t m o r e c a n I say?
                 t h a n k y\u.

                           It i ^ w i t h i n my p o w e r to e x c u s e y o u f r om j u r y s e r v i c e
                 in CoronerSs* courts.               It is not in my p o w e r to e x c u s e you
                 from o t h e r courts, but as far as I am c o n c e r n e d , s u b j e c t to
                 a p r o v i s o w h r c h I w i l l m e n t i o n in a m om e nt , I i n t e n d to
                 e x c u s e y o u from C o r o n a l jury s e r v i c e for the r e s t of y o ur
                 lives.          I t himc you h a v e d on e your bit.            The only proviso I
                 h a v e is that if \ n y of you do not w i s h m e to do that, p l e a s e
                 w r i t e to m e at tha M e d i c o - L e g a l Ce nt re , b e c a u s e I w o u l d not
                 w a n t to e x c u s e y ou \ i f it w as n' t s o m e t h i n g y o u w an t ed , but if
    D
                 I do not h e a r to yoii I w i ll w r i t e a l e tt e r to y o u in due
                 course, or at least my J u ry O f f i c e r w i l l w r i t e y o u a l e tt e r
                 to c o n f i r m that so y o u ^ h a v e got it.

                           I w a n t to r em in d y du that right at the o p e n i n g on the
                 1 8 t h of April, 1990, w h e n\ yo u first c a m e tog et he r, I d r e w
                 your a t t e n t i o n to the facu (t ha t this w o u l d b e s tr es s f u l,
                 that things m i g h t get to ycni.              If you r e m e m b e r I r e m i n de d
                 you that o n e of the g oo d things was you h a d y o u r s e l v e s and
                 that y ou c o u l d s u p p o r t o n e another.           I d i d at that p oint
                 a l l u d e to the p o s s i b i l i t y that\if e x t e r n a l h e l p was n e e d e d
                 b e c a u s e you had p r o bl em s y ou rs e l v e s w i t h c o p i n g w i t h the
                 situ at io n, then o ne s hould seek m ,                   I w a n t to r e p e a t that
                 but I w ant to add o ne or two a d d i M . o n a l po in ts .                 W h e n we
                 h a v e f i n i s h e d today you will, of course, b e s p l i t t i n g up and
                 in that s e n s e y ou w ill lose the f e l l o w s h i p of the e l ev e n of
                 y ou w h i c h y o u h a v e b u i l t up o ve r s e v e r a l m on th s.

                           I do n ot w a nt to su gg es t for a m i m i t e that you are
                 g o i n g to n e e d any c o u n s e l l i n g or any help) o r a n y t h i n g of the
                 sort, but you may do and there w o u l d be nta s h am e if you did.
                 If y o u do, r e m e m b e r that your GP is the fiB.st port of call.
                 Y o u m ay not like him, d o n ' t go to him, but h e s h o u l d be in a
                 p o s i t i o n to h e l p you.                                \

                           In a dd i t i o n, I k n o w b e c a u s e I h a v e h e a r d r r o m them,
                 that the F a m i l y and C o m m u n i t y S e r v i c e s D e p a r t m e n t in
                 S h ef fi el d, that is the social w or k er s if y o u like\ at
                 R e d v e r s House, U nion Street, S h ef fi el d, a r e b o t h a v a i l a b l e
                 a-a d ,— i n d e ed ,— anxious- to h e l p you w i t h any personal--^
    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                          APPENDIX         A
                                                                                                11




                       ra th—
        I a n T ’ROTiras-^love r
        Pa u l D a v i d BraHy-— —
        Barry Sidney Bennett

        I h a v e a l r e a d y r e m i n d e d you, and g i v e n yoTT~^^o-^IuryJs
f-i-ndl-ag s so I do n o t - p r o p o s e to- rep ea t t h e m .------------ .

          N o w I e x p l a i n e d to you, ladies and g en tl em en , that you
w e r e not a l l o w e d to add any riders to yo ur verdict.
Indeed, I am not a l l o w e d to do that either, b u t u n d e r
R u l e 43, if I t hi nk there is any m a t t e r w h i c h I sh ou ld refer
to s o m e o n e for their c o n s i d e r a t i o n then I am e n t i t l e d to do
that.          Wh a t I p r o p o s e to do is that I do think there are
o n e o r two m a t t e r s w h i c h I think c ou ld u s e f u l l y be thou ght
a b o u t by va ri o u s bodies.                Indeed, they may a l r e a d y h a v e
th ou g h t a b o u t them.             I m a k e no r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s w i t h re g a r d
to them b e c a u s e m os t of these are m a t t e r s of e x p e r t i s e as
o p p o s e d to m e r e c o m m o n s e n s e and t he re may b e p r o b l e m s w h i c h
I am not ex p e r t en o u g h to be ab l e to de a l with.                            Ho we ve r, I
feel t h e r e a r e one or two m a tt er s w h i c h I do wa n t to d r a w to
c e r t a i n persons' a t t e n t i o n so they can ap pl y their m i n d to
them.          W h i l s t I w o u l d not wi s h to add ri de rs or, indeed,
m a k e r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s , I just p r o p o s e to o u t l i n e the mai n
topics w h i c h h a v e o c c u r r e d to me as I h a v e bee n s i t t i n g
listening, t o g e t h e r w i t h you, to e v i d e n c e w h i c h we ha v e
heard.

          T h e first m a t t e r that I think c o n c e r n s me is the
p r o b l e m w h i c h I think was i l l u s t r a t e d by the fact that if
you h a v e p e o p l e lo ok i n g in one d i r e c t i o n p a r t i c u l a r l y
in t e n t l y to w a t c h an event, as in de ed o n e w o u l d get at a
f o o t b a l l m a t c h or, indeed, at o t h e r m a j o r events, it may
p r o v e very d i f f i c u l t to turn them round, if I can use that
term, so that they use escape ro ut es w h i c h ar e at the b a c k
or at the sides.                 T hat is the first thing.

          T h e s e c o n d thing is that I know, b e c a u s e w e m a d e
in qu iri es , that a lot of wor k has be e n d o n e in c o n n e c t i o n
w ith a i r c r a f t d i s a s t e r s, p a r t i c u l a r l y a r i s i n g out of the
M a n c h e s t e r air d i sa st er, on p e o p l e e s c a p i n g from ae ro p l a n e s
in st ress s i tu a t i o n s and what h a p p e n s w i t h re g a r d to ga tes
and w h e n they m o v e fo rw ar d and so on.                       A gr ea t de a l of work
has b e e n d o n e by Dr. H a n n a h Mu i r and ot h e r s at their
research establishment.

          I t h i n k it w o u l d be b e n e f i c i a l if o n e c o u l d b r i n g
t o g e t h e r i n f o r m a t i o n from d i f f e r e n t sou rc es wh ic h may hav e
a p p l i c a t i o n s in o t h e r fields and so I i n t e n d to w r i t e to the
a p p r o p r i a t e a u th o ri ti es, for example, the Fire S e r v i c e and,
indeed, Dr. Mu i r and see w h e t h e r or not t h e r e is n't some
sco pe w h e r e b y i n f o r m a t i o n can be p o o l e d and perhaps
i m p r o v e m e n t s m a d e w i t h regard to f u t u r e safety.
                                                                                                  12




                           The se c o n d thing that co nc e r n s me is the Safety
                 Certif ic at e.         I am, of course, aw ar e that there is a n e w
                 one in force, and we ha v e not been c o n c e r n e d w i t h that,
                 but one of the factors w h i c h we all b e c a m e a w a r e of was
                 not only that there w e r e pr ob le ms on the te rr a c e s but that
                 there w e r e p r o b l e m s w i t h i n the t u r ns ti le areas, and it
                 seems to me that some a d d i t i o n a l thou ght m a y b e is r e q u i r e d
                 to see w h e t h e r there is not some way of m o r e e f f e c t i v e l y
                 c o n t r o l l i n g ingress, b e c a u s e at the mom en t, of course,
    B            there is no s y s t e m of counting, as far as I u n d e r st an d,
                 into the t u r n s t i l e area, so one is in fact left w i t h
                 ex ac tl y the same p o s i t i o n as one was before, n a m e l y that
                 you h a v e to e s t i m a t e the n u m b e rs w i t h i n that ar ea by eye.

                         W h e t h e r that is a s i t u a t i on w h i c h can be o v e r c o m e or
                not I do n o t know, but I do int end to w r i t e b o t h to the
                Lo ca l Au th o r i t y , as the e n f o rc in g a ut ho ri ty , an d ind eed
                a ls o to the Club, to ask them to a pp ly th eir m i n d s to that
                part of the Ground.            We have ten ded to th ink of sim ply the
                te rraces and the pens but I think one has to go a lit tle
                further and think ab ou t the area witho ut.                    T h e r e may be no
                solution, I d o n ' t know, but I feel that it is a m a t t e r
                w h i c h I w o u l d like to think I had d r a w n to s o m e b o d y ' s
                attention.
    D
                           Wi t h r e g a r d to the Safety C e rt if ic at e, I am of co u r s e
                 a w a r e that L o r d J u s t i c e T a y l o r spent a g r e a t de a l of time,
                 in fact m u c h m o r e time, w i t h re g a r d to r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s
                 than I have done, and he did m a k e r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s w i t h
                 reg ard to in s p e c t o r a t es , but it seems to me, and I intend
                 to w r i t e to the H om e S e c r e t a r y on this, that w i t h a m a t t e r
                 such as sa fe ty in sports g r o u n d s it m i g h t p e r h a p s be w o r t h
                 looking at n o t simply an i n s p e c t o r a t e but p o s s i b l y an
                 h om og en ou s, nati on al , licensing, a pp ra is al , i n s p e c t i n g
                 o r g a n i s a t i o n or service, b e c a u s e at the m o me nt , of course,
                 the Safety C e r t i f i c a t e s are iss ued by local au th or i t i e s ,
                 there are m a n y of them, and ea ch one of them has a
                 re la t i v e l y small n u m b e r of sports gr ou nds .         H o w e v e r har d
                 the peo p le w i t h i n the a u t h o r i t i e s ma y try an d ho w e v e r
                 competent, their e x p e r i e n c e will be l i m i t e d and I w o u l d
                 like some th ou g h t to be g iv en to w h e t h e r it w o u l d no t be
                 be t t e r in the in t e r e s t s of sa fet y if a bo d y of e x p e r t i s e
                 c ou ld be b u i l t up w h i c h (a) a p pl ie s m o r e u n i f o r m
                 standards, and (b) w o u l d be in a m u c h b e t t e r p o s i t i o n to
                 assess ris k and so on at any p a r t i c u l a r stad ium , so my
                 int en ti on is to w r i t e to the Home S e c r e t a r y and ask him to
                 c o n s i d e r that.

                          In a d d i t i o n such a body w o u l d ha ve - and this is a
                furt her po int w h i c h I w i s h to d r a w to his a t t e n t i o n - or
                m a y b e some o th er body, the fa ci li ty for e n s u r i n g that
                there is b o t h p r o p e r train ing and the e s t a b l i s h m e n t of
                c o n t i n u i t y of i n f o r m a t i o n from one p e r s o n to another, in
                or der to try and en s u r e that p r a c t i c e w h i c h is go o d and
    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                                                   13




              sound is p a s s e d on and c o n t i n u es to be a p p l i e d and be
              dev el op ed , but even if such a body was no t set up, of
              course, w i t h i n each o r g a n i s a t i o n that ma y be in vo l v e d in
              st ag in g m a j o r events w he re loads of p e o p l e co me together
              g re at e f f o r t should, I am sure, be put into b o t h training
              and the n e e d for c o n t i n u it y of some sort or another.

                        T h e r e is a n o t h e r as pec t w h i c h I wa n t to w r i t e on - it
              all h a p p e n s to be the Home Se c r e t a r y b e c a u s e it hap pe ns to
  B           be his d e p a r t m e n t , i n cl ud in g the first point.            On e has to
              as k o n e s e l f the q u e s t i o n as to w h e t h e r or not the
              i n v o l v e m e n t of the Po li ce in the a c t i v i t i e s w i t h i n the
              S t a d i u m is a p r o p e r use of b o t h their training, e x p er ti se
              and a b i l i t i e s , and I w oul d like to s u gg es t to the Home
              S e c r e t a r y that this is s o m et hi ng w h i c h needs, in my view,
              a d d r e s s i n g as a m a t t e r of r e l a t i v e urgency, to ma k e some
              d e c i s i o n s as to who, in fact, on the sa fe ty side should
              ha ve (a) the u l t i m a t e authority, (b) the e x p e r t i s e and (c)
              the r e s p o n s i b i l i t y .

                       It is a m a t t e r of c o n s i d e r a b l e r e g r e t to me to say
             that w h i l s t we w e r e sitting d u r i n g these Inquests, and
             w i t h o u t me m a k i n g any effort to kee p a b r e a s t of events, I
             read in the p a p e r of one foot ba ll d i s a s t e r in Sou th
  D          Africa, w h e r e a b o u t 40 pe op le di e d as a r e s u l t of c r u s h
             injuries.           T h e r e w e r e at least two o th er no n foo tb al l
             s i t u a t i o n s that I remember, one was a b r o a d w h e r e num be rs
             of p e o p l e w e r e i n j u r e d and killed, a n d a l t h o u g h in the
             event n o b o d y was se r i o u s l y hurt, just last Sa tu r d a y in the
             town in w h i c h I live there was a c r u s h i n g i n c i d e n t at a
             foot ba ll match.             So a l t h o u g h it w o u l d be n i c e for me to
             say we ha v e had all this inquiry, we have d i s c u s s e d it and
             e v e r y t h i n g else, it will never ha p p e n again, un le ss there
             is c o n s i d e r a b l e , c o n t i n u o u s v i g i l a n c e and p e rh ap s even a
             c h a n g e of a t t i t u d e w i t h re ga rd to match es, I fear it will
             ha p p e n a g a i n and it will be, of c o u r s e --- well, you know
             h o w a wf ul it has been once but to ha ve it a g a i n w o u l d be
             just^ that m u c h worse.                H o w you sol ve it -the only safe
             stadium, in my view, is an empty one.                                As soon as you
             b ri ng a s u b s t a n t i a l n u m b e r of p e o p l e t o g e t h e r you run
             risks, and w h e t h e r it is p o s s i b l e to have te rr ace s wh ere
             p e o p l e s ta nd w i t h o u t risk I have doubts.                   So I intend
             ag ain to d r a w these thoughts to the Home S e c r e t a r y and see
             what, if an y t h i n g , he can or w i s h e s to do.

                       Finally, and I am ch ea ti ng a little bit b e c a u s e this
             is not a c t u a l l y a sa fety matter, I do in te nd to w r i t e to
             the Hom e S e c r e t a r y ^ a n d ask him to s e r i o u s l y a pp ly his mind
             to the i n t e r - r e l a t i o n s h i p be t w e e n cor on er s' in qu est s and
             p u b l i c i n q u i r i e s in m a j o r d i s a s t e r s of this type, b e c a u s e
             I think s o m e b o d y has got to g r a s p the n e t t l e and sort out
             the situa ti on , w h i c h I do not think is en ti r e l y
             satisfactory.


  H




L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                                                           14




                              T h a t is the b r o a d o u t l i n e of the ma t t e r s w h i c h o c c u r to
                    me at the moment.              If s o m e t h i n g el se w e r e to co me to me at
                    some time in the fu t u r e and I thou ght it right, then of
                    c o u r s e I can always write.                Indeed, a n y b o d y can w r i t e to
                    the H o m e S e c r e t a r y if they wish.

                             -I-want' to tu rn -t o -youj lad ies and gen tl em en *                 1 want---
                          say first of all that y o u h a v e ha d an in fi n i t e l y h a r d e r
    B               t^sk than I ha d imagined.                 I k n e w it was g oi ng to be p r e t t y
                    h a r d for you but in fact it has been harder.                           I wa n t to
                    t han k y o u for yo ur p e r s e v e r a n c e , for y o u r interest, for your
                    a tt en ti on , for y ou r c o u r a g e in r e a c h i n g d e c i s i o n s and
                    a n n o u n c i n g them.  I ad m i r e you.         W h a t mo r e can I say?         I
                    th ank y\u.

                         It isv w i t h i n my p o w e r to e x c u s e y o u from jury se r v i c e
                in C o r o n e r s ^ courts.        It is not in my p o w e r to ex cu s e you
                from o t h e r courts, but as far as I am con ce rn ed , su b j e c t to
                a p r o v i s o w h r c h I w i l l m e n t i o n in a moment, I int end to
                exc us e y o u frota C o r o n a l jury se r v i c e for the rest of yo u r
                lives.         I think you h a v e d o n e yo ur bit.          T h e only p r o v i s o I
                h a v e is that if $ny of yo u do not w i s h m e to do that, p l e a s e
                w r i t e to me at tnk M e d i c o - L e g a l Centre, be c a u s e I w o u l d not
                w an t to excuse y o u \ i f it w a s n ' t s o m e t h i n g y o u want ed, but if
    D
                I do not h e a r to you, I w i l l w r i t e a letter to you in due
                course, or at least my J ury O f f i c e r w i l l w ri te y o u a le tt er
                to c o n f i r m that so you. h a v e got it.

                              I wan t to re m i n d yd u that ri ght at the o p e n i n g on the
                    1 8th of April, 1990, w h e r k y o u first ca m e together, I dr e w
                    your a t t e n t i o n to the f a c t \ t ha t this w o u l d be st res sfu l,
                    that things m ig ht get to yoVi.                 If yo u r e m e m b e r I r e m i n d e d
                    y ou that one of the g o o d thiiags was yo u h a d y o u r s e l v e s and
                    that you co uld s u p p o r t o n e another.               I did at that p o i n t
                    a l l u d e to the p o s s i b i l i t y that\if e x t e r n a l he l p was n e e d e d
                    b e c a u s e you had pr ob l e ms y o u r s e \ v e s w i t h co p i n g w i t h the
                    s itu ati on, then one sh o u ld se ek i\t.                I want to re p e a t that
                    but I wan t to add one or two a d d i t i o n a l points.                     W h e n we
                    h a v e fi ni s h e d today yo u will, of course, be s p l i t t i n g up and
                    in that se nse you wi l l lose the f e l l o w s h i p of the el e v e n of
                    you w h i c h you h a v e b u i l t up ov e r s e v e r a l months.

                              I do not wa n t to s u g g e s t for a miruite that yo u are
                    go in g to ne ed any c o u n s e l l i n g or any h e L b or a n y t h i n g of the
                    sort, but you may do and there wo ul d be n<s shame if you did.
                    If you do, r e m e m b e r that you r GP is the fiisst port of call.
                    Yo u may not like him, d on 't go to him, but H e sh ou ld be in a
                    p o s i t i o n to h e l p you.

                              In addit ion , I k n o w b e c a u s e I h a v e h e a r d ftrom them,
                    that the Fam ily and C o m m u n i t y Se rv i c e s D e p a r t m e n t in
                    Sh eff iel d, that is the so c i a l w o rk er s if you l i k e y at
                    R e d v e r s House, Union Street, S he ff ie ld , are b o t h a v a i l a b l e
                    a n d ,— i n d ee d,— anxi ous to h e l p you w i t h a-n y p e r s o n a l
    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                      APPENDIX         A
                                                                                                                 11




                               fee^fe-McGrath—
                               I anTHoroas~_Slov e r
                               Pa u l D a v i d Bra<3y~~— —
                               Barry Sidney Bennett                   ----

                            I h a v e a l r e a d y r e m ind ed you, and given yo!T~t+te~-lury^s^
                     fi nd in gs — s-a— I— 4-q— a o -fe— p r o p o se— to— rep aa-t— them-.-------------

                              N o w I e x p l a i n e d to you, ladies and ge nt l e m e n , that you
      B
                    w e r e not a l l o w e d to add any riders to y o u r verdict.
                    Indeed, I am not a l l o w e d to do that either, b u t u n d e r
                    R u l e 43, if I think there is any m a t t e r w h i c h I should refer
                    to s o m e o n e for their c o n s i d e r a ti on then I am e n t i t l e d to do
                    that.          W h a t I p r o p o s e to do is that I do t hi nk there are
                    on e o r two m a t t e r s w h i c h I think c o u l d u s e f u l l y be thought
                    a bo ut by va ri ou s bodies.                 Indeed, they may a l r e a d y ha v e
                    tho u g h t a b o u t them.             I mak e no r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s w i t h reg ard
                    to them b e c a u s e most of these are m a t t e r s of e x p e r t i s e as
                    o p p o s e d to m e r e c o m m o n s e n s e and t he re ma y b e p r o b l e m s w h i c h
                    I am not expert en o u g h to be able to d e a l with.                               Ho we ver , I
                    feel t h e r e ar e on e or two mat te rs w h i c h I do w a n t to d r a w to
                    c e r t a i n persons' a t t e n t i o n so they ca n a p p l y th eir mi n d to
                    them.          W h i l s t I w o u l d not wi s h to add ri de r s or, indeed,
                    m a k e r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s , I just pro po se to o u t l i n e the mai n
                    topics w h i c h h a v e o c c u r r e d to me as I h a v e b e e n s i tt in g
                     listening, to ge t h e r w it h you, to e v i d e n c e w h i c h we have
                    heard.

                               T h e first m a t t e r that I think c o n c e r n s me is the
                     p r o b l e m w h i c h I think was i l l u s t r a t e d by the fact that if
                     you h a v e p e o p l e loo ki ng in one d i r e c t i o n p a r t i c u l a r l y
                     in te n t l y to w a t c h an event, as indeed o n e w o u l d get at a
       E
                     f o o t b a l l m a t c h or, indeed, at o t h e r m a j o r ^ e v e n t s , it may
                     p r o v e very d i f f i c u l t to turn them round, if I can use that
                     term, so that they use escape ro u te s w h i c h a r e at the b a c k
                     or at the sides.                 That is the first thing.

                                   T h e se c o n d thing is that I know, b e c a u s e we ma d e
                         in quiries, that a lot of work has be e n d o n e in c o n n e c t i o n
•       F                w it h a i r c r a f t disas te rs , p a r t i c u l a r l y a r i s i n g out of the
                         M a n c h e s t e r air disaster, on p e o p l e e s c a p i n g from ae ro p l a n e s
                         in stress s i t u a t i o n s and what h a p p e n s w i t h r e g a r d to ga tes
                         and w h e n they m o v e forward and so on.                      A g r e a t de a l of work
                         has b e e n d o n e by Dr. H a n n a h M u i r an d o t h e r s at their
                         r e s e a r c h esta bl is hm en t.

                                   I t hi nk it w o u l d be b e n e f i c i a l if o n e c o u l d br in g
        G                to g e t h e r i n f o r m a t i o n from d i f f e r e n t s o u rc es w h i c h may hav e
                         a p p l i c a t i o n s in o t h e r fields and so I in te nd to w r i t e to the
                         a p p r o p r i a t e authori ti es , for example, the F i r e S e r v i c e and,
                         indeed, Dr. M u i r and see w h e t h e r or no t t h e r e isn t some
                         scope w h e r e b y i n f o r m a t i o n can be p o ol e d and perhaps
                         im p r o v e m e n t s m a d e w i t h regard to f u t u r e safety.




    J. L. Harpham Ltd.
I
I

                                                                                                         12




                                  The s e c o n d thing that con ce rn s me is the Saf ety
            A           C e r t if ic at e.     I am, of course, aware that there is a n e w
                        one in force, and we have not be en c o n c e r n e d w i t h that,
                        but one of the factors w h i c h we all b e c a m e a wa re of was
                        not only that there w e r e pr ob lem s on the te rr ace s but that
                        there w e r e p r o b l e m s w i t h i n the tur ns ti le areas, and it
                        seems to me that some a d d i t i o n a l thought m a y b e is r e q u i r e d
                        to see w h e t h e r there is not some way of m o r e e f f e c t i v e l y
                        c o n t r o l l i n g ingress, b e c a u s e at the moment, of course,
            B           there is no s y s t e m of counting, as far as I un de rs ta nd ,
                        into the t u r n s t i l e area, so one is in fact left w i t h
                        ex ac t l y the same p o s i t i o n as one was before, n a m e l y that
                        you h a v e to e s t i m a t e the num be rs w i t h i n that ar ea by eye.

                                 W h e t h e r that is a s i t u a t i on w h i c h can be o v e r c o m e or
                        not I do no t know, but I do int end to w r i t e b o t h to the
                        L oc al Au th o r i t y , as the en fo rc in g author ity , and in de ed
            C
                        also to the Club, to ask them to a ppl y th eir m in ds to that
                        part of the Ground.            We have tended to t hi nk of si mp ly the
                        terraces and the pens but I think one has to go a li tt le
                        furt he r and think about the area without.                     T h e r e ma y be no
                        solution, I d o n ' t know, but I feel that it is a m a t t e r
                        w h i c h I w o u l d like to think I had dr aw n to so me b o d y ' s
                        at tention.
            D
                                  W i t h r e g a r d to the Safety C e r t if ica te, I am of co u r s e
                        a wa re that L o r d J u s t i c e T a y l o r spent a g r e a t de a l of time,
                        in fact m u c h m or e time, w i t h r e g a r d to r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s
                        than I have done, and he did m a k e r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s wi t h
                        re ga rd to in s p e c t o r a t e s , but it seems to me, and I int end
                        to w r i t e to the Home Se c r e t a r y on this, that w i t h a m a t t e r
                        s u c h a s s a f e t y in sports grounds it m ig ht pe r h a p s be w o r t h
            E           loo ki ng at not si mp ly an i n s p e c t o r a t e but p o s s i b l y an
                        ho mo ge n o u s , natio na l, licensing, apprai sal , i n s p e c t i n g
                        o r g a n i s a t i o n or service, b e c a u s e at the mom en t, of course,
                        the Safety C e r t i f i c a t e s are is su ed by local au th or i t i e s ,
                        there are m a n y of them, and each one of them has a
                        r e l a t i v e l y small n u m b e r of sports gr ounds.       H o w e v e r hard
                        the p e o p l e w i t h i n the a u t h o r i t i e s may try and h o w e v e r
                        competent, their e x p e r i e n c e will be l i m i t e d and I w o u l d
    •       -           like some th ou g h t to be g iv en to w h e t h e r it w o u l d not be
                        be t t e r in the i n te re st s of safety if a body of e x p e r t i s e
                        c o u l d be built up w h i c h (a) ap plies m o r e u n i f o r m
                        standards, and (b) w o u l d be in a m u c h b e t t e r p o s i t i o n to
                        assess r is k and so on at any p a r t i c u l a r stadium, so my
                        i n t e n t i o n is to w r i t e to the Home S e c r e t a r y and ask him to
                        c o n s i d e r that.
            G
                                  In a d d i t i o n s uc h a body w o u l d h a v e - and this is a
                        fu rt h e r p o i n t w h i c h I w i s h to d r a w to his a t t e n t i o n - or
                        m a y b e some o t h e r body, the faci li ty for e n s u r i n g that
                        there is b o t h p r o p e r training and the e s t a b l i s h m e n t of
                        c o n t i n u i t y of i n f o r m a t i o n from one p e r s o n to another, in
                        or de r to try and e n s u r e that p r a c t i c e w h i c h is g o o d and




        J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                                                      13




                 sound is p a s s e d on and co n t i n ue s to be a p p l i e d and be
                 d e ve lo pe d, but even if such a body was not set up, of
                 course, w i t h i n each o r g a n i s a t i o n that ma y be i n v o l v e d in
                 s t a g i n g m a j o r events w h e r e loads of p e o p l e co m e tog et he r
                 g re at ef f o r t should, I am sure, be put into b o t h training
                 and the n e e d for c o n t i n u i t y of some sort or another.

                           T h e r e is a n o t h e r as pe ct w h i c h I wa n t to w r i t e on - it
                 all h a p p e n s to be the Home S e c r et ar y b e c a u s e it hap pe ns to
     B           be his de p a r t m e n t , i n c l u d i ng the first point.            One has to
                 ask o n e s e l f the q u e s t i o n as to w h e t h e r or no t the
                 i n v o l v e m e n t of the Po l i c e in the a c t i v i t i e s w i t h i n the
                 S t a d i u m is a p r o p e r use of b o t h their training, e x p e r t i s e
                 and abilities,' and I w o u l d like to s u gg es t to the Home
                 S e c r e t a r y that this is so m e th in g w h i c h needs, in my view,
                 a d d r e s s i n g as a m a t t e r of r e l a t i v e urgency, to m a k e some
                 d e c i s i o n s as to who, in fact, on the sa fe ty side sho uld
                 have (a) the u l t i m a t e authority, (b) the e x p e r t i s e and (c)
                 the r e s p o n s i b i l i t y .

                          It is a m a t t e r of c o n s i d e r a b l e r e g r e t to me to say
                that w h i l s t w e w e r e si tt i n g d u r i n g these Inques ts, and
                w i t h o u t me m a k i n g any effort to keep a b r e a s t of events, I
                read in the p a p e r of one f o ot ba ll d i s a s t e r in S o u t h
    D           Africa, w h e r e about 40 p e o p l e di e d as a r e s u l t of c ru sh
                injuries.           T h e r e w e r e at least two o t h e r no n fo ot b a l l
                sit u a t i o n s that I remember, one was a b r o a d w h e r e num be rs
                of p e o p l e w e r e in ju r e d and killed, and a l t h o u g h in the
                event ^n o b o d y was se r i o u s l y hurt, just last S a t u r d a y in the
                town in w h i c h I live there was a c r u s h i n g i n c i d e n t at a
                fo ot bal l match.            So a l t h o u g h it w o u l d be n i c e for me to
                say we h a v e had all this inquiry, we ha v e d i s c u s s e d it and
                e v e r y t h i n g else, it w il l n ev er ha pp e n again, un le ss there
                is c o n s i d e r a b l e , c o n t i nu ou s v i g i l a n c e and p e r h a p s even a
                ch a n g e of a t t i t u d e w i t h r e g a r d to ma tc hes , I fear it wi ll
                ha pp e n a g a i n and it w i l l be, of c o u r s e --- well, you kno w
                ho w a wf ul it has been once but to have it a g a i n w d u l d be
                just that m u c h worse.                H o w you solve it - the on l y safe
                stadium, in my view, is an e mpt y one.                           As soon as you
                b ri ng a s u b s t a n t i a l n u m b e r of p e o p l e t o g e t h e r you run
                risks, and w h e t h e r it is p o s s i b l e to ha ve t e r r a c e s w h e r e
                p e o p l e s ta nd w i t h o u t r is k I ha v e doubts.            So I in te nd
                a ga in to d r a w these thoughts to the Hom e S e c r e t a r y and see
                what, if anything, he can or wi s he s to do.

                          Finally, and I am c h ea t i n g a lit tle bit b e c a u s e this
                is not a c t u a l l y a safety matter, I do in te nd to w r i t e to
                the Home S e c r e t a r y and ask h i m to s e r i o u s l y a p p l y his mi nd
                to the i n t e r - r e l a t i o n s h i p b e t w e e n co ro ne rs ' in qu e s t s and
                p u b l i c i n qu ir ie s in m a j o r d i s a s t er s of this type, b e c a u s e
                I think s o m e b o d y has got to g r a s p the n e t t l e and sort out
                the s i t u a t i o n , w h i c h I do not think is e n t i r e l y
                sa t i sf ac to ry .

    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                                                         14




                            Th a t is the b r o a d o u t l i n e of the m a t t e r s w h i c h o c c u r to
                  me at the moment.             If s o m e t h i n g e l s e w e r e to c o m e to me at
                  some time in the f u t u r e and I tho ugh t it rig ht, then of
                  c o u r s e I can always write.               Indeed, a n y b o d y ca n w r i t e to
                  the Ho m e S e c r e t a r y if they wish.

                            1- want to t u r n --to -youj— ladioo and gont-lomon.                   1 want---
                        say first of all that you ha v e ha d an i n f i n i t e l y ha rd e r
  B               t^sk than I had imagined.                 I k n e w it was g o i n g to b e p r e t t y
                         \i ^ ° r ^ ° U k Ut     fact it has bee n hard er.                  I wa n t to
                  tha nk yo u for your p e r s e v e r an ce , for y o u r in ter est , for your
                  at te n t i on , for yo u r c o u r a g e in r e a c h i n g d e c i s i o n s and
                  a n n o u n c i n g them.   I ad mir e you.          W h a t m o r e can I say?         I
                  th ank yom.

                       It i ^ w i t h i n my p o w e r to e x c u s e y o u fr om jury se r v i c e
              in Coroners^ courts.               It is not in my p o w e r to e x c u s e you
              from o t h e r courts, but as far as I am c o n c e r n e d , s u b j e c t to
              a p r o v i s o w h r c h I wi l l m e n t i o n in a m o me nt , I in te nd to
              ex cu se y o u from C o r o n a l jury s e r v i c e for the re st of yo ur
              lives.         I thinlc you h a v e d o n e you r bit.          T h e onl y pr o v i s o I
              h a v e is that if \ n y of you do not w i s h me to do that, p l e a s e
              w r i t e to me a t t h V M e d i c o - L e g a l Centre, b e c a u s e I w o u l d not
  D           wa n t to ex c us e yo u \ i f it wa s n ' t s o m e t h i n g y o u wan te d, but if
              I do not he a r to you. I wi l l w r i t e a let ter to you in due
              course, or at least my J u r y O f f i c e r w i l l w r i t e y o u a l e t t e r
              to c o n f i r m that so you. h a v e got it.

                        I wa n t to re m i n d you that right at the o p e n i n g on the
              18 t h of April, 1990, w h e i k y o u first ca m e togeth er, I d r e w
              your at t e n t i o n to the fa c t ( t ha t this w o u l d be stress ful ,
              that things m i gh t get to you.                   If you r e m e m b e r I r e m i n d e d
              yo u that one of the g o o d thxngs was you h a d y o u r s e l v e s and
              that you c ou ld s u p p o r t on e anVther.                 I d i d at that p oi nt
              a l l u d e to the p o s s i b i l i t y that\if e x t e r n a l h e l p was n e e d e d
              b e c a u s e you had p r o b l e m s y o ur s e l v e s w i t h c o p i n g w i t h the
              situat io n, then one sh oul d se ek i\t.                    I wa n t to r e p e a t that
              but I want to add o n e or two a d d i t i o n a l points.                       W h e n we
              ha v e fi ni sh ed today you will, of course, be s p l i t t i n g up and
              in that s en se you w i l l lose the f e l l o w s h i p of the el e v e n of
              you w h i c h you h a v e b u i l t up ov e r s e ve ra l mon ths .

                        I do not wa n t to s u gg es t for a min\ite that you are
              g o i n g to need any c o u n s e l l i n g or any help) or a n y t h i n g of the
              sort, but you may do and there w o u l d be nb shame if you did.
              If yo u do, r e m e m b e r that your GP is the fiEvSt port of call.
              Y o u ma y not like him, d o n' t go to him, but H e sh ou ld be in a
              p o s i t i o n to h e l p you.

                        In addition, I k n o w b e c a u s e I h a v e h e a r d frrom them,
              that the Fa m il y and C o m m u n i t y S e r v i c e s D e p a r t m e n t in
              Sheff iel d, that is the soc ial w o rk er s if you l ik ey at
              R e d v e r s House, Union Street, She ff ie ld , are b o t h a v a i l a b l e
                     — i n d e e d ,— a-nxious— t o - h e lp you- w i t h any— p-er s onal
  H




L. Harpham Ltd.
             V




                                          OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR                    MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                        WATERY STREET
                                                  SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                                        SHEFFIELD
                                                       (West District)
                                                                                        S3 7ET
             STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                           CORONER


                                      Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721                  •1-s-t— Ma-y........ "19



         SLP/JT.




         The Right Hon. Mr. Kenneth Baker, M.P.
         Home Office,
         50 Queen A n n e ’s Gate,
         London. SW1. H 9 A T .




         Dear Sir,

         I have recently concluded the Hillsborough Inquests.  I am of course aware
         that Lord Justice Taylor has presented a report in two parts incorporating a
         substantial number of recommendations, many of which I believe have already
         been implemented or are in the process of being acted on.

         Nevertheless at the conclusion of the inquests I indicated that there were a
         number of matters which I was intending to raise with you.

         For convenience I have dealt with                                 these matters as schedules to this letter

             1.      Schedule A deals with the issue of a National Licencing
                     Authority for sports grounds.

             2.       Schedule B deals with the issue of police involvement within
                      football stadia (and no doubt any other major venue).

             3.      Schedule C deals with the inter-relationship of inquests and
                      Public Inquiries with some reference to other investigations which
                     may follow a major disaster.

                      Also attached as Appendices are:-

             4.     Photocopy of Page 11-14 of the closing session on 28.4.91 of the
                    Inquest hearings (Appendix A ) .

             5.     A copy of a letter which I wrote to the Chief Fire Officer,Sheffield
                    drawing his attention to evacuation difficulties and location of means
                    of escape (Appendix B ) -

         If I can be of any further assistance in relation to any of these matters,
         please let me know.


         Ynn rs f/a ft-l-ifn 1 1v




R8606    H.M.C.
BAGABC
                                 A P P E N D IX   A



                                                                                                       11




                           lith M c G r a t h
                        Ian
                        P a u l D a v i d Bra
                        B a r r y Si d n e y Ben ne tt

                        I h a v e a l r e a d y reminded you, and g i v e n yo u
              f-i n d i n g s - so I -d-Q- no-t pg-o p o se- t o -r epeat th atn.----

                        N o w I ex p l a i n e d to you, ladies and g e n t l e m e n , that you
B
              w e r e not a l l o w e d to add any riders to yo u r verd ict .
              Indeed, I am not al lo we d to do that eit her , b u t u n d e r
              R u l e 43, if I think there is any m a t t e r w h i c h I should refer
              to s o m e o n e for their c o n s id era tio n then I am e n t i t l e d to do
              that.          W h a t I p r o p o s e to do is that I do t h i n k there are
              on e o r two m a t t e r s w h i c h I think c ou ld u s e f u l l y b e thought
              abo ut by var io us bodies.                   Indeed, they ma y a l r e a d y ha v e
              t h o u g h t a bo ut them.           I ma ke no r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s w i t h regard
              to them b e c a u s e m os t of these are m a t t e r s of e x p e r t i s e as
              o p p o s e d to m e r e c o m m o n s e n s e and th ere ma y be p r o b l e m s wh ic h
              I am not expert en o u g h to be able to d e a l with.                             However, I
              feel t h e r e a r e one or two matt ers w h i c h I do w a n t to d r a w to
              c e r t a i n persons' atten tion so they can ap pl y their mind to
              them.          Wh il s t I w ou ld not wish to add ri de r s or, indeed,
              m a k e rec omm e nd a t i on s , I just prop ose to o u t l i n e the mai n
 D            topics w h i c h h a v e oc curred to me as I h a v e b e e n sit ti ng
               listening, tog et h e r with you, to e v i d e n c e w h i c h we have
              heard.

                            T h e first ma t t e r that I think c o n c e r n s me is the
                  p r o b l e m w h i c h I think was illustr ate d by the fact that if
                  you h a v e pe op le looking in one d i r e c t i o n p a r t i c u l a r l y
                  in te nt ly to w a t c h an event, as indeed o n e w o u l d get at a
                  fo ot b a l l m a t c h or, indeed, at o t h e r m a j o r events, it may
                  p ro ve very d i f f i c u l t to turn them round, if I can use that
                  term, so that they use escape ro ut es w h i c h a r e at the back
                  or at the sides.                That is the first thing.

                            T h e sec ond thing is that I know, b e c a u s e we ma d e
                  inquiri es, that a lot of work has b e e n d o n e in co nn e c t i o n
                  w i t h ai rc r a f t disasters, p a rt ic ul ar ly a r i s i n g ou t of the
                  M a n c h e s t e r air disaster, on pe op le e s c a p i n g from aeropl ane s
                  in stress sit ua t io n s and what ha p p e n s w i t h r e g a r d to gates
                  and wh en they m o v e forward and so on.               A g r e a t dea l of work
                  has b e e n do n e by Dr. Hannah M ui r and o t h e r s at their
                  r e s e a r c h establishment.

                            I t hi nk it w ou ld be ben ef ic ia l if o n e c o u l d br ing
                  t og eth er i n f o r m a ti o n from dif fe re nt sour ces w h i c h may have
                  a p p l i c a t i o n s in o t h e r fields and so I in te nd to w r i t e to the
                  a p p r o p r i a t e authorities, for example, the F i r e Se r v i c e and,
                  indeed, Dr. Mui r and see whe the r or no t t h e r e isn't some
                  scope whe re b y in fo rm a ti on can be po ol ed and perh aps
                  im pr o v e m e n t s m a d e w i t h regard to f u t u r e safety.

  H




L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                                                       12




                           Th e se c o n d thing that concerns m e is the Sa f e t y
                 C e r t i f i c a t e.  I am, of course, aware that there is a n e w
                 one in force, and we have not been c o n c e r n e d w i t h that,
                 but one of the factors w h i c h we all be ca m e a w a r e of was
                 n o t o nl y that there w er e problems on the te rr a c e s but that
                 there w e r e p r o b l e m s w i t h i n the t u rn sti le areas, and it
                 seems to me that some ad di ti on al thou ght m a y b e is re qu i r e d
                 to see w h e t h e r there is not some way of m o r e e f f e c t i v e l y
                 c o n t r o l l i n g ingress, be ca us e at the moment, of course,
     B           there is no sy s t e m of counting, as far as I un d e r s t a n d ,
                 into the t u r n s t i l e area, so one is in fact left w i t h
                 e x a c t l y the same p o s i t i o n as one was before, n a m e l y that
                 you have to e s t i m a t e the numbers w i t h i n that a r e a by eye.

                           W h e t h e r that is a situation w h i c h can be o v e r c o m e or
                 not I do n o t know, but I do intend to w r i t e b o t h to the
                 L o c a l A u t h o r i t y , as the enforcing au tho rit y, an d ind eed
                 al s o to the Club, to ask them to a pp ly their m i n d s to that
                 p ar t of the Ground.             We have tended to think of si mp ly the
                 terra ce s a n d the pens but I think one has to go a little
                 f u r t h e r and think about the area without.            T h e r e may be no
                 so lution, I d o n ' t know, but I feel that it is a m a t t e r
                 w h i c h I w o u l d like to think I had dr aw n to s o m e b o d y ' s
                 at te nt io n.
    D
                           W i t h r e g a r d to the Safety C e r t ifi cat e, I am of co ur se
                 a w a r e that L o r d Ju st i c e Ta yl or spent a g r e a t d e a l of time,
                 in fact m u c h m o r e time, w i t h re gar d to r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s
                 than I h av e done, and he did ma ke r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s wi t h
                 r e g a r d to ins pe ct or at es , but it seems to me, and I intend
                 to w r i t e to the^Home Secr et ar y on this, that w i t h a ma tt er
                 s uc h as s a f e t y in sports grounds it m i g h t p e r h a p s be w o r t h
                 loo ki ng at no t simply an i n s p e c t or at e but p o s s i b l y an
                 ho m o g e n o u s , national, licensing, app ra is al , i n s p e c t i n g
                 o r g a n i s a t i o n or service, be ca use at the moment, of course,
                 the S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e s are issued by local a u t h o r i t i e s ,
                 there are ma n y of them, and each one of them has a
                 r e l a t i v e l y small n u m b e r of sports groun ds.       H o w e v e r hard
                 the p e o p l e w i t h i n the au th or iti es may try and h o w e v e r
                 compe te nt , their ex pe r i e n ce will be l i m i t e d and I wo ul d
                 like some th ou g h t to be given to w h e t h e r it w o u l d not be
                 be t t e r in the in terests of safety if a bo dy of e x p e r t i s e
                 c o u l d be b u i l t u p w h i c h (a) applies mor e u n i f o r m
                 standa rds, and (b) w o u l d be in a muc h b e t t e r p o s i t i o n to
                 assess ris k and so on at any p a r t i c u l a r stad ium , so my
                 i n t e n t i o n is to w r i t e to the Home S e c r e t a r y a n d as k him to
                 c o n s i d e r that.

                           In a d d i t i o n such a body wo ul d hav e - and this is a
                 f u rt he r p o i n t w h i c h I w i s h to dr a w to his a t t e n t i o n - or
                 m a y b e some o t h e r body, the facility for e n s u r i n g that
                 there is b o t h p r o p e r training and the e s t a b l i s h m e n t of
                 c o n t i n u i t y of i n f o r m a t i o n from one p e r s o n to an ot he r, in
                 o rd er to try and en sure that pr ac ti ce w h i c h is g o o d and
    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                                                              13




                      developed     hh             c o nt ln ue s to be a p p l i e d an d be
                      cou rs e wii-M    ^E!        SUCh a body was no t set U P> of
                               W 1 ^hln each o r g a n i s a t i o n that may be i n v o l v e d in
                      g          r        e           f        t      l0adS ° f P e° P l e      to ge th er
                      Ind       thP            fS h o u l d > ? am s u r e > be put into b o t h trai nin g
                      and       the n e e d    for c o n t i n u i t y of some sort or another.

                      o n , T h e r e is a n o t h e r aspect w h i c h I wa n t to w r i t e on - it
                      all h a p p e n s to be the Home Se c r e ta ry b e c a u s e it h a pp en s to
          B
                     ask o n e s e l f ' t h 8"**’ i n c l u d i n § the ^ s t point.       O n e ^ a s to
                     •       i     self the q u e s t i o n as to w h e t h e r or no t the
                     i n v o l v e m e n t of the Po li ce in the a c t i v i t i e s w i t h i n the
                     and' . m i -!-3 P r °Per use of b o t h their training, e x p e r t i s e
                     t^rJtarv                   ?{?     •“ °Uld ^         C° S U g g e S t to ‘he
                                                       S 1S s o m e t h ing w h i c h needs, in my v i e w
                     d ecS o n ^ a fto
                     h      a      5     e
                                                  who^'        %£ r e l a t l V e Ursen^ >
                                              fc? * h o > ln f a c t > °n the sa fe t y si de
                                                                                             to    sh ou ld
                     th e r e s p o n s ib ilit y ?         a u th ° ^ >     M          e x p e rtis e and (c )

                     that whi                       c ?n s i d e rable r e g r e t to me to say
                     tnat w h i l s t we w e r e sitting du r i n g these In au e s t q    ^nrl
                     rlld T n          th ma k i n §     e f f ° rt t0 k "e P a b r e a s t of e v e n t s , I
                     Afr?r.i            i  p a p e r of one footb all d i s a s t e r in S o u t h         ’
      D
                     in juries W           T h e r e ° w p 40 ? 6? ple die d 33 a r e s u l t     «ush
                     si tu a t i o n *     ^ j e r e we r e a t least two ot he r n o n f o o t b a l l
                     nf Hoi ?              t h a t iI remember, one was a b r o a d w h e r e num be rs
                     evP                  lnj Ur ed and k i l l e d > and a l t h o u g h in the
                     ?own i n ° w h i c h T l S er i^ Sly h U r t ’ juSt laSt S a t u r d a y in the
                     f o o t b a U match      Z *                  3 c r u s h i "§ i n c i d e n t at a
                     c,          l match.     So a l t h o u g h it w o u l d b e n i c e for m e to
                     every thing 8e Is e * 1 1                i n q u i r ^ ’ we h a ^ d i s c u s s e d it and
                     is c o n s i d e r a b l e ’   nn?'      n 0 V 8 ^ b ? ppen again, u n l e s s there
                     xb c o n s i d e r a b l e , c on ti nuo us v i g il an ce and p e r h a p s even a
                     change o f a t t i t u d e w it h re g a rd to m a tc h e s . I f J a r i t w i f i
                                          “ 1 U b*i ° £ “ “ « • - - 1 " l "         kn o w
                 ? » e h Z     !?        en once but to h ave it a g a i n w o u l d be


•
                 sta di um ilTmv W ? r s e *. Ho w y° u solve it - the on l y safe
                   adium, in my view, is an empty one.          As soon as vou
      F          ris kf 3and w h p ? h i a l -HU ? b e r ° f pe op le t o g e t h e r y o u run
                 npn^i’ ?         w h e t h e r it is p o ss ib le to hav e te rr a c e s w h e r e
                 peo pl e s t a n d w i t h o u t risk I have doubts.           So I in te nd
                 whft
                 wnat,           if
                                 it a
                                    ann yt
                                        v thi
                                           h ing
                                              n p,S e h
                                                      heth°USh1:S t0 hes
                                                          can or wis thB H
                                                                         to° me
                                                                              do.S e c r e t a r y and see


                 is n o t ^ c t i a i l v ^ I J m hchea1:inS a little bi t b e c a u s e this
                 fhp So a c £u a l l y a safety matter, I do i n t e n d to w r i t e to
                 t o t h » * S e c r e t a r y and ask him to s e r i o u s l y a p p l y his mind
                 D ublin   ^ t e r - r e i a t i o n s h i p b e t w e en corone rs' i n q u e s t s and
                 pu bl i c i n q u i r i e s in m aj or dis as te rs of this type, b e c a u s e

                 the s i t u a t i o n         w h h     ?°5    t0 §r aSp the n e t t l e an d    sort °u t
                 s a tis fa c to ry ? ’          h lC h 1 d ° n o t t M n k i s e n t i r e l y
     H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                                                                          14




                          mo „          1S        e b r o a d ou tl in e of the m a t t e r s w h i c h o c c u r to
                          me at the moment.               If s o me thi ng el se w e r e to com e to me at
                          som e time m        the fu tu re and I thou ght it right, then of
                                      c an a l w a y s write.          Indeed, a n y b o d y can w r i t e to
                          the H o m e S e c r e t a r y if they wish.

                                        v*?nt to turn to you, ladioo and g on tl cm cn .                        i - w a n t ---
                          .A f a L f i r s t of all that you hav e ha d an i n f i n i t e l y har de r
             B                      5          "ad 1[pa gined.          I k n e w it was g oi ng to be pr et ty
                          h a i M for yo u but in fact it has been har de ?.                             I wa n t to
                                              * y ° ur perseve ran ce, for y o u r interest, for your
                          a t t e n t i o n , for y o u r c o u r a g e in r e a c h i n g d e c i s i o n s and
                          announq^ing them.              I admire you.            W h a t m o r e can I say?                I
                          thank you.                                                                              7

                                 It i
          C                                wi th in my p o w e r to e x c u s e y o u fro m jur y s e rv ic e
                         in Coro>nerj
                                          s. courts.       It is not in my p o w e r to e x c u s e you
                         from o t h e r       urts, but as far as I am c o n c e r n e d , su b j e c t to
                         a p r o v i s o whr<vj I wil l ment ion in a m o m e n t , I in te n d to
                         ex cu se y o u frota C o r o n al jury s e rv ic e for the re st of y o u r
                         lives.         I
                                        - think you have done yo ur bit.               T h e on l y p ro vi so I
                           ave is that if \ n y of you do not w i s h me to do that, pl e a s e
                         w r i t e to me at the Med ic o- Le ga l Cent re, b e c a u s e I w o u l d not
         D               wa n t to ex c u s e y o u N l f it wa sn' t s o m e t h i n g yo u wan te d, bu t if
                         I do not hea r to you. I           will w r i t e a le tt er to y o u in due
                         course, or at least iky            Jury O f f i c e r w i l l w r i t e y o u ale tt er
                         to c o n f i r m that so youv hav e got it*


                                   L W ? n t -?° ^ n ^ nd         that r i §ht at the o p e n i n g on the
                         18t h of April, 1990, wherkyou first ca m e togeth er, I d r e w
                         y our a t t e n t i o n to the factCthat this w o u l d be stressf ul,
         E                 « a t |.u i n§S m i | h t 1 Set to you.       If you r e m e m b e r I re mi n d e d
                         y o u that one of the go od t h i V g s was yo u h a d y o u r s e l v e s and
                         that yo u c o u l d su pp o r t one another.             I di d at that p oi nt
                         a l l u d e to the p o s s i b i l i t y that\if e x t e r n a l he l p was ne ed e d
                         Dec au se yo u had pr ob lem s yo urs elv es w i t h c o p i n g w i t h the
                         si tu at io n, then one should seek ixt.                 I wa n t to re p e a t that


    •
                         but I wa n t to add one or two a d d i t i o n a l points.                W h e n we
                                  i n iS      to d a y you w i l l , o f c o u r s e , be s p l i t t i n g up and
         F               m th a t sense you w i l l           lo s e th e f e llo w s h ip o f th e e le v e n o f
                         y o u w h ic h y o u h ave b u i l t up o v e r s e v e V a l m o n th s .
                                   I do not wa n t to suggest for a m i m i t e that you are
                         g oi ng to ne e d any co u ns el li ng or any help) or a n y t h i n g of the
                         sort, bu t you may do and there w o u l d be n \ shame if you did.
                         It you do, r e m e m b e r that your GP is the fi\st port of call.
         G               Yo u ma y not like him, don't go to him, but Ke s h o u l d be in a
                         p o s i t i o n to h e l p you.

i
I                              In ad di tio n, I k n o w b e ca us e I ha v e h e a r d iSrom them,
                     that the Fa m i l y and Co mmu nit y S e r v i c e s D e p a r t m e n t in
                     S h ef fi el d, that is the social wor ke rs if you likes, at
                     R e d v e r s House, Union Street, Sh eff iel d, a r e b o t h av a i l a b l e
                     aa-d, indeed, anxious to hel p you wi th any p e r s o n a l




    J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                         A p p i'iliD X X         3

                                             OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                              WATERY STREET
                                                      SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                              SHEFFIELD
                                                           (West District)
                                                                              S3 7ET
                STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                              CORONER


                                         Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721     ■Lst—May................... 19.....91




             SLP/JT/Hills/Escape.




             The Chief Fire Officer,
             South Yorkshire County Fire Service,
             West Division H-Q-,
             Wellington Street,
             Sheffield. SI 3 F G .



             Dear Sir,

             Hillsborough Inquests/Evacuation Procedures and Means of Escape.

             You may well be aware that I have recently concluded the inquests into the
             Hillsborough Disaster and you will also be aware that Mr. Seaman came and
             gave evidence at the inquests.

             Although there were various matters which arose during the course of these
             inquests which gave me some cause for concern e.g., the possibility of
             closure of the tunnel exit gates in order to prevent ingress on to the
             terracing.   I expect that you will be considering this problem.
             However, part from that, the matters which I felt I wanted to raise with you
             in this letter a r e :-

        1.   For whatever reason, the terracing at Hillsborough were not evacuated within
             the notional evacuation time which had been calculated in respect of them.
             I have no doubt that there were many causes but one factor which has occured
             to me is that evacuation times are calculated as I understand it by applying
             flow rates through specific apertures.  This of course   assumes that the
             people who have to leave a specified area are:-

                    (a)        Aware that a life-threatening emergency exits and that it is
                               in their interests to go.

                    (b)       Realise where the exit points are and the routes are unobstructed.'

                    (c)       Do not have some motivation which makes them hesitate not to
                              give up their position and

                    (d)        Are prepared to be distracted from the object of their attention.

             A crowd which attends a football stadium is of course intent upon watching
             the match.   Their attention will therefore be towards the field, i.e.,
             forward and away from exits which may be located at the rear or to the side
             of them.   Clearly, if there were to be a raging inferno immediately in
             front of them the natural instinct of people will tend    to make them back away
             from the apparent problem and move towards exit points   located behind them.



R8606
BAGABA
If however the problem which presents itself is not so obviously apparent,
and if attention is focused towards the front, there may be considerable
reluctance for people to move away from their viewing positions and out of
the viewing area particularly if they have some fear that they may not
subsequently be allowed back, or that they might lose a vantage point if in
the events they were mistaken about the need to go.

The point I am trying to make is that simple flow rates may not be a
sufficient basis for calculating evacuation times in certain circumstances.

Another matter which occurred to me whilst listening to the evidence was that
on the terrace in question, the means of escape were all situated at the
rear.  I am of course aware that there were little gates in the perimeter
fencing, which in fact turned out to be one of the primary routes of escape
on the day in question, but I also understood that these had never been
contemplated as forming a major escape route in the calcuations which had
been made.

I am less concerned with that happened to Hillsborugh on the
15th of April 1989 but more concerned with the general principle as to
whether it is wise to locate the means of escape and the secondary means of
escape in the same general area.  I say this because it does not  take too
much imagination to be able to contemplate a situation where the  rear exits
are all blocked.  To take one scenario, if there was a collapse of the upper
tier of the stand across the back of the terracing.

I appreciate that if exits or escape routes are located forward, then
particularly if a panic arises, there may be substantial risks of these
routes becoming blocked by a movement of spectators forward, and this
difficulty is compounded by the possible problem of distinguishing a safety
movement from a pitch evasion at football matches.

The purpose of this letter is not to suggest solutions to you or to be
critical but simply to draw to your attention two matters which gave me some
concern.  Whether there are any solutions which could usefully be applied,
at Hillsborough or elsewhere is of course a matter for you.



During my preparation for Hillsborough I learned of some very interesting
work which had been done by Dr.  Helen Muir at the Research
Establishment, Department of Applied Psychology at the College of
Aeroneutics, Cranfield, Bedford.  Her work was based upon the Manchester Air
Disaster and she has undertaken some experimental work to try and demonstrate
problems with egress and crowd behaviour from a confined space.   I have seen
a short video of some of this work and I was struck by the fact that problems
which appeared to me to have arisen at Hillsborough were not dissimilar to
those which she was demonstrating in her experimentation.

It may be that you might feel that it would be helpful for you to get in
touch with her so that there could be an exchange of information which may be
of interist and use to all.




I am sending a copy of this letter to her so that she can be aware of what is
going on.

As I indicated on the last day of the inquest,   I am interested in the
                              3



possibility whether there is scope for the pooling of information regarding
safety from separate disciplines.

Finally, I am sending a copy of this letter to the Home Secretary for his
information.




Yours faithfully,




S .L .Popper,
H.M.Coroner.



c.c. Home Secretary M r . Kenneth Baker,
c .c .
                                                OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR            MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                      WATERY STREET
                                                          SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                                      SHEFFIELD
                                                               (West District)
                                                                                      S3 7ET
             S T E F A N L. P O P P E R , LL.B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                                     CORONER


                                           Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721
                                                                                      1 st Hay




        SLP/JT/Hills/Escape.




        The Chief Fire Officer,
        South Yorkshire County Fire Service,
        West Division H.Q.,
        Wellington Street,
        Sheffield. SI 3 F G ■



        Dear Sir,

        Hillsborough Inquests'/Evacuation Procedures and Means of E s c a p e

        You may well be aware that I have recently concluded the inquests into the
        Hillsborough Disaster and you will also be aware that Mr. Seaman came and
        gave evidence at the inquests.

        Although there were various matters which arose during the c°urse of these
        inquests which gave me some cause for concern e.g., the possibility o
        closure of the tunnel exit gates in order to prevent ingress on to the
        terracing.   I expect that you will be considering this problem.      ^
        However, part from that, the matters which I felt I wanted to raise with you
         in this letter are:-

         For whatever reason, the terracing at Hillsborough were not evacuated within
         the notional evacuation time which had been calculated in respect of th^ ’
         I have no doubt that there were many causes but one factor which has oc^ r e
         to me is that evacuation times are calculated as I understand it by applying
         flow rates through specific apertures.  This of course assumes that the
         people who have to leave a specified area are.-

                (a)          Aware that a life-threatening emergency exits and that it is
                              in their interests to go.

                              Realise where the exit points are and the routes are unobstructed.
                (b)

                              Do not have some motivation which makes them hesitate not to
                 (c)
                              give up their position and

                              Are prepared to be distracted from the object of their attention.
                 (d.)

         A crowd which attends a football stadium is of course intent upon watching
         the match.   Their attention will therefore be towards the field, i.e.,
         forward and away from exits which may be located at the rear or to     e si
         of them    Clearly, if there were to be a raging inferno immediately in
         front of them the natural instinct of people will tend to make them bac     away
          from the apparent problem and move towards exit points located behind th    .



R8606

BAGABA
If however the problem which presents itself is not so obviously apparent,
and if attention is focused towards the front, there may be considerable
reluctance for people to move away from their viewing positions and out of
the viewing area particularly if they have some fear that they may not
subsequently be allowed back, or that they might lose a vantage point if in
the events they were mistaken about the need to go.

The point I am trying to make is that simple flow rates may not be a
sufficient basis for calculating evacuation times in certain circumstances.

Another matter which occurred to me whilst listening to the evidence was that
on the terrace in question, the means of escape were all situated at the
rear.  I am of course aware that there were little gates in the perimeter
fencing, which in fact turned out to be one of the primary routes of escape
on the day in question, but I also understood that these had never been
contemplated a s ’forming a major escape route in the calcuations which had
been made.

I am less concerned with that happened to Hillsborugh on the
15th of April 1989 but more concerned with the general principle as to
whether it is wise to locate the means of escape and the secondary means of
escape in the same general area.  I say this because it does not take too
much imagination to be able to contemplate a situation where the rear exits
are all blocked.  To take one scenario, if there was a collapse of the upper
tier of the stand across the back of the terracing.

I appreciate that if exits or escape routes are located forward, then
particularly if a panic arises, there may be substantial risks of these
routes becoming blocked by a movement of spectators forward, and this
difficulty is compounded by the possible problem of distinguishing a safety
movement from a pitch evasion at football matches.

The purpose of this letter is not to suggest solutions to you or to be
critical but simply to draw to your attention two matters which gave me some
concern.  Whether there are any solutions which could usefully be applied,
at Hillsborough or elsewhere is of course a matter for you.



During my preparation for Hillsborough I learned of some very interesting
work which had been done by Dr.  Helen Muir at the Research
Establishment, Department of Applied Psychology at the College of
Aeroneutics, Cranfield, Bedford.  Her work was based upon the Manchester Air
Disaster and she has undertaken some experimental work to try and demonstrate
problems with egress and crowd behaviour from a confined space.   I have seen
a short video of some of this work and I was struck by the fact that problems
which appeared to me to have arisen at Hillsborough were not dissimilar to
those which she was demonstrating in her experimentation.

 It may be that you might feel that it would be helpful for you to get in
 touch with her so that there could be an exchange of information which may be
of interist and use to all.




 I am sending a copy of this letter to her so that she can be aware of what is
 going on.

 As I indicated on the last day of the inquest,   I am interested in the
                            3



possibility whether there is scope for the pooling of information regarding
safety from separate disciplines.

Finally, I am sending a copy of this letter to the Home Secretary for his
information.




Yours ^ i t hfully,




c.c. Home Secretary Hr. Kenneth Baker.
c:. c .
                  APPEHBIX            A

                                                                                           11




            ,th M cG ra -th-
       Ia
       P a u l D a v i d Bi
       B a r r y Si d n e y Be nn e t t

         I h a v e a l r e a d y r e m in de d you, and g i v e n y o u
£ i n d i n ^ s— s-q — I— do no-fe— p r o p o s-Q— to— r ap a a-fc— t h a m ,

         N o w I e x p l a i n e d to you, ladies and g e n t l e m e n , that you
w e r e not a l l o w e d to add any riders to yo u r ve rd ict .
Indeed, I am not a l l o w e d to do that eit he r, b u t u n d e r
R u l e 43, if I think there is any m a t t e r w h i c h I sho uld refer
to s o m e o n e for their c o n s i d e r at io n then I a m e n t i t l e d to do
that.         W h a t I p r o p o s e to do is that I do th ink there are
one or two m a t t e r s w h i c h I think c o u l d u s e f u l l y b e thought
ab ou t by v a r i o u s bodies.             Indeed, they may a l r e a d y have
thought a b o u t them.                I make no r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s w i t h regard
to them b e c a u s e m o s t of these are m a t t e r s of e x p e r t i s e as
o p p o s e d to me r e c o m m o n s e n s e and there ma y be p r o b l e m s w h i c h
I am not e x p e r t en ou gh to be able to d e a l with.                          How ev er , I
feel t he re a r e one or two matters w h i c h I do w a n t to dr a w to
c e r t a i n persons' a t te nt io n so they can a p p l y their mi n d to
 them.        W h i l s t I w ou ld not w ish to add ri de rs or, indeed,
m ak e r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s , I just pro po se to o u t l i n e the m a m
 topics w h i c h h av e oc cu r r e d to me as I h a v e be e n sit ti ng
 listening, to gether w i t h you, to e v i d e n c e w h i c h we have
heard.

          T h e first m a t t e r that I think c o n c e r n s me is the
 pr o b l e m w h i c h I think was i l l u s t r a t e d b y the fact that it
 you h a v e pe o p l e lo oking in one d i r e c t i o n p a r t i c u l a r l y
 i n t en tl y to w a t c h an event, as in de ed o n e w o u l d get at a
 foot ba ll m a t c h or, indeed, at o t h e r m a j o r events, it may
 prove v er y d i f f i c u l t to turn them round, if I ca n use that
 term, so that they use escape ro u t e s w h i c h are at the ba c k
 or at the sides.                That is the first thing.

          Th e s e c o n d thing is that I know, b e c a u s e w e ma d e ^
 inquiries, that a lot of work has b e e n d o n e in c o n n e c t i o n
 w i t h a i r c r a f t disas te rs , pa r t i c u l a rl y a r i s i n g ou t of the
 M a n c h e s t e r air disaster, on pe ople e s c a p i n g from ae rop lan es
 in st ress s i t u a t i o n s and what h a p p e n s w i t h r e g a r d to g at es .
 and w h e n they m ov e forward and so on.                      A g r e a t de a l of work
 has b e e n d o n e by Dr. Ha nn ah M ui r and o t h e r s at their
 r e s e a r c h e s t a bl is hm en t.

            I t h i n k it w o u l d be be ne fi ci al if o n e c o u l d b r i n g
  together i n f o r m a t i o n from d i f fe re nt s ou rc es w h i c h may have
  a p p l i c a t i o n s in o th er fields and so I in te n d to w r i t e to the
  a p p r o p r i a t e authorities, for example, the F i r e ^ S e r v i c e and,
  indeed, Dr. Muir and see whether or not t he re xsn t some
  scope w h e r e b y i n f o r m a t i o n can be poo led and perh aps
  i m p r o v e m e n t s ma d e w i t h regard to f u t u r e safety.
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                   HI LLS BOROUGH IIMQUJRY TEAM
DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                    NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
CHESHIRE CONSTABULARY                               Fowler Street
Police Headquarters                                 Birmingham B7 5DA
Chester CH1 2PP                                     Telephone: 021-359 3332
Telephone: 0244-350000 Ext 2091                     Fax: 021-359 6735

                                                    Your Ref:
 CONFIDENTIAL
                                                    Our Ref:    JMJ/HJ/454

D r S L Popper                                      Date:       19 March 1991
H M Coroner
South Yorkshire (West)
Legal/Medico Centre
Watery Street
SHE F F I E L D
S3 7ES




I refer to your letter of 8 March in respect of D r Helen Muir.   I have written
to D r Muir as requested and a copy is enclosed for your records.




                          t




                                          Chester
  PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
PERSONAL

                                                              JMJ/HJ/449
Applied Psychology Unit
Cranfield Insitute of Technology                             15 March 1991
Cranfield
Bedfordshire
MK43 O A L




T h a n k you for your recent letter which I have already acknowledged.

As a result of the w a y in which the Inquests on the Hillsborough Disaster have
progressed, the Coroner, D r S L Popper, has decided that he does not wish to
explore further the aspects which w e have previously discussed.     T o a large
extent these factors have already been brought out and no useful purpose
would be served b y exploring them again.

D r Popper has asked m e to write to you and thank you for your offer of help,
and indeed for everything that you have done over the last few weeks in
assisting our thinking.

I look foward to seeing you in due course, probably on matters equestrian.

Best wishes,




                                          Chester
        91     12:20           FAX 0742:726247       MEDICO LGL CNTER
 03 r91        12:22           FAX 0742 726247       MEDICO L(;L CN'TER

J MERVYN JONES MSc
DEPUTY CHIEF                         F                                                                            -;V'S
                                                                                                        ■ H I P

C U iB W m COy«7A£ULAPY                                                NECHELIS C R I 3 P O L J e i STATION
Hokce Headquarters                                                     r&WiST Street
Chester CH1 2PP                                                        BirmJnchstti 3 ? 5QA
T e le p h o n e 0 2 4 4 -3 5 0 0 0 0 Ext 209 i -                      Telephone; 021-353 3332                        ;
                                                                                                                   •/>V
                                                                       Fax: 021 -3 5 9   6 /3 5                   ■3-

                                                                       Your Ref:
 C O N T ID E N T IA L
                                                                       Our Ref:    J M J /J S J M 5 4

 D r S L Popper                                                        Dare;       19 M a rc h 1991
 H M C o ro n er
 Soutii Y o rk shire (’West)
 L egal/M edico C e n tre
 Water-v S tre e t
 SHEFFIELD ,
'S3 7ES




I r e f e r tu y o u r le tte r of 8 March in re s p e c t of Dr                         i h£r»e w ritte n
to  Dr          a s . re q u e s te d a n d a copy is enclo sed fo r y o u r re c o rd s




                                                                                                                     V

             ftEPLY                                    Chester
PLEASE                       the .office
                                               .0244-343197                       29 Oct 90 10:21 No.004 P .01
                                               •:V
                                              :■: ■■                                                              .     U
                                              :                                                                       - V:



                                                           FAX T R A N S M IS S IO N                                      -
                                                                             HILLSBOROUGH I N Q U I R Y

                         THE ATTENTION OF

                                                                 I



               Date                      j \ o Jc\ r;
 ■    f ~ ‘<
               N um ber o f pages                      C. ^ c            (Inc. this)                             ■/   :


■-




■A.



-                TEXT
■:




                                                                                             i    o




                                                                                                                 y


                         r"* <Ci     O fkS   c-i j |. jci O ,             A             C    1



                                 V           5J 1               «t 't-   (    C        v4 r : O          i   |


                                                       .err      <' m    v ^t      .
                                                                                                  K '



               Reply required                        ^ y £ s/N 0

               rriOi**   lilt,     wLry i * uniwf         v              O1 c..              ;,j: lm t

                         (CORONER'S OFFICER)

:>             TEL, (0244) 350000                   EXT.2091
r
               FAX NO. {0244} 34§#97.               -?
F IL E NOTE DATED 2 6 . 1 0 . 9 0 .        TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH



This    is the lady w h o d ea lt w i t h the M a n c h e s t e r A i r

Disaster.

A v e r y i n t e r e s t i n g co nv er sa ti on .

I e x p l a i n e d to her that I was              ^    Hi ll sbo rou gh.            She said

s t r a i g h t a w a y t ha t she felt that t he re w e r e qu ite

substantial        s i mi l a r i t i e s b e t w e e n w h a t h a p p e n e d at

M a n c h e s t e r and w h a t she a s s u m e d had h a p p e n e d at

H i l l s b o r o u g h , i n p a r t i c u l a r she sa i d that b e h a v i o u r of

p e o p l e c h a n g e v e r y s u b s t a n t i a l l y w h e n th e y p e r c e i v e a life

t h r e a t a n d in M a n c h e s t e r t h e y m a n a g e d to cl o g up seve ral of

the e x i t s ^    P e o p l e w h o on e m i g h t have t h o u g h t w o u l d have

e s c a p e d d i d n t w h e r e a s others    from q u i t e a distance,             managed

to get out.          T h e y had m a n a g e d to s i m u l a t e this on seve ral

oc c a s i o n s w h e r e t h e y w o u l d o f f e r p e o p l e a small      financ ial

in c e n t i v e a n d e v e n in t h o s e c i r c u m s t a n c e s t h e y had bee n

able to c l o g up exits.              T h e i r feel ing was that h o w e v e r m u c h

t r a i n i n g one ga v e p e o p l e in the en d t h e y w o u l d ru n from a

life t h r e a t e n i n g s i t u a t i o n and t h e r e f o r e one ha d to d e s i g n

exits etc in o r d e r to a l l o w for that.                    She also said that

th e y ha d n o t i c e d an e n o r m o u s a m ou n t of d a m a g e to the

a i r c r a f t w h i c h t h e y u s e d for th e i r si m u l a t i o n s and t h e y had

had                    ° v a r i o u s             a r t icles of       fur ni tu re etc

an d the force e x e r t e d b y p e o p l e was v e r y m u c h h i g h e r tha n

a n y b o d y antici pa te d.      A p p a r e n t l y t here is a v i d e o of t he ir

t ests an d she sa i d that she w o u l d send th at to me.                            She




BACABF
also m e n t i o n e d that one of her c ol le ag ue s had don e some

w o r k on a l c o h o l i c b e h a v i o u r and re sp o n s e and she w o u l d have

a w o r d w i t h hi m to see w h e t h e r th ere was any w o r k ava il ab le

on the e f f e c t of alc oh ol and be haviour,                   not the ef fe c t of

d r u n k e n e s s and be haviour,       bu t si m pl y in g e s t i o n of m o d e r a t e

amo un ts of alcohol.             She also m e n t i o n e d that t he re was a

                               at the U n i v e r s i t y of S u r r e y w h o had done

some w o r k on e s c a p i n g from buildings.

It sounds to me as if this                  lady m i g h t have some v e r y

i n t e r e s t i n g i n f o r m a t i o n a v a i l a b l e w h i c h one c o u l d rel at e to

the s i t u a t i o n w i t h i n the en cl o s u r e s a ft er the life

t h r e a t e n i n g c r u s h was perceived.




BACABF
      '   U ? /l f   -   "i.VM,




                                           5th May          89

SLP/PAD


Assistant Chief Constable M. Jones,
West Midlands Police.



Dear A.C.C. Jones,


Ret SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 (As Amended)


On looking through my papers I see I have a letter from the
Administration & Legal Department addressed to Mr. Mackrell
regarding this incident, I enclose the same for your information.

I am not sure whether any of the interviews have actually taken
place, I certainly h a w ' t received any copy statements as yet.

It is only right that I should say that this matter was mentioned
to me and I felt that if the Local Authority had a statutory
duty regarding the licencing and continuing licencing of the
ground that they had to be in a position to satisfy themselves
regarding the position with regard to the ground.




Yours sincerely,




S. L. POPPER
H. M. CORONER
•**               ekt.L'f.                                                                                                hi1
                                                       *✓                                                                           ■/X
                                                                                                                  /                                                  /?:)i
                                                                               . ../v/VA?                         ",      Jit.-J- If"
                                                                                                                                   "(s .
                                                                                                                  r       '%

                                                    M e tro p o lita n D istrict


                  Roger Pensam, FCIS, M B IM , S o lic ito r                                                                A dm inistration and Legal D ep artm en t
                  Head o f D e p a rtm e nt
                                                                                                                            T o w n Hall
                                                                                                                            S heffield S1 2HH
                                      GP/262/DMB                                                                            T ele p h o n e      0742-26444       ,
                  O ur reference
                                                                                                                            Facsim ile           0742-735003
                                                                                                                            Telecom G old        7 6 :L M X 0 8 6
                  Y o u r reference
                                                                                                                            T elex               5 4 243 SHFLIB G
                                                                                                                                            or    265871 MONREF G (q u o te re f L M X 086)
                  Date                17th April,               1989



                   Mr. G. Mackrell,
                   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club,
                   Hillsborough,
                   Sheffield,
                   S6 1SW.

                   Dear Graham,

                    Safety of Sports Grounds A c t 1975 (As Amended)

                    I refer to your conversations with myself and other Officers which took
                    place on Sunday, 16th April, 1989.          I now write to confirm that the
                    terracing at the Leppings Lane end of the Football Ground must not be used
                    for the admission of spectators until such time as steps have been taken to
                    examine in detail the safety of that whole area.              The steps are in the
                    p2.po-i-Xii£ now sncl hcpeful-Ly luitrifir cj.cLiiiXCcici.ou ox ciiis issue can l>e
                    arrived at shortly.

                   I understand that the next football match is planned for Hillsborough on
                   29th April, 1989, and prior to that date a full inspection of the stadium
                   will be held.  I will make arrangements for this inspection as soon as
                   possible.

                    In addition to the usual annual inspection the Council will expect t o ’be
                    thoroughly briefed in connection with the proposed stewarding of the ground
                    at the next and subsequent matches.

                   Following discussions with H. M. Coroner I wish to arrange to interview
                   staff employed by the Club in connection with their duties relating to crowd
                   safety.  These interviews will relate to both the present and the proposed
                   crowd control measures.  Copies of the interview records will be passed onto
                   H. M. Coroner.

                    This               ssnrvss to    ou.t    existing pcsjLti.cn in iro-XtitiiLon
                    the stadium.  Obviously more detailed discussions will take place on a
                    regular basis from now on.

                    Yours sincerely,
                         I



                             !1£ f!


                    JH                                                                                                    '34690 - Mr. Bownes


                                                                                                                                             734690 - Mr. Bownes
      R 7503-"!                             For t e i e o h o n e e n a u i r ies o n t h i s m a t t e r n lea se ring                               'S T D C o d e 07 42!
                                                   8 March        91



    Our Ref:      SLP/LL
    Your Ref:     OMJ/FR


    Hr J Mervyn Jones
    Deputy Chief Constable
    c/o Furnival House
    Furnival Gate

X   Eyre Street
    SHEFFIELD
    SI 4QN

    Dear Mervyn
    Thank you for sending me a copy of Helen Muir's letter. I would
    be most grateful if you could simply reply and thank her for
    everything that she has done,
    Yours sincerely




    S I POPPER
    H M Coroner

t
    J MERVYN JONES MSc                                      HILLSBOROUGH I NQU IR Y T EAM
    DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE
    CORONER'S OFFICER                                      NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
    Furnival House                                         Fowler Street
    Furnival Gate                                          Birmingham B7 5DA
    Eyre Street
    Sheffield S1 4QN
    Telephone: 0 7 4 2 -7 3 1 5 4 6
    Fax        : 0 7 4 2 -7 3 1 4 8 3
                                                           Your Ref:
    CHESHIRE CONSTABULARY
    Police Headquarters
                                                           Our Ref:    JMJ/FR
    Chester CH1 2PP
    Telephone: 0 2 4 4 -3 5 0 0 0 0 Ext 2091
    Fax       : 0244                                       Date:       26th February, 1991




     CONFIDENTIAL




    Dr S L POPPER,
    H.M. Coroner,
    C/0 Town Hall,
    Sheffield,
    South Yorkshire.




    I have pleasure in enclosing a letter from Dr Helen MUIR
                              The contents are self-explanatory and do not seem to
I   progress us turtner.

    Is there any further work you would like to be done?




                                               Sheffield

         PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
21 February 1991



J Mervyn Jones MSc
Deputy Chief Constable
Coroner's Officer
Furnival House
Furnival Gate
Eyre Street
Sheffield SI 4QN




Dear Mervyn

Thank you for your letter of 18 January 1991.   Please accept my
apologies for not having replied before now. Having been absent
from work for several weeks before Christmas I came back to such
a backlog of work and exams to mark etc that I have taken some
time to catch up with my correspondence.

I have made some enquiries about the questions which you raised
regarding an expert on the effect that alcohol can have on
behaviour.


In the Unit here                 has done quite a lot of work in
the alcohol field.    (His work has included studies of drink
driving and alcohol and performance etc.) Unfortunately, he was
not able to come up with a name of someone who had studied the
effects of alcohol on groups or crowd behaviour in such a way
that it could be related to the Hillsborough situation.
Nevertheless, if the Coroner feels that it would be helpful to
talk to Andrew, he can be contacted at the above address and
telephone numbe r .

Please do not give another thought to the fact that the Coroner
has decided not to call me. I found our discussions interesting
and shall continue to be concerned about the behaviour and
decision making issues raised by the Hillsborough situation. As
an academic researcher I would still be interested to know
whether the gate from the left hand section onto the pitch was
opened more frequently and/or for longer than the gate from the
right hand section.
I trust that we shall be in contact at some point in the future,
if not in connection with Hillsborough, perhaps in connection
with the BHS or other road safety issues.

Please give my kind regards to

With best wish es .

Yours sincerely




Dr :_____
Director
                                     APPEUBIX                 A

                                                                                                    11




                           4 t h McGrath
                        Ia n T H * r n r a « - _ £ lo v e r
                       Pa u l D a v i d B
                       B a r r y Si d n e y B e n n e t t

                    I h a v e a l r e a d y re mi n d ed you, and g i v e n yo u
              f inding-s— s-9 — £— do no-fe— p r o p o se— to— r ep e at— t h e m .----

                      N o w I ex p l a i n e d to you, ladies and gen tl em en , that you
B
             w e r e no t a l l o w e d to add any riders to yo u r verdict.
             Indeed, I am not al lo w e d to do that either, b u t un der
             R u l e 43, if I think there is any m a t t e r w h i c h I should refer
             to s o m e o n e for their co ns i d e r a t i o n then I am e n t i t l e d to do
             that.         Wh a t I p r o p o s e to do is that I do think there are
             one or two m a t t e r s w h i c h I think c o u l d u s e f u l l y be thought
             a bou t by v a ri ou s bodies.                Indeed, they may a l r e a d y have
             tho ugh t a b o u t them.            I make no r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s w i t h regard
             to them b e c a u s e most of these are m a t t e r s of e x p e r t i s e as
             o p p o s e d to m e r e c o m m o n s e n s e and th ere may b e p r o b l e m s w h i c h
             I am not exp ert en ou gh to be able to d e a l with.                            However, I
             feel t h e r e a r e one or two matt ers w h i c h I do w a n t to dr a w to
             c e r t a i n persons' a t t e n ti on so they can ap pl y their mi n d to
             them.         W h i l s t I w ou l d not wi s h to add ri de r s or, indeed,
             m a k e re co mm en d a t io n s , I just pro po se to o u t l i n e the mai n
D             topics w h i c h ha v e oc cu rr ed to me as I h a v e be e n sitt ing
              listening, to ge th er w i t h you, to e v i d e n c e w h i c h we have
             heard.

                        T h e first m a t t e r that I think c o n c e r n s me is the
              p r o b l e m w h i c h I think was ill ust ra te d by the fact that if
              you h a v e pe o pl e lo ok ing in one d i r e c t i o n p a r t i c u l a r l y
              inte ntl y to w a t c h an event, as indeed o n e w o u l d get at a
              fo ot ba l l m a t c h or, indeed, at o t h e r m a j o r ^ e v e n t s , it may
              pr ove ve ry d i f f i c u l t to turn them round, if I can use that
              term, so that they use escape ro u t e s w h i c h are at the bac k
              or at the sides.                 Th a t is the first thing.

                           T h e se c o nd thing is that I know, b e c a u s e w e mad e
                  inquiries, that a lot of work has be e n d o n e in c o n n e c t i o n
                  w i t h a i r c r a f t di sasters, p a rt ic u l a r l y a r i s i n g out of the
                  M a n c h e s t e r air disaster, on pe op le e s c a p i n g from ae rop lan es
                  in stress s i t u a t io n s and what h a p p e n s w i t h r e g a r d to ga tes
                  and w h e n they m o v e forward and so on.                   A g r e a t de al of work
                  has b e e n d o n e by Dr. H a n n a h M u i r and o t h e r s at their
                  r e s e a r c h esta bl is hm en t.

                            I t hi nk it w o u l d be be ne f i c i a l if on e c o u l d b r i n g
                  toge the r i n f o r m a t i o n from d i f fe re nt sou rc es w h i c h may have
                  a p p l i c a t i o n s in o t h e r fields and so I in te nd to w r i t e to the
                  a p p r o p r i a t e authorities, for example, the Fi re S e r v i c e and,
                  indeed, Dr. Muir and see whe th er or not t h e r e isn t some
                  scope w h e r e b y i n f o r m a t i on can be po o l e d and perhaps
                  i m p r o v e m e n t s m a d e w i t h regard to f u t u r e safety.

 H




L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                                              12




                     Th e se c on d thing that co nc er ns me is the Safety
            Ce rt if ic at e.       I am, of course, aw ar e that there is a new
            one in force, and we h av e not been c o n c e r n e d w i t h that,
            but one of the fac to rs w h i c h we all b e c a m e a w a r e of was
            not only that there w e r e p r ob le ms on the te rr ac es but that
            there w e r e p r o b l e m s w i t h i n the tur ns ti le areas, and it
            seems to m e that some a d d i t i o n a l thought m a y b e is re qu ir ed
            to see w h e t h e r there is not some way of m o r e ef f e c t i v e l y
            c o n t r o l l i n g ingress, b e c a u s e at the mome nt, of course,
B           there is no sy s t e m of counting, as far as I un der sta nd,
            into the t u r n s t i l e area, so one is in fact left w i t h
            exa ct ly the same p o s i t i o n as one was before, na m e l y tha
            you h a v e to e s t i m a t e the nu mb e r s    w i t h i n that ar e a by eye.

                      W h e t h e r that is a si t ua ti on w h i c h can be o v e r c o m e or
             not I do no t know, but I do intend to w r i t e b o t h to the
             L oc al A ut ho ri ty , as the en f o r ci ng au tho rit y, and indeed
 C           also to the Club, to ask them to ap ply their m i n d s to that
             part of the Ground. We ha ve tended to t hi nk of simply the
             terra ces an d the pens but I think one has to go a little
             fu rt he r and think about the area without.                 T h e r e may be no
             solution, I d o n ' t know, but I feel that it is a mat ter
             w h i c h I w o u l d like to think I had d ra wn to so me b o d y s
             attention.
 D                      W i t h r e g a r d to the Safety Ce rt if ica te, I am of cou rse
              a wa re that L o r d J u s t i c e T a y l o r spent a gr ea t de a l of time,
              in fact m u c h mo r e time, w i t h re g a r d to r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s
              than I hav e done, and he did ma k e r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s wit h
              re ga rd to in s pe c t or a t e s, but it seems to me, and I intend
              to w r i t e to the H o m e S e c r e t a r y on this, that w i t h a ma tt er
              s uch as sa fe ty in sports gro und s it m i g h t p e r h a p s be w o r t h
              loo kin g at not simply an i n s p e c t o r a t e but p o s s i b l y an
              ho mo ge no us , natio na l, licensing, app ra is al , i ns pe ct in g
              o r g a n i s a t i o n or service, b e c a u s e at the mome nt, of course,
               the Sa fe ty C e r t i f i c a t e s are issued by lo cal au th or iti es,
               there ar e m a n y of them, and each one of them has a
              r e l a t i v e l y small n u m b e r of sports grounds.         H o w e v e r har d
               the pe o p l e w i t h i n the a u t h o r i t i e s may try and how ev er
               compet ent , their e x p e r i e n c e will be l im it ed and I wo uld
               like some tho ug ht to be g ive n to w h e t h e r it w o u l d not be
               b et t e r in the i n t e r e s t s of safety if a bo dy of e x p er ti se
               c o u l d be b u i l t up w h i c h (a) ap pl ie s mo r e uniform^ ^
               standards, and (b) w o u l d be in a m u c h b e t t e r p o s i t i o n to
               assess r i s k and so on at any p a r t i c u l a r stadium, so my
               i n t e n t i o n is to w r i t e to the Home S e c r e t a r y and ask him to
               c o n s i d e r that.

                          In a d d i t i o n such a body w o u l d ha v e - and this is a
                f u r t h e r po in t w h i c h I w i s h to d r a w to his a t t e n t i o n - or
                m a y b e some o th er body, the f a ci li ty for e n s u r i n g that
                there is b o t h p r o p e r tra in in g and the e s t a b l i s h m e n t ot^
                c o n t i n u i t y of i n f o r m a t i o n from one p e r s o n to another, in
                or de r to try and e n s u r e that p r a c t i c e w h i c h is goo d and

     HI




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
sound is p a s s e d on and c o n t i n u e s to be a p p l i e d and be
d e ve lo pe d, but even if such a body was not set up, of
course, w i t h i n ea c h o r g a n i s a t i o n that may be i n v o l v e d in
sta gi ng m a j o r ev en ts w h e r e loads of peo pl e c o m e to ge the r
great ef f o r t should, I am sure, be put into b o t h tra in in g
and the n e e d for c o n t i n u i t y of some sort or another.

          T h e r e is a n o t h e r as pe ct w h i c h I wa n t to w r i t e on - it
all h a p p e n s to be the Home S e c r et ar y b e c a u s e it h a p p e n s to
be his de p a r t m e n t , i n c l u d i n g the first point.            On e has to
ask o n e s e l f the q u e s t i o n as to w h e t h e r or no t the
i n v o l v e m e n t of the P o l i c e in the a c t i v i t i e s w i t h i n the^
S ta di um is a p r o p e r use of b o t h their training, e x p e r t i s e
and ab ili tie s, and I w o u l d like to sug ge st to the Home
Se c r e t a r y that this is s o me thi ng w h i c h needs, in my view,
a d d r e s s i n g as a m a t t e r of r e l a t i v e urgency, to m a k e some
de c i s i o n s as to who, in fact, on the saf ety side sho uld
hav e (a) the u l t i m a t e authority, (b) the e x p e r t i s e and (c)
the re sp o n s i b i l i t y .

          It is a m a t t e r of c o n s i d e r a b l e re gr et to me to say
that w h i l s t w e w e r e sit ti ng d u r i n g these In que sts , and
w i t h o u t me m a k i n g any effort to kee p a b r e a s t of events, I
read in the p a p e r of one f o ot ba ll d i s a s t e r in S o u t h
Africa, w h e r e about 40 pe o p l e di e d as a r e s u l t of c r u s h
injuries.         T h e r e w e r e at least two ot her n o n f o o t b a l l
si tua ti on s that I remember, one was ab ro a d w h e r e n u m b e r s
of p e o p l e w e r e i n j u r e d and killed, and a l t h o u g h in the
event no bo d y was ser io us ly hurt, just last S a t u r d a y in the
town in w h i c h I live there was a cr us h i n g i n c i d e n t at a
f oo tba ll match.           So a l t h o u g h it w o u l d be n i c e for me to
say we ha v e had all this inquiry, we have d i s c u s s e d it and
e ve ry th in g else, it wi l l ne ve r ha p p e n again, u n l e s s there
 is co ns i d e r a b l e , c o n t i n u o u s v i g i l a n c e and p e r h a p s even a
ch a n g e of a t t i t u d e w i t h re g a r d to match es, I fear it wi l l
 hap pe n a ga in and it w i l l be, of co ur s e --- well, yo u know
 ho w awful it has been on c e but to ha v e it a g a i n w o u l d be
 just that m u c h worse.               Ho w you solve it - the only safe
 stadium, in my view, is an empty one.                             As soon as you
 b ri ng a s u b s t a n t i a l n u m b e r of p e o p l e to ge t h e r you run
 risks, and w h e t h e r it is p o s s i b l e to have t e r r a c e s w h e r e
 pe op le s ta nd w i t h o u t risk I hav e doubts.                  So I int end
 a gai n to d r a w these thoughts to the Home S e c r e t a r y and see
 what, if an yt hi ng , he can or wi s h e s to do.

           Finally, and I am c h e at in g a little bi t b e c a u s e this
 is not a c t u a l l y a sa fety matter, I do in t e n d to w r i t e to
 the Home S e c r e t a r y and ask him to s e r i o u s l y ap pl y his mi nd
 to the i n t e r - r e l a t i o n s h i p b e t w e e n corone rs' in qu e s t s and
 p u b l i c i n q u i r i e s in m a j o r d i s a s t e r s of this type, b e c a u s e
 I think s o m e b o dy has got to g ra sp the n e t t l e and sort out
 the situation, w h i c h I do not think is e n t i r e l y
 satisfactory.
  /                                                                                                     1A




                   T h a t is the b r o a d o u t l i n e of the m a t t e r s w h i c h o c c u r to
              me  at the mo ment.              If s o m e t h i n g els e w e r e to co m e to m e at
              some time in the fu tu re and I thou ght it right, then of
              course      I can al w a y s write.               Indeed,      a n y b o d y ca n w r i t e to
              the H o m e   S e c r e t a r y if they wish.

             -------1 wa n t -fee— turn— to you?— ladiea and g e n t l e m e n . — I w a n t L
              to say first of all that y ou hav e had an in fi ni te ly har de r
              task than I had imagined.           I kn e w it was go ing to be pre tt y
             shard for you but in fact it has be en harder.                        I want to
                lank y o u for your pe rs ev eran ce, for y o u r interest, for your
              abstention, for yo ur c o u r a g e in r e a c h i n g d e c i s i o n s and
              a n n o u n c i n g them. I admire you.        W h a t m o r e can I say?
               thaivk you.

                             is wi th i n my p o w e r to e x cu se y o u from jury service
               in C o r o n e r s ' courts.     It is not in my p o w e r to excus e you
               from oth<        courts, but as far as I am c on ce rn ed , su bjec t to
               a p r o v i s o <hich I will m e n t i o n in a mo ment , I intend to
               ex cu se y o u Irom C o r o n a l jury se rv i c e for the          rest of your
               lives.         I think    y ou have     do  ne   your bit.    T h e   only pr ov is o I
               h a v e is that          any of you do not w i s h me to do that, p l ea se
               w r i t e to me a t \ h e M e d i c o - L e g a l Centre, b e c a u s e I w o u l d not
               wa nt to excus e ytou if it wa sn ' t s o m e t h i n g y o u wanted, but if
 D             I do not he a r t o \ o u I wil l w r i t e a lette r to you in due
               course, or at l e a s \ my Jury O f f i c e r wi l l wr ite y o u a let te r
               to c o n f i r m that so jv>u h a v e got it.

                          I wan t to remind >you that right at the op en i n g on the
                18th of April, 1990, wften you first c a m e together, I dr e w
                your a t t e n t i o n to the fafct that this w o u l d be stressful,
                that things m ig ht get to \ o u .             If you r e m e m b e r I remi nded
                y ou that one of the good tHings was you h a d y o u r s e l v e s ^ a n d
                that yo u c o u l d su pp or t one another.              I did at that po int
                a l l u d e to the p o s s i b i l i t y that if e x t e r n a l h e l p was n e e d e d
                b e c a u s e y ou had prob le ms yoursNelves w i t h c o p i n g w i t h the
                situation, then one should seel<\it.                     I wan t to repea t that
                but I want to add one or two a d d i t i o n a l points.                   Wh e n we
                ha v e f i ni sh ed today you will, of dourse, be s p l it ti ng up and
                in that se nse y ou will lose the f e l l o w s h i p of the elev en ot
                you w h i c h y ou h a v e bu ilt up ove r s e ^ r a l months.

                          I do not wan t to suggest for a m i W i t e that you are
                going to nee d any c o u n s e l l i n g or any helsx> or anyt hi ng of the
                sort, but you may do and there wo ul d be rto shame if you did.
                If y ou do, re m e m b e r that your GP       is the frrst port of call.
                You may not like him, don't go to him, b u t N ^ e should be in a
                p o s i t i o n to h e l p you.

                           In addit ion, I k n o w b e c a u s e  I h a v e h e a r d Sro m them,
                 that the F a mi ly and C o m m u n i t y Se r v i c e s D e p a r t m e n t in
                 Sheffiel d, that is the social wo r k e r s if y ou like* at
                 R e d v e r s House, Un ion Street, Sh effi eld, are bot h ava il ab le
                 3 nd,             — anxious to ha l p you w i t h any porconat-




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                             *                                         #
            RADIAL FENCE BETWEEN
                  PENS 2 & 3




    PITCH




                                   Fig. 1 - Reconstruction of Barrier 124A




\
        DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR1-7A & PR1-8A




                                                       •*t


                                                             PEN 3




PEN 2




                       HEADCOUNT  -    1419
                     PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03




                                                                       FIG           1
                                                                            Riflgn QH
                                                                     RLSD SET PR178A/PP1131
     DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPH MP1A-14
SHOWING RAISED 1ST BARRIER & PEN DIVIDING FENCES


             OCCUPANTS OF PEN 3 SHOWN




                                    PEN 3

   PEN

                            ->v
                                            PEN 4




              HEADCOUNT       678

             PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 14.52




                                                      FIG            2
                                                           Bigpna&
                                                    BLSD SHT MPU4E/FP1131
    DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPH MP1A-14
SHOWING RAISED 1ST BARRIER & PEN DIVIDING FENCES


                OCCUPANTS OF PEN 4 SHOWN
 (NB   ESTIMATED CROWD - 84 OCCUPANTS - SHOWN HATCHED)




                 HEADCOUNT   -   821

               PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 14.52




                                                           FIG           3
                                                                mam or
                                                         HLSD SET MP114F/PP1131
Tabic 1


TOTAL NUMBER OF PEOPLE COUNTED THROUGH TURNSTILES A to G AT DIFFERENT TIMES

                             TURNSTILE

   TIME    A+B      C        D      E       F     G    D+E    F+G   TOTAL
    P*

   1:00      3     10      5       7        9     8     12     17     42
   1:05     19     21     24      23       16    21     47     37    124
   1:10     40     41     39      43       28    40     82     68    231
   1:15     64     54     56      59       35    44    115     79    312
   1:20     84     74     76      80       47    53    156    100    414
   1:25    114     92     98      94       56    60    192    116    514
   1:30    146    114    131     111       74    85    242    159    661
   1:35    178    149    151     113       93   102    264    195    786
   1:40    216    176    185     131      125   124    316    249    957
   1:45    271    199    217     165      150   141    382    291   1143
   1:50    363    241    278     211      189   182    489    371   1464
   1:55    448    280    336     270      229   214    606    443   1777
   2:00    535    341    390     312      281   262    702    543   2121
   2:05    603    399    439     348      331   303    787    634   2423
   2:10    690    447    494     399      398   377    893    775   2805
   2:15    784    490    546     448      463   444    994    907   3175
   2:20    883    537    611     496      532   509   1107   1041   3568
   2:25    989    587    676     548      589   559   1224   1148   3948
   2:30   1097    658    736     603      634   618   1339   1252   4346
   2:35   1206    730    790     663      691   676   1453   1367   4756
   2:40   1309    796    847     709      758   720   1556   1478   5139
   2:45   1415    857    892     741      820   770   1633   1590   5495
   2:50   1522    933    946     791      873   803   1737   1676   5868
   2:55   1649   1000   1015     832      932   840   1847   1772   6268
   3:00   1790   1096   1098     902     1005   904   2000   1909   6795
   3:05   1911   1160   1163     951     1066   940   2114   2006   7191
   3:10   1930   1168   1170     960     1071   948   2130   2019   7247


Ref SEL1 [300,5]hdtabl.tab
Table 2

NUMBER OF PEOPLE COUNTED THROUGH TURNSTILES IN EACH 5 MINUTE INTERVAL

                                  TURNSTILE

     TIME            A+B     C    D      E      F      G    D+E    F+G    •TAL
      P®

 12:55    _
              1:00      3    10    5      7      9      8     12     17    42
  1:00    _
              1:05     16    11   19     16      7     13     35     20    82
  1:05    _
              1:10     21    20   15     20     12     19     35     31   107
  1:10    _   1:15     24    13   17     16      7      4     33     11    81
  1:15    .   1:20     20    20   20     21     12      9     41     21   102
  1:20    _
              1:25     30    18   22     14      9      7     36     16   100
  1:25    _   1:30     32    22   33     17     18     25     50     43   147
  1:30    _   1:35     32    35   20      2     19     17     22     36   125
  1:35    .   1:40     38    27   34     18     32     22     52     54   171
  1:40    _   1:45     55    23   32     34     25     17     66     42   186
  1:45    -   1:50     92    42   61     46     39     41    107     80   321
  1:50    .   1:55     85    39   58     59     40     32    117     72   313
  1:55    -   2:00     87    61   54     42     52     48     96    100   344
  2:00    -   2:05     68    58   49     36     50     41     85     91   302
  2:05    .   2:10     87    48   55     51     67     74    106    141   382
  2:10    .   2:15     94    43   52     49     65     67    101    132   370
  2:15    .   2:20     99    47   65     48     69     65    113    134   393
  2:20    -   2:25    106    50   65     52     57     50    117    107   380
  2:25    -   2:30    108    71   60     55     45     59    115    104   398
  2:30    -   2:35    109    72   54     60     57     58    114    115   410
  2:35    -   2:40    103    66   57     46     67     44    103    111   383
  2:40    -   2:45    106    61   45     32     62     50     77    112   356
  2:45    -   2:50    107    76   54     50     53     33    104     86   373
  2:50    -   2:55    127    67   69     41     59     37    110     96   400
  2:55    -   3:00    141    96   83     70     73     64    153    137   527
  3:00    -   3:05    121    64   65     49     61     36    114     97   396
  3:05    -   3:10     19     8    7      9      5      8     16     13    56

Ref SEL1 [300,5]hdtab2.tab
m




    DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR1-7A & PR1-8A
               OCCUPANTS OF PEN 2 DELETED




                  HEADCOUNT   -   1074
                 PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03




                                                         FIG            4
                                                             based ok
                                                       KLSD SHT PR17BB/PPU31



9
                  DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR1-7A & PR1-8A
                                   SUPERIMPOSED ON
      DIGITISED DRAWING OF PHOTOGRAPHS PR10A-2 TO PR10A-5, SCALED ETC TO MATCH

                                             PEN 3
                                 OCCUPANTS OF ROW 3 ONLY SHOWN
                    (NB   ESTIMATED CROWD - 60 OCCUPANTS - SHOWN HATCHED)
                                          hbi arma of m -T i/m -a i




                                   - a r r - v7-                                         PEN 4

                                                                                         ••"i
                                                                      PEN 3
          —   1__
                      -r"                                                     —   ~i ~



r~~
      PEN 2




                                     HEADCOUNT           -       382

                                  PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN 15.03




                                                                                           FIG               7
                                                                                                ai«TCT> ok
                                                                                         BL3D ser m?6D/miai
      o                                               %                                                       %
      o
             C300.10K rn st Hr t .pit

      o
      o



                                                                        Turnstile C

      o                                                                      forc< on pe<lai -   1J56 x foiice on >ing ‘
      CD
      CNI
t/l
c                                                                                                                                    -
                                                                                                                                     t
-S o
r«    CD
<y
                                                                                                                                                                T u rn s tile IB

o> O
o  8
O* f -

                                                                  X   i*
      o
      0
      01

      o
      C
      oD
       u

0> o                                                                                                                        fo rce   On   p e d a l!    «   Q..S6; x   force| on      ‘wiivcj*
2 S




      8
                                        *3^                                                                        ’ *
:n o
cr o


      O
      o
      ro




      O
      O


                                              _L                                i.                                                                                                       _L
                      ion.                     500.   600.    700.    800.       900.    1000.   1100.    1200.    1300.   1400.     1500.             1600.     1700.        1800.        1900.   2
                                                             force applied to a Ving' of the turnstile (Newtons))
            FIG.       ft        RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE FORCE REQUIRED ON THE RELEASE                                                                                                                ’
                                                                                                                                                                                                       V"
                                 PEDAL OF A TURNSTILE AND THE FORCE APPLIED TO A 'WING'
                                                                       H                                                                   H
             G raph Kef C30Q.33H<LYELD4.PLT


                                                                  0UT3DC PWCTER UEASUREp Al UID-SPAN 00.425 mm
                                                                  fNBlOe DIMtTER MEASW^D'AT MtO-SPMJ                           52L073 mm



                                                                                                                                                                    T-
                            T '



                                                                                                                                                                                           4
                          /:                                                                                                                                                               i
                                                                                                                                  APPUED LOAD                                              I
                                                                                                                                                                                        - 4 -
                                                                                                                                                                                           l
                                                                                                                                      -    I     "                  T|>8£ UNDER TEST      ii
                                                                                                                                                                     4 POWTBEMOINGl
                                                                                                                                          ton-

     o CT*
                          BEGtNtttftG: OF: m o   3.3 \W                                       — 3"                        yf
     oI
        cd
                                                                                                                                          2m "       i-



                 t
                                                                                                                                  APPUED LOAD
                     O


                     <5
                     &
                                        ^SRADtEMT! O f; GSftPM M El^STIC 8EG10K -                        1.^59 JsN/mm



                     LJ




                                                          ■ >.... i — a.. . 1 , I     i   i     i    i           i   ii    i       ■J     i i    i 1       1 1 1   1 1     1   1   *   ■ *       ‘ 1   > .
         0.                       10.               20 .                        30.                        40.                  50.                  60.             70.                   80.               9t
                                                                                                            DISPLACEMENT (mm)


                               Fiq A 1.5         LOAD DEFLECTION CURVE OF 2nd WROUGHT IRON TUBE FROM BARRIER N o .129
*h
u)
           j.   Graph Ket □M U H L ttE L D IP l.T

                                                              OUTSIDt PWCTER UEASUREp AT IflD-SPAN          00.128 mm
                                                              INSIDE DtfUfJER MEASURED ■AT MIDrSPM         31.605 mm




                                                                                                                                               i-   —   ■




                                                                                                                APPUED LOAD


                                                                                                                     t ....   TliBE UNDER TEST *4
                                                                                                                                 4 POINT BENDING!
                              afcUW^WG- <^-YT&iJ 10.6 kN
                                                                              c— 3— =— rf-s— =— =—       — rf— r~
     I'j
     *r
     oj                                                                                  A
           to                                                                                                       2m
                          v.
                          t:
                         u'i




                         uj

                                                                                                            i   APPUED LOAD




                                            CBWJEprr: O f: GRAPH JN , ELASTIC REGION -   U t 8 kN/m m




                                                                                             40.             50.
                                                                                              DISPLACEMENT (mm)


                                    iq A 1 .4       LOAD DEFLECTION CURVE OF 1st WROUGHT IRON TUBE FROM BARRIER N o .129
