                                  SrvMTVl



HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




    INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

 VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

           STADIUM DISASTER

        ON THE I5TH APRIL, 1989




                Before

S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, B S , MRCGP

        (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                  At

            The Town Hall,
              Sheffield.

                  On

           18th March, 1991




      TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
     Official Shorthand Writers,
 55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                     INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




DR. SLATER Called

     By THE CORONER
     Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN

TREVOR BICHARD Recalled

     Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN
     Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL
     Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

PETER EDWARD SMITH

     Statement read by THE CORONER

PATRICIA ANN OWENS

     Statement read by THE CORONER

PROCEDURAL MATTERS
           SEVENTY SECOND DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

               M O N D A Y , 18th MARCH 1991


       THE CORONER:  Good morning.      Good morning, Mr. Fraser,
 and welcome.  Pleased to see you.

      MR. FRASER:  Morning sir.  Sir, Mr. King sends
his regards.  He is otherwise engaged but in the building
and therefore I appear on behalf of the families this
morning with your leave.

      THE CORONER:   Thank you.

      MR. SHORT:  Sir, it is Michael Short standing in
for Stuart Catchpole.

      THE CORONER:   Mr. Coughlin, you I think are looking
after Mr. Isaacs.

      MR. COUGHLIN: Indeed sir, well not Mr. Isaacs,
Mr. Duckenfield sir.

       THE CORONER:  What I intend to do, ladies and
gentlemen, I am going to listen to Dr. Slater at this
stage.   I know we are in the middle of Mr. Bichard's
evidence but we have had 48 hours break so another
two minutes is not going to make very much difference
and it means Dr. Slater can get back to his work in
the hospital.


                     DR. SLATER Called

                     By THE COR O N E R :

Dr. Slater, you will recollect that you already took the
oath quite a few months ago but I think it carries over.

      I have merely asked you to come to cross two 't's'
and dot one '± ' I think would be about right.

      If I can ask you to turn to the case of Mr. Joynes,
Nicholas Joynes, where you did the post-mortem and where
in the usual way - in fact Mr. Fraser is here which is
most convenient — on the 2nd of May you took us through
your post-mortem report, but when I was reading it through
1 noticed that for some reason we don't seem to have
actually expressed in words, at least it is not recorded,
w h^t   know is the short cause of death, so could you
tell me what the short cause of death is in the case
of Nicholas Joynes? - A. Yes sir, the short cause of
death in Nicholas Joynes was stated as simply 1 (a)
traumatic asphyxia.
                                                                   2


                                          DR. SLATER




           THE CORONER: Thank you very much indeed.
     Mr. Fraser, any questions on that?

           MR. FRASER:    No thank you sir.

Q*         THE CORONER:  I take it nobody else has any
     questions on that, and I found a similar problem, if I
     can put it like that, with Mr. McCarthy.  This was a
     young man who we did also on the 2nd of May,
     John Daniel McCarthy.  Again you took us fully through
     the relevant parts of the post-mortem but for some
     reason we had not recorded the short cause of death.
     Can you just tell me what it is in that case? - A. Sir,
     the recorded death on Joseph Daniel McCarthy was 1(a)
     traumatic asphyxia and under (2) traumatic subdural
     haemorrhage.

Q. Yes, thank you.  I remember, in fact I have got in front
   of me you of course explained all that to us at the time.
   - A. Yes.

           THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser, any questions on that?

           MR. FRASER:    No thank you.

Q*          THE CORONER:  Then the third point is one that
     was drawn to my attention I think by Mr. and Mrs. Hammond
     who you may remember you, together with other pathologists,
     very kindlyspent some time privately with those families
     who wished to talk to you and I think there was a point
     which apparently they raised, or they understood you
     to say that you were a little bit unsure about a fracture
     and how it might have been caused and that you would
     come back and give them any further information when you
     had done some more research, or words to that effect.
     That is their understanding in their letter to me.
     Can you help me on that at all? - A. Yes, I reassessed
     my evidence on this sir in view of the query from the
     relatives.   The marks which may have been significant in
     interpretation of the injuries present were firstly two
     rather straight scratches on the face and also more
     significantly a solitary fracture to the right rib and
     this had been associated with surrounding bruising and
     in fact tearing to the lung.   The position of the rib
     fracture is in quite a protected area just beneath the
     right collar bone.   I note that the height of Philip
     was recorded as 163 cms. and therefore it is difficult
     to be certain because clearly the height of the ground
     was not actually measured as we don't normally do it,
     but I would estimate that the height was approximately
     between 4' and 4'3".   That is the height of the fracture
     above the ground.
                                    DR. SLATER




      Obviously with the incident at Hillsborough it
is really impossible to say the actual causation of
that.  It is clearly indicative of blunt pressure to that
area.  It is somewhat protected and therefore I would be
thinking possibly more of a focal rather than a distributed
blunt pressure but the specific query from the relatives
was with regard to whether or not this could have been
caused for example from one of the barriers and I just
think I have to be honest sir and say it is impossible
to say yes or no to this.   It is possible but I have got
no definite proof of this and likewise it could be another
cause sir.

So "focal blunt pressure" but the precise source of
that is what you are unable to help us further on? - A.
Sir, there is no evidence to point to the actual cause
of the pressure sir, no.

      THE CORONER: Mr. Fraser, did you see this letter
from Mr. Hammond? Would you like to have a look at it?

      MR. FRASER:  Sir, I am aware of its contents.
Would you just bear with me for a moment sir because
Mr. Hammond is in Court and perhaps I could have a quick
word with him?

       THE CORONER:   Yes.

      MR. FRASER:  No sir, the family appreciate the
point and thank you, Dr. Slater.

       THE CORONER:   Anybody else?     Anything of Dr. Slater?
That    is all I want from you today.    Thank you very much.

      MRS. M c B R I E N : Sir, is it possible to ask general
questions of Dr. Slater?

      THE CORONER:  Well, Mrs. McBrien, we have had
months of general questions.  What is the question you
want to ask?

      MRS. McBRIEN: When you said  last week that
Dr. Slater was being called I just thought that we would
have an opportunity to go into various things.

       THE CORONER:  Well, Mrs. McBrien, I really don't
think.   Dr. Slater has given evidence on ten occasions,
well how many post-mortems did you do, I can't remember,
but quite a lot? - A. A lot sir, yes.

       THE CORONER: He then came and gave lengthy
evidence on causes of death on the 4th of May in general
terms.
                                                               4

                                        DR. SLATER       '




         Indicate to me what it is you want to ask and
   I will tell you whether it is appropriate to ask him?

         MRS. M c B R I E N : Well I had a number of queries
   which I didn't ask ....

         THE CORONER:  Mrs. McBrien, if you can't indicate
   what it is then I cannot give you a ruling as to whether
   or not I am going to allow it.

         MRS. McBRIEN:  It was connected with the blueness
   of the skin and how that can be caused in a number of
   ways.  if you wear tight shoes your skin becomes blue.
   If you are in low temperatures your skin becomes blue.
   I was wondering what was the chance of recovering after
   you have been in a tight situation.   They were just
   general queries of that nature.

         THE CORONER:  Well Dr. Slater has dealt with all
   that at length.  That was the reason, you will remember
   he came on the 4th, Dr. Gumpert and Dr. Slater came and
   told us all about this at great length.

         Mrs. McBrien, I will give you ten minutes to ask
   general questions of this nature and insofar as you are
   able to deal with them Dr. Slater do so, and insofar as
   you are not don't.  Right, Mrs. McBrien.

         MRS. McBRIEN:  I am sorry I did not ask questions
   at the preliminary Inquest, I was at the time too upset.

         THE CORONER:  Mrs. McBrien, I have said how much
   time I am giving you so don't spend it in explanations.


                Cross-Examined by MRS. M c B R I E N :

Q. Dr. Slater, is it possible after people have been in a
   tight situation and let us say their fingertips became
   blue or their toes became blue, that they could quite
   easily recover if they were put into an area where there
   was plenty of room? - A. I don't think, I think that is
   a virtually impossible question to answer, to be honest.

        With regard to the significance of blueness, yes,
  we go by distribution.  The blueness in the face and
  the lips is probably the most important factor.  The
  more peripheral signs of blueness in the hands and feet
  is less important in say for example giving the cause
  of death.  It is really the blueness in the face and
  the distribution and in the type of asphyxia which
  normally happened the traumatic asphyxia due to pressure
  on the chest, here the blueness in the face which was
  the only significant thing.
                                                               5


                                    DR. SLATER '.




         Yes, I accept there are other forms of blueness
   given appropriate circumstances and situations but it
   is the blueness in the face and lips and tongue which
   is the most important.

        In terms of recovery this is very very difficult.
  If somebody has been asphyxiated death can occur
  virtually instantaneously in some people and longer
  in other individuals, so it is very difficult to give
  general responses to that question.

Q. Yes, it does depend on the severity of the crushing
   then, doesn't it?  I mean some people could have been in
   a crushing situation and it does not necessarily mean
   they would die as a result of it? - A. That is absolutely
   right, yes.




                    Q. Also,   if people are subjected
                                                DR. SLATER


 Also, if people are subjected to shock, that can have an
 effect on the circulation too, can't it? - A. I am sorry,
 there is background noise and I can't actually hear you
 very well.

When people are subjected to shock the colour of people
changes, doesn't it?    That is one of the reactions to
shock? - A. Yes.    You are asking rather clinical
questions which are not really my remit.    Shock I do not
normally deal with.    I deal with it as a specific cause
of death but not colour changes.    In a living person if
they become shocked, I am talking purely as a general
practitioner, one becomes pale, for example, not blue.

I was thinking a large part of it was due to shock, the
symptoms they showed.   They would definitely have a
shock at what was happening in those pens, wouldn't they?
- A. No, I think you are asking virtually impossible
questions here.   I really can t answer that.   In terms
of pathologists using the word "shock", we usually refer
to shock in terms of shock and haemorrhage from bleeding.
You are talking here about emotive responses of
individuals to circumstances which wouldn't actually be
taken into account by pathologists giving a cause of
death.

Would the temperature of the body become lower if they
were subject to shock?   Is that one of the factors that
takes place? - A. There again you are talking about
clinical problems, which isn't really my area of remit.
In terms of the causation of death we just don't consider
those areas.   It isn't significant to a pathologist.

Would you say the people who had been in those pens would
need to be put into quite a warm place?    That would help
them?   If they were put on cold concrete, for instance,
that would be very harmful after what they had been
subjected to, wouldn't it? - A. Again that is a virtually
impossible question because when somebody has been
subjected to trauma the important thing is the emergency
resuscitation.    Where they are put does not really
matter two hoots.    It is the person there trying to do
the resuscitation that matters.

But the temperature of the body would be important,
wouldn't it? - A. When one has considered all other
aspects like respiration, heart, airways.   It is the
emergency resuscitation that matters in the first
instance, and if it is on a concrete surface rather than
a warm surface that does not matter so long as somebody
is there doing the work.

Now in the case of someone being sick, they could only be
sick when they were alive, of course, couldn't they? -A.
                                                  DR. SLATER


 No, I am afraid not.   If somebody has passed away and
 the body is moved or there is then pressure on the tummy
 the contents could be regurgitated.

After they had died? - A. Yes.

That was a query I was particularly interested in because
I thought in the case of John that the cause of death
could b e . ..

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, most of your questions
are totally irrelevant and unanswerable, but we are not
getting into speeches.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:    All right, I will leave it at that.
Thank you.

     THE CORONER:   Nobody else wants to ask anything.
Dr. Slater, thank you, and thank you for your time.    We
now turn back to Mr. Bichard.

                TREVOR BICHARD Recalled

     THE CORONER:    Mrs. McBrien,   it is your turn.

            Cross-Examined by MRS. MCBRIEN:

Officer, you were the video operator in the Control Room
that day, weren't you? - A. Yes.

So you were concerned with cameras and pictures? - A.
That is correct.

What you see on a picture or a screen firstly depends on
how good your eyesight is, doesn't it? - A. Yes.

Would you say your eyesight was very good? - A. Yes.

Now pictures or photographs can mean different things to
different people? - A. Yes.

If you were shown a photograph and I was shown a
photograph I could see different things on it to what you
may pick out? - A. That's true.   Different
interpretation of what people see, yes.

It would depend on what you were looking for? - A. Yes.

Now you were not looking for over crowding in the pens,
were you? - A. No.

Why was that?   Had you been given no instructions or why
weren't you to do that? - A. It is not a question of not
                                                 T. BICHARD


 to do that, it is that other things were being done at
 the time.

. What were you looking for on the screens? - A. The things
  that were taking place outside on Leppings Lane and
  eventually when things did move inside obviously there
  were pictures being taken then.

 Yes, when you move your cameras around what are you
 specifically looking for?   Why do you have those
 pictures there in the Control Room?   What is the purpose
 of them? - A. It is additional eyes for the people in
 command, to give them a view from the Control Box of what
 is taking place in various parts of the ground.

 Do you find when you are doing that job that you do
 convey information to the Commander? - A. Yes, I do.

 Could you give me some examples of the type of thing you
 would convey to him? - A. Relating to this specific
 incident or on a general basis?

No, on a general basis. - A. It goes across the board.
I can think of occasions relating to traffic problems
that occur on Herries Road, incidents that take place
within the crowd, even deployment of Officers around the
ground, access to the South Stand car park.    It is
really across the board, the facilities.    It depends
what the Commander wants or what I want to do with the
system and it is usually dictated by what is taking place
outside, either the messages coming in, requests being
made, or just a general overview of what is happening on
the day.

You mentioned incidents taking place, could you give any
examples of incidents that take place within the ground
that you need to draw someone's attention to? - A. I
think probably the two best examples was an incident of
fighting that was taking place on the Kop on the specific
day.

On the Kop? - A. Yes, and a collapse that occurred in the
uncovered seating areas on another occasion.

So you were able to see that quite clearly from the
Control Room? - A. Both incidents, or are you referring
to a specific incident?

No, both incidents.   - A. Yes.

Did you have to use the zoom facility to get a closer
view of these people? - A. Yes, that is right.
                                               T. BICHARD


Once you spot something you then enlarge that picture to
get more information, is that correct? - A. Yes, if that
is what is needed.

So you are able to spot that.   Now if somebody - this is
on any normal match day - broke their ankle or something
like that, would you be able to detect that sort of thing
on the terrace? - A. No.  Perhaps I did not make that
particular incident very clear.   The collapse had
occurred and it was indicated where it was and we were
able to oversee the situation when directing first aiders
to it.   It wasn't the actual man collapsing that I saw,
but oversaw what took place when it occurred.

Yes, if you saw someone who appeared to need attention
you would draw that to the attention of the Commander? -
A. Yes.

So you are looking out for danger or trouble in the pens
then?   Is that right? - A. Yes, across the board,
really, yes.

On the 15th April, 1989, did you not spot any trouble or
danger of any sort? - A. None whatsoever.




          THE CORONER:   You had better say
                                                       T. BICHARD


       m    SEHn 90R0NER:
       Mrs. McBrien.   You
                              You had better say at what time,
                             had better ask at what time, rather.

 Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:    Were you looking at the screens
      from 2.54, from about that time, when the players came
      onto the field?   That would be an important point to go
      from; did you see the screens from that time? - A. I
      would be watching a screen but I believe at that time
      it would be, in fact, the screen that was appertaining
      to Leppings Lane.   I believe that things were still
      occurring outside on Leppings Lane.

Q. What time did you look at the Leppings Lane Terrace7 -
   A. It probably would be after 3 o V l o c k , once the
   situation in Leppings Lane had alleviated itself.

Q. I know you weren't looking out for disparity and that
   may not mean very much to you, but would you be looking
   at the direction in which the fans were facing?  When
   the players are on the field people normally watch them
   playing, don t they? - A. As a spectator, yes, but
   obviously we are there as a job in connection with ....

Q. Yes, spectators are there to watch the match so once
   they appear on the field you would expect their heads
   to be facing in that direction.  Did you look at Pen 2
   at J o clock and see which direction those heads were
   turned in? - A. I can t really answer that question but
   perhaps --- I didn t see anything on Leppings Lane
   Terrace that was untoward until the time when people
   appeared to be taking part in what I thought in my own
   mind was a pitch invasion.

Q * hut        fe?v,t? e .di£ feronce in Pen 2 ’ not in numbers
    but the fact that in Pen 2 people would be looking
    towards the pitch; in Pen 3 a lot of them were looking
    behind them wondering what was happening behind them,
      round?"16   them W6r6 actually fa^ing the wrong way

           THE CORONER:   I think he has answered the
      question but I will ask it again for you:

Q. Did you notice any difference in the way people were
   looking in Pen 2 and Pen 3 at around 3 o'clock? - A.
   No, sir.

     * M? S * McBRIEN: Did you use the zoom facility at
  that time to get a better close up, a better picture? -
  A. Again, I have got to be careful what I say about
  which camera I was looking at.  Obviously, it is one
  pair of eyes, and generally speaking I can only manage
  to look at one screen.  If my attention was into what
                                                         T. BICHARD


      was taking place in Leppings Lane then in relation to
      that, yes, I was using the zoom facility.

      Yes, once you spotted something after 3 o'clock did you
      then use the zoom facility? - A. Yes, I did.   I believe
           5 v re Was a Policew°man near to gate number 1 and
      it had been mentioned that she had left the gate open
      unattended, and an Officer was sent down there, and I
      think that is, in fact, recorded on one of the tapes
      and the zoom facility was used.

 Q. But it was focussed on Pen 1, you say, at that time? -
    A. It was really the gate and what the Policewoman was
    doing.

 Q. You concentrated on Leppings Lane, you said, because
    that was where the problems were.  Now, were you
    looking at Leppings Lane turnstiles at 2.45 or
    thereabouts? - A. Yes, I would be.

Q . The numbers that you saw there outside at that time,
    did you think they could possibly get in by 3 o'clock?
    - A. At the time I did not address that thought.

Q.         THE CORONER:    You have got to answer it at the
     time.   I am not interested in what you think now.   What
     Mrs. McBrien is wanting to know is, at 2.35 on 15th
     April, 1989, did you think they could get in, or, your
     answer seems to say that you didn't think about it, but
     just answer, whatever your answer is. - A. Not at that
              •         tline> but the question had been raised a
     little bit earlier than that and I was quite happy at
     that time that the people would get into the Ground.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   I think you said at 2.30 that
     question was raised, wasn't it, and at that time it was
     considered that the people would get in, but things
     changed dramatically between 2.30 and 2.45, didn't
     they? - A. Yes, they did.

     o y as thinking, was a further consideration given at
     2.45 because of the slowing down? - A. I think the fact
        the matter was that people were concerned about
     people being injured outside at that time, rather than
     being concerned with the mass getting in to see the
     football match.   The problem was the number of people
     outside and the necessity to alleviate their suffering.
Q. As you understood it did it appear that the kick-off
   would only be delayed if there had been fog on the
   rennines or a bad motorway accident?  If it was late
   arrivals, that it would not be considered? - A. As I
     S i ? -J    ? invd to M r * K i n g » the general feeling was
     that it had to be an intervening factor outside just
                                                 T. BICHARD


late arrivals.  As I think has been explained before,
people do come late to football matches, for whatever
reason.

So as it was such a sunny day and there were large
numbers outside, the kick-off was still going to take
place at 3 o'clock, it seemed, that day?

     THE CORONER:   It is not this Officer's duty to
postpone the kick-off.  He has given you an answer on
that, Mrs. McBrien.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   When Mr. Kelly was in the Control
Room you heard Mr. Duckenfield say that the cause of
the disaster was that a gate had been forced, is that
right? - A. I don't think the cause of the disaster.
It was part of a conversation and the fact that the
gate had been forced was something that took place
within that conversation.

And there was a sudden in rush? - A. Yes,     that is
right.

You would not doubt that a sudden in rush would cause a
disaster, would you? - A. Not necessarily, no.

Would you think there would be a risk if there was a
sudden in rush?

     THE CORONER:   No, I don't think we need to
enquire of this Officer's opinion as to the quality of
the risk.  That is the Jury^s job.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Right,   thank you very much.

           Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL

Officer, can you think back and try and recall the
parameter of time that you were inthe Control  Box for
that day?  When did you first go there and how long
were you there for? - A. It would be fairly early in
the morning, maybe 10, 10.30.

And when did you leave   the Control Box?   - A. I can't   be
sure of that.

Well, perhaps I can short circuit this.  Were you in
the Control Box between half-past-2 and 3 o'clock? - A.
Yes, certainly.

Did you leave the Control Box during that half hour
period? - A. No.
                                                       T. BICHARD


 th** ?«  *    ii     front of you there is a document
 that is given the caption C532.  Could you look it u d
 please? - A. Yes, I have that.                       P’

 That   shows the layout of the Control Box,           does itnot?
 - A. It is, yes.

The bottom diagram is a plan of the Control Box and in
it there is a square with your name on it? - A. Yes
sir,   that is my position in the Control Box.      ’

        1f f K i2 the l6ft hand wal1 of the Control Box,
looking at it from your position, is the door which
is ? o r r e c u ry t0 th® Contro1 Box? " A * Y e s > sir,   that

There are no other ways into that Control Box, are
there? - A. No, sir.

Can you confirm that the plan is right, namely that the
door opens outwards? - A. Yes, sir, that is correct.

And is hinged on the side of the door furthest away
from your position? -  A. Yes, that is right, sir.

comeSiitor fhotr th? t            n0t P ossible for someone to
n ” .        i    Control Box or even look into the Control
^ x ..ln such a way that they are hidden by the opening
          t °5* ”   * N° ’ s i r ’ if anybody comes to the door
usually I do notice who it is.




                                  Q. Yes.    Do you know
                                                      T. BICHARD


 Do you know Superintendent Greenwood? - A. Yes, sir.

Can I just ask you to confirm this;  can you confirm
that between 2.30 and three o'clock that afternoon
Superintendent Greenwood did not come to the Control
Box? - A. Yes, I can confirm that.

Are you sure about that? - A. Yes, sir.

     MR. RUSSELL:    Thank you.

     THE CORONER:    Do you know what your call sign was
on the day? - a . Hillsborough Ground Control.

That is how you were described,    so to speak? - A. Yes.

               Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE

Mr. Bichard, on Friday, the very last subject you were
being asked about, related to the  gap of     time between
the opening of Gate C and the opening of      Gate A? -A.
Yes, sir.

You were asked questions about that by Mr. King and the
Coroner said he would make a few enquiries about t i m e s .
M r . Bichard, are you in a position to help the Jury now
about the interval of time between the opening of those
two gates? - A. Yes, sir.

Off you go? - A. I knew the video was available and
what I have done is I have taken the timing at 1 minute
40 seconds.  I am quite happy that that is the time gap
between C and Gate A, the request   for Gate A to be
opened.  I think that is the best   way to    put it.

     THE CORONER:    Say that again.

     MR. PAYNE:  Take it in stages.  Do you mean to say
you have re-examined the video yourself over the
weekend? - A. Yes, sir.

You have noted the time at which Gate C was opened? -
A . That is the time that is shown on the v i d e o .

     THE CORONER:   Which video are we talking about?
The Police video do you mean? - A. Yes.

     MR. PAYNE:  Then you have actually timed the
interval between that incident and the time at which
the instruction was given to open Gate A? - A. I
realised that when the instruction came in I moved
across to there.  Obviously there is no sound or
                                                          T. BICHARD


      anything but I know that is why I did it and it is 1
      minute 40 seconds.

 Q. Before you did what? - A. Prom Gate C being opened to
    me moving across to Gate A to see why the request had
    come in for Gate A to be opened because Ibelieve
    again, looking at the video, there was a lapse from me
    going across there, the actual request being made to
    the actual gate being opened.

 Q. What is the time interval between the opening of the
    two gates as recorded on the video? - A. That I didn't
    monitor.  I have took the time of me actually.   The
    time from Gate C opening to the time I am sure that the
    request came in for Gate A to be opened.

Q. How is it you are sure about that? - A. Because of my
   actions on the camera.

Q.   Because the film, the scene shown on the screen, can be
     seen to change? - A. That is right, sir.  I moved the
     position of the camera to look at Gate A.

Q. The time interval which you have measured is from the
   view of the opening of Gate C as shown on the
   picture? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. To the time at which the camera can be seen to swing
   round, is that right? - A. That is right and, in fact,
   I zoom into the area around Gate A.

Q. You caused the camera to swing round as a result of
   receiving an instruction, did you? - A. It was as a
   result of the radio request from Sergeant Higgins.

Q.    The time interval between those two events is what? -
     A. It is 1 minute 40 seconds.   Perhaps I can just clear
     up something else?   You have made reference to the
     opening of Gate A.   Something took place then.  The
     opening of the gate wasn't immediate.   It was within a
     period then.

Q. Is that something which can be seen on the film? - A.
   No.

Q. Just expand on what you are saying, something took
   place? - A. I don't know if I can speak about the
              1            b r i e v e that Sergeant Higgins had some
   difficulty convincing a steward that he w a s ...

         THE CORONER:     You have no need to speak of that.

         MR. PAYNE:     Sir,   is that helpful.
      THE CORONER:     Partially.

Do you know the tape reference for the video that you
reviewed? - A. No, sir.

Is it right that the only shot of Gate A that you saw
is the shot where one sees a number of Officers lined
up at the back of Gate A, and you cannot actually see
the gate as such, is that right? - A. The angle of the
camera does not allow you to see the g a t e .

Is that the shot we are talking about? - A. The initial
shot, yes.  There were Officers behind the gate but I
believe that I moved away from that scene again and
looked at a general scene and in fact went back to it
when the gate had been opened and saw people moving
through a line of Officers.

     THE CORONER:     I want to have a look at this myself
because I thought I was reasonably clear in my mind.
What we will do is adjourn for a few minutes and find
it.  It is all on the compilation tape.     We will have a
look to find it on the compilation tape.     If we can
find it we might show it.     If need be we will put the
segment of the tape up that deals with it.     I want to
be clear about t h i s . I think that is the only way to
do it.

     MR. PAYNE:      I have no other questions.

     THE C O R O N E R : I might have one or two more but we
will deal with this aspect of the tapes first.        We will
rise for a few minutes and see whether we can sort this
out once and for all.

                      (Short A d j o ur n m e n t )

      THE CORONER:       We are going to have a little look
at a small snippet of the compilation tape and I want
you to watch it and I want you to tell us whether this
is the video that you saw the scenes which you saw and
whether this is the basis on which you are giving your
evidence so that we can understand what you are saying.
We are not looking at the whole of the compilation
tape, the two hours job, we have wound it forward to
14.52 when Gate C opens and then we will watch for a
few m i n u t e s . It is only short but I want to be sure
that we have understood the evidence.

                  (The video film was shown)

     THE CORONER:     Can you stop the video for a moment?
                                                     T. BICHARD


Is that the pan you are talking about? - A. Yes,     sir.

Are you saying you panned across at that point when you
heard the request? - A. That is right, sir.

               (The video film c on t i n u e d )

Is it right you then left Gate A and moved back towards
Gate C area, the roof of the turnstiles? - A. If my
memory serves me right I came back for a general view,
yes.

               (The video film continued)




                              /Q.     THE CORONER.
                                                               18



                                            T. BICHARD




Q.         THE CORONER:  What is that showing us? - A. That
     is the reference I made to how I saw two lines of
     Officers behind 'A' gates with people passing through
     them to the rear of the North Stand.

Q. What made you go back to Gate 'A', can you remember?
   You may not be able to remember it is two years' on
   because there is gap, isn't there? - A. Yes.

Q. There is almost a four minute gap between the first
   one and this one? - A. I am not sure about the reason
   for that.   I am quite confident about the first look
   at that gate.   Looking at the tape it is something in
   my mind, I can make reference to incidents or messages
   that were passed or things that were said in relation
   to what I did on that tape. It is like a pocket book
   to me.

           THE CORONER:  Mr. Payne, do you want to ask
     anything else arising from the video.  It is more or
     less clear to me now?

           MR. PAYNE:  No, I don't think there is any
     question.  I am grateful sir.

           One thing which is quite clear in looking at
     the segment that we have just seen, in looking at that
     short section we have just seen, when the camera or the
     machinery was allowed to run at its normal speed one
     got quite a different impression from what was happening
     as to when we were going one frame at a time.

             THE CORONER:   I don't think we need deal with
     that.

           Mr. Fraser, I know you weren't here on Friday
     but do you want to ask any questions.  You may have
     seen the transcript but the point we were discussing
     at length was the time interval between the opening
     of Gate C and the opening of Gate A and the time
     interval between the request for that to be opened as
     opposed to its effectiveness.

           MR. FRASER:  No I understand that sir and that
     position has obviously been clarified this morning.
     Thank you.

Q*         THE CORONER:     I just want to ask you one other
     question.

           The recordings which you mentioned, the VHF
     recordings, those of course would not have been done
     in the Hillsborough Control Room, they would be done
     somewhere else? - A. No, the machinery is held at Force
     Control at Snig Hill.
                                                            19


                                         T. BICHARD



Q. So they would do their transcriptions from there? - A.
   I am not sure about who would actually do the
   transcriptions.

Q. It follows therefore there is absolutely no point in
   showing you transcripts of the tapes because you would
   not recognise them because you weren't in those
   locations.  That is correct, isn't it? - A. The only
   transcripts of those tapes I recognise is the messages
   I passed to Force Control.

Q. Do you know which channel you were speaking on? - A.
   Normally it would be a dedicated channel, Channel 2.
   There was some speculation it might have been Channel 1.
   Had you asked me that two days ago Iwould have been
   sure it was Channel 2.  I believe there is only four
   actual channels to choose from.

Q. In fact we have not got a transcript of either 1 or 2.
     A. And telephone conversations are also taped as well
   sir.

        THE CORONER:    I see.  I think we will leave it.
  We have got enough.    Thank you very much indeed.

        Now the next matter we are going to deal with
  this morning is I am going to read most of, not all,
  but most of the statement from Peter Edward Smith.
  This is what is known as a Track Officer, and for
  reasons  which I don't need to go into it is not
  practical for me to call him, so I am going to read
  his statement.

        I am also satisfied in the light of the evidence
  which we have already heard the statement falls within
   . ambit of Rule 37 which is the rule which deals
  with the admission of documentary evidence.

        It is the statement of Peter Edward Smith,
  Police Constable 1285 in the South Yorkshire Police
  and the date appears to be 29.4.89.  It is not
  strictly a statement, it is a recollection as opposed
  to a statement but I think we won't worry about the
  technicality at this stage.

        "SEMI FINAL HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL GROUND -
        15 APRIL 1989.

       On Saturday 15 April 1989 I commenced duty
       at 0945 am at the Hillsborough Football
       Ground.  At this time I was in company with
       Police Constable 417 ILLINGWORTH and we
       went straight to the North Stand for the
       1000 am briefing.  The briefing was taken
                               P.E. SMITH



 by Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and
 Superintendent MURRAY, followed by criminal
 intelligence  given by Detective Sergeant
 CHARLESWORTH.

Following the briefing, I remained on
the North Stand and took meal.   I was part
of Serial 1 whose duties were on the
perimeter track.  Police Sergeant CHAPMAN
was the Serial Sergeant and Inspector
DARLING was the Sector Inspector.   I
was deployed to the perimeter track in
front of the Leppings Lane terracing
together with Police Constable ILLINGWORTH.
This is the duty I have carried out at
the ground since about 1983, with the
exception of isolated matches.

I was on this duty for the Coventry v
Leeds Semi Final in 1987 and for the
Liverpool v Notts Forest match in 1988.
My duties there include supervision of
the gates leading from the terracing
to the perimeter track and the gates
are not opened without permission of
a supervisory Officer, other than to
allow injured persons onto the perimeter
track to receive medical attention.

Prior to the kick off fans are monitored
for misbehaviour, etc.  It is my normal
practice to inform Control of any such
incidents and they normally pass that
information to other Officers for
action.  On only one occasion have I
had to enter the terracing during a game
to deal with fans.  This was an Everton
cup match.

The 1988 Semi Final between the same
teams had taken place with myself and
Police Constable ILLINGWORTH on the
perimeter track.  That year the
terraces were filled well prior to the
kick off.  We had a constant job asking
people to get off the top of the perimeter
fence.  I noticed that a large number of
fans were worse for drink and I suffered
much abuse from them consisting of the
usual verbal and spitting.  At the
conclusion of the game the gates from
the terraces to the pitch both opened
by bodily pressure and by fans reaching
through the fencing and releasing the
                              P.E. SMITH




gates.  The wire meshing on the perimeter
fence was also ripped out by the fans to
gain access to the track.  Others simply
climbed over the fence and dropped onto
the track.  Others had climbed over during
the match and were either escorted from
the track or returned when approached
by Police Officers.

One fan who re-scaled  the fence to return,
was later treated for an ankle injury.
Having policed that match and other
matches involving Liverpool over the last
two years, I had no doubt of what my
duties would entail in 1989.

At 11.15am, together with Police Constable
ILLINGWORTH, I collected a track stool
and went to the Leppings Lane end of the
pitch.  I placed my stool initially at
gate four and Police Constable ILLINGWORTH
placed his at gate five.  At this time the
turnstiles were not open, according to
the briefing they would open at midday
1200.  I checked all the gates and
secured them.  The gates, as the previous
year, have one large fastening device
which replaced two slide bolts positioned
at the top and centre of the gates.

Following last year's match, fencing had
been replaced with a smaller mesh where it
had been made insecure and at the sides
of the gates and the gates themselves, to
prevent fans reaching through and releasing
them.  Metal sheets were also welded on
to prevent the same.

I remained in sight of the terraces until
about 11.40am when I saw about half a dozen
supporters enter  the terracing.  I again
rechecked all the gates and stood facing
the terracing at the rear of the goal.
There was no great influx of fans at
this end of the ground.

I can recall radio messages regarding
fans looking for Public Houses and this
served to reaffirm my earlier apprehensions
of what I could expect later.

About 12.20pm, I was relieved for a drink
and returned about 12.35pm.  I saw the
terraces were still filling slowly.  I
                              P.E. SMITH



remained on the track until around 2 p.m.
when I was relieved for a meal.  When I
left the track there was still no great
number of fans in the terraces or stand.

On arrival at the gym for hot meal the kitchen
was closed and I waited for it to re-open
and then took a meal with Police Constable
HLENGWORTH.   We returned to the track about
2.50pm and I can recall that during that
time away there had been mention of radio
problems.   The two centre pens behind
gates three and four had filled considerably
whilst I was away as had the outer pens.

There was a gap of aobut ten foot (10')
to the front of the outer pens and though
there was no gap in the centre pens, they
were not full.  I saw a fan on the railings
dividing pens three and four, that is the
centre pens, leaning over the perimeter
fence, and told him to get down.  He got
off the perimeter fence but remained
squatted on the dividing railings.

From previous experience I knew I could do
little about that and I left the fan
there.  I saw Police Constable ILLINGWORTH
stood in the front of the end pen between
gates five and six, where several supporters
had climbed the fence and were leaning over.

I walked back towards gate three and saw
a group of fans numbering 20-30 jumping
up and down and pushing, causing surging
towards the front.   This group were
positioned about half way down the
terracing to the left of gate three
as I looked at them.

As I stood at gate three a cheer went up
and I knew that the teams had come out.
There was a lot of pushing and the crowd
in the pen in front of me, the centre South,
surged forward to the fencing and people
at the front shouted and screamed.  The
crowd then moved back.  I recall a ball
hitting the perimeter fence near to gate 4
and the fans again surged forward and back.
I moved slightly to my left away from the
goal mouth to avoid being struck by a
ball during the pre-kick off knock
about.  I still did not look onto the
pitch and continued to monitor the fans.
                               P.E. SMITH




I noticed a Serial of Police Constables
walking in front of the North Stand near
to the corner with the terracing and as the
first of them reached the corner gate three
flew open and the crowd moved back from
the fence.  I closed the gate immediately
and no one tried to get out and I assumed
the pressure of a surge had opened the
gate.

There was no great pressure on fans at the
front after the gate was re-secured.     I
was then joined by two more Officers from
the Serial previously mentioned.     As
they reached me the gate three again
opened and I attempted to reclose it but
was unable to do so due to pressure from
the f a n s . These were not the same fans
who had been stood there on the previous '
occasion.




                 One or both
                                          P. E. SMITH


 "One or both of the other Officers also assisted in
 trying to close the gate.    I am unaware of whether
or not the gate was fully locked at this point, but
the fans were again screaming and shouting, "We're
squashed, open the gates you bastards".    I had
stepped back from the gate at this point leaving the
other two Officers.    I saw people were tight up to
the fence, particularly two or three young women to
my right of the gate.    I got out my personal radio
which I wear hung around my neck under my tunic and
cannot usually hear at a large match.    I tried to
pass a message asking if we could open the gate to
relieve pressure.    I got no reply but think there
was some message about a gate being opened
elsewhere.    The noise was terrible and people were
screaming, a different type of scream and I opened
the gate three fully.    I saw people were being
forced onto the fence and turning blue.    I passed
another radio message, "This is serious people are
dying in here."

I attempted to pull people out of the gate but they
were jammed solid.   The female previously mentioned
was turning a dark colour and I climbed on to the
hoardings and looked over the fence and gestured for
the fans to get back but was spat at and someone
shouted, "Fuck off Copper."

I got down and returned to the gate where a number
of Officers had arrived, including Superintendent
Greenwood, who I assisted in trying to get people
out of the gate.

I remember looking at the rear of the terrace near
to the tunnel, I believe when I was on the
hoardings, and seeing three young males talking and
looking at the pitch.    They are stood in plenty of
space whereas people there at a normal match are
struggling to see.    I notice a number of fans on
the hoardings shouting to other fans to get back but
no one does.   I assisted taking bodies onto the
grass area and recall thinking, "Are they still
playing football?"    By this time there was a large
number of Police and fans and people laid on the
pitch.

I have no idea of the time of these events but think
people were being crushed prior to the kick off.

I continued moving bodies away from gate three with
the assistance of other Officers and fans, other
fans were pointing to me and saying, "This is your
fault."
                                              P. E. SMITH


     Some time during this I had radioed for bolt
     croppers.   This was to enable the mesh to be cut.
     I could not hear any reply.   A supervisory Officer
     calls for us to form a tunnel to get people from the
     gate but people are trapped by the step from the
     terraces.   I recall many people giving mouth to
     mouth, St. John's, fans and Police.

     Superintendent Greenwood tells me to assist in
     getting the St. John's Ambulance to gate three, this
     I do.   I saw Inspector Darling about more
     ambulances."

Then he discusses aspects of rescue and so on which I do
not think are relevant or helpful and I think I will
leave them out.   He does deal with the question of
delaying kick-off so I will read that section:

     "During the briefing it was mentioned that the start
     would not be delayed and that we should not get
     involved in the atmosphere but be detached.   It was
     to be policed fairly and, if necessary, firmly but
     within the law and that no complaints were wanted.

     It was surprising that hot meals were being taken
     immediately prior to kick-off as usually if hot
     meals are provided, they are taken first or
     certainly not prior to kick-off."

He then discusses ideas of his as to what might or might
not be done, which I think we can again leave and I will
carry on:

     "During the tragedy, I can recall seeing fans from
     the rear of the terraces being lifted into the stand
     above.   This is a common practice and on this
     occasion there appeared to be no reason for it as to
     the best of my recollection, the tunnel entrance was
     clear."

He then has a sentence which I think is a comment which I
would not allow if he was here so I am not going to read
it:

     "There never appeared any blockage in the tunnel
     en trance/exi t .

I will just read two more sentences:

     "I formed the impression when trying to get people
     out of the gate that there were people underneath
     the ones I could see."

Then the penultimate sentence:
                                               P. E. SMITH


     "At no time did there appear to be any great influx
     of supporters into the pens."

So that is what Mr. Smith says.   We cannot, of course,
cross-examine him because he is not here.   I don't
suppose anyone can make any comment?   No.   We would
obviously have preferred to have had him but it is not
practicable.   We have got to do the best.

The next thing I want to do is to show the video.     That
is the BBC video.    We have already seen it, but we are
going to see a few more minutes of it.    We have left the
sound until about six or eight minutes past.    You will,
hear that because the sound disappears because I did not
think it was appropriate to have the text, but there is
no reason why you should not see the picture.    This
video shows the match so try to look at the Leppings Lane
end and not the match.

                  (BBC video shown)

                (Luncheon adjournment)
                                                          27




         CORONER:   The first thing we are going to do
is exhibit the photograph which came from a newspaper,
and is associated with Mr. Kelly.  I am afraid we have
had to copy it off the newspaper because that is the
best we could do.  What number is that?

     MR. BEECHEY:     C540,   sir.

     THE CORONER:   We are doing it, Mr. King, to
please the family.  Whether that is --- I am
exceedingly doubtful because of the other evidence
which we have in the case, but I did say we would
exhibit it and so we have.

     MR. KING:      Sir, the family will be very grateful.

     THE CORONER:    That is the first thing.  The
second thing is that I have got a statement from
Pstricia Ann Owens, which I will admit as documentary
evidence.  This is a correction which she wants to make
as a result of some evidence we had.   Mr. Robertson
came along and was talking about Jonathon Owens, I will
just remind you, and he said that he had a stand ticket
and he could not change it and so he finished up on the
terraces with a stand ticket.   Well, you will hear what
mum says.  She says:

     "I am the mother of Jonathon Owens, who lost his
     life on the Leppings Lane Terraces at the FA Cup
     i
     Soflj’ final at Hillsborough Stadium on 15th April


    I make this statement in connection with the
    evidence given to the Resumed Inquests by Michael
    Robertson that Jonathon went to the FA Semi-Final
    with a West Stand seating ticket, intending to
    swap it with friends for a Leppings Lane standing
    ticket.

    Michael Robertson went on to give evidence that
    Jonathon was unsuccessful as his friends did not
    arrive, and he went onto the terraces with a stand
    ticket.

    In April 1989, shortly after the disaster, my
    husband John and I were shown a fully intact
    Leppings Lane standing ticket which was found
    among Jonathon's effects by an Officer of the West
    Midlands Police Force.

    The fully intact Leppings Lane standing ticket*
    (No. 150489/LL3/48/23) was eventually handed over
    to me, I recall, during the course of a visit to
    my home in late March/early April 1990, by two
       female West Midlands Officers, one of whom was
       P.C. Parkes.

       During the course of this visit it was again
       explained that this ticket was in Jonathon's
       possession at the time of his death".

 Then there is a formal declaration and that is it.     It
 is very important, of course, to the family.

      The third thing I want to do is to formally admit
as documentary evidence the post mortem reports from
the individual pathologists.   Normally speaking I would
ask them to produce the report then tell us, as in fact
they did in April/May last year, but for some reason I
did not say,   And of course your report forms part of
the inquest proceedings".   There are 95 of these, of
course, as you will appreciate and they are all fairly
lengthy, but we have actually heard everything that is
of any consequence as far as the inquest is concerned.
JL think it is right that we should have the full
document within the documentation of the Inquest, and
also it does enable one to double check in cases of
ambiguity.   Mr. Fraser, I take it you are not going to
say you want them read in toto?

       MR. FRASER:    No, I think we will forego that one,
sir,   thank you.

     THE CORONER:   And I take it nobody else is going
to want them read, because we did try by calling the
pathologists to deal with the issues fully and yet as
sensitively as one could.  So that is post mortem
reports in respect of each and everyone of the deceased
by the pathologist who undertook the post mortem, whose
names of course we know from the interim inquest, and
the major relevant contents which, of course, we also
know about.

     MR. PAYNE:      Do we need to give these a "C"
number?

     THE CORONER:   No, I don't want to give these "C"
numbers.  I don't want to turn them into exhibits, I
want to turn them into documents as documentary
evidence.  Rather than having them as exhibits I want
to treat them as if they were the evidence of a
witness, not entirely logical, I think, but I think
practically it is more convenient to do it that way.
Any objection from anybody to that course?
(No response)

     MR. FRASER:   Sir, the only issue that might arise
rrom that is at the mini Inquests you did have produced
  you? lntention
       iStffltio'S S    T 1?St kn?un P o r t i o n s . Would i t be
                      to enclose those as part of thi q
  hearing^' ir ^ fa c t? 1 thlnk tHey "6re Produ“ d a f t e r the

          THE CORONER:      Say that again?


  o f th o se f^ c er ta in S ^ n ^ ™      p S ^ ’w ^ cS ^ u l *
                                         a A h i c S l a ^ those




        MR FRASER:       Very good, sir.


 »ake        “ p T ^ ex h ^ tsIS
 don^t wa n t 1them°tthh J>Jry^ t0 take °Ut with thera and 1
 repoJts Shi£h“• don*?      S    " " 1 ^ ith 95 post " orte">
 TVifl* -So 4-u         ^ think need to study in detail
 Is e x i i b U s r S „ o o s e S V hy I ^ 0n' t want to tr e a t them
 clear?              opposed   to anything else.       Is that



 know ?f'Mrsr?SoS 4r,shis heJe?""” ' °f            °"enS' 1 don,t

        MR FRASER:       No, sir.


Jonathon iT e v e r ^ c a s ^ ^ ^ U ^ U ^          V    SEere1"8 ! ^
about'LS^o^peli'his
•»_••                         d“*£e
             speii nis name and      * llttle
                                 it was       disc“ssi°n
                                        spelt with an
  o at the end.  Now what is       Tt %  R tl wlcn an
me, but ....               S lt?   U d°esn't matter to




 h -       FRASER:   We will see from our file, sir
sirf      ^        the definitive spelling.  It is ''on",

       THE CORONER:       So we will treat tfiie „_
typographical error in the s ta te m e n t       J am
                                                   am concerned
                                                      co
  *b2 i t™ ” u d ,.b5:t?“ th CertlflCate ri*h t > tha‘ i* »hat


  remember*1^          ^     ^     ?h11 a ^ h " * T ^ S ’ you w il1


 had re” « d 1 ; f „ L « “        g ™ “ n
                                        T p a ^         d ^ a U s ^ d S "     ”


 e^aC^jy the Sarae way as the P°st mortem reoorts T
 should really have said, "And I introduce th*»
 questionnaire", or the relevant part of the

 2   « S i™ ir io 'x .f 'T s s :* ? « « « « .", and so i am
 them all out.          It would not t a k e ^ h a t ’l o ^ g ^ t ^    ££*t

 Sii E
 forms, but because t h e ^ u r ^ h a s ^ t ^ f i n d ' i n           d ^ 6


Mr?UFraser?°n *            HaVe y° “ 801 any ProbIe">s » it h th a t,


f a S u ^ 8™ 3™ ^ = P ^ ’s « e 0 t I m r t r y i n g h?o l e t ^ h e " 1”1
a p p r e c U e Pth flSr a l    right a S d l am l u r e Jhey

version I am sure then familiesewillVunderstandethat.


« . „ d ^ S n ? b u t ^ s Jmef?eaIsond irmereiyesaid  !
fo- sent °Vt the questionnaire.    They corrected the
K t a !   l o S ^ j S      t e f S S S l“ nShJeh V l '“ V     "   “ r^   ‘
bS? J ^ n t " 1^   ^                  ’• * “    “ 1*

B ^ S S s ^ - ’S ^'& irr
       MR FRASER:           I understand,    sir.




                                 THE CORONER:          We did write
     THE CORONER:  We did write to a few people mainly
the ones unfortunately whose youngsters died who were
under 16 because we discovered that the Registrar likes
to have the mother's occupation as well and that was
something we had not put on the questionnaire.  I am
going to admit as documentary evidence a supplementary
questionnaire which has been completed by some of the
people to whom we wrote anyway.  The first one relates
to Peter Andrew Harrison and it gives the mother's
occupation as auxiliary nurse.  Mum's name is Patricia
Margaret Harrison.

    The second one relates to Kevin Daniel Williams and
mother's occupation is housewife, previously shop
assistant, and that is what we will be putting on the
form and it is signed in this particular case by the
father, James Stephen Williams.  There is, as you know,
Mr. Fraser a small problem with regard to this lad,
namely that Mr. Williams is the stepfather.   We have a
letter from Goffey and Co., solicitors, dated 22nd
February 1991, which I will also admit as documentary
evidence, in which they tell us that the natural father
is Mr. Alan Howard and that he is a welder by
occupation.  I have to say that because it will turn up
on the inquisitions.  Is that satisfactory, Mr. Fraser?

    MR. FRASER:   Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:  Then we heard about John Paul
Gilhooley and mum's name is Jacqueline Mary Gilhooley
and she is a support worker.  She signed it.

    We have a letter from the Hammonds re Philip
Hammond and mum is Hilda Hammond and she is a senior
sister at an Intensive Care Unit.  She has signed that.

    Then there is Lee Nichol and his mum is Patricia
Frances and she is a school escort with handicapped
children and she has signed that.

    There are one or two people who did not reply but I
do not want to press them simply for mum's name and
occupation.  As far as I know that is all the evidence.
Have I forgotten anything?  Is there any other bit of
evidence that anybody feels I have overlooked
particularly on the mopping up side.  There is one bit
I have just been reminded of and that is Mr. Hammond
and his job.  We have got you down incorrectly as Post
Office manager and we ought to have you down as Post
Office executive I think.  Would you be kind enough on
this form to just correct it and initial it?  Put the
date against your initial as well.

    A lot of this is complete nonsense you may think
and to a certain extent I agree with you.  In fact to a
large extent I agree with you but if we can get the
trivia right, the paperwork right, the names are not
trivia.  They are very, very important.   It is just a
question of crossing the Ts which is something that
niggles me a little bit.   I know from experience for
all of us our names, identities and so on are
exceedingly important.   That is only right and proper
and that is how it should be.   That is all right, Mr.
Fraser, I take it?  I look at Mr. Fraser because these
are matters personal to the families but obviously if
there is anybody who wants to chip in I am willing to
listen.

    It looks like an early afternoon for you.   Can I
explain what the plan is?  This week is going to be a
little bit different for various reasons.   The first
thing is that when I have finished you go home.
Tomorrow we do not want you here and so have a day off,
relax and build up strength because I want you back on
Wednesday at 11.  It may be a wasted day for you on
Wednesday to a certain extent because it depends how
long we will be going on with the legal submissions but
I would rather have you here so that if we are ready to
start with the summing up we can do so.   If the worst
comes to the worst you will have had another day off so
far as Jury work is concerned though it will be
disturbed by the fact that you have had to come here.
I hope you will forgive me for that.  I cannot be sure
how long we will be.  On Wednesday we want you here for
about 11 o'clock.  Do you think that is realistic? Are
we going to run into Wednesday with legal submissions?

     MR. PAYNE:  I do not think legal submissions are
going to be very lengthy.  Sir, I have submitted mine
in writing.  I shall read them, amplify the reference
to authorities and answer any questions which you put
to me and I shall be surprised if that lasts more than
two hours.

     THE CORONER:   What do you think?

     MR. KING:  As we are bound by the rules that we
cannot address you on the fact which is a very salutary
limitation and we can only address you on the law, that
of itself will restrict our ambit considerably.   My
instinct tells me that we will be fortunate to finish
in a day if only because inevitably these things do run
on when questions are asked and responses are put
forward.  We have got a number of different advocates
putting forward submissions.  I would have thought,
sir, I cannot anticipate it will go on for more than a
day and a half at the outset.

     THE CORONER:  We will change the 11 o'clock.   Be
here for 1 o'clock and if we find we are finished early
we will get everybody to have an early lunch and we
will start at 1 o'clock.  If I find we have not
finished or I need a bit of time to think about what
has been then I have also got to allow for that.  It is
no use listening to all the legal submissions and not
heeding or at least considering what I am told but if
you could be here for 1 o'clock on Wednesday.
                                                           34




      Thursday will be a normal day except it may be,
depending upon whether we start or not on Wednesday or
not we might start at 9.30 on Thursday rather than at
10.  Could you make a mental note for that.

      Friday, for personal reasons amongst the jury we
have got a bit of a problem with Friday morning so I
want to start on Friday at 1 but be prepared to stay till
5.  Can everybody make a note of that? Whether we stay
till 5 or not will depend on (a) when I start with my
summing-up and (b) how fast I am and I don't know either
of those two things, so this week as far as the jury
are concerned don't come tomorrow at all; Wednesday at
1 o'clock; Thursday at 9.30, God willing, and Friday
at 1 and that, I think, will make things a lot easier
for your jury member who has got something on.

      I think that is it as far as you are concerned.
Is there anything else I ain likely to need the jury for
this afternoon? Then why don't you be on your way and
see you on Wednesday.  If on Wednesday we find there
is a bit of documentary evidence which I have forgotten
well we can always deal with it briefly before I start
summing-up.

                      (The jury retire)


      Now with regard to the legal submissions, Mr. Payne
as you very rightly say you have given  me yours and indeed
Mr. Maxwell gave me his.

      I think what I will do with Mr. Maxwell's certainly
is that I will read it because we have done everything
completely open as far as I know and in public so we might
as well, it is about fourteen pages   of double space so it
is not that long   and I will read it and then it is inthe
transcript, quite apart from anything else, and it also
means everybody has the opportunity of hearing it.

      Yours, Mr. Payne, as you say you  are going to read
to me so we will have the benefit of that and I don't have
to do it and then you can elaborate wherever you think it
is appropriate.

      With regard to the last page where you sort of
categorise the schedules, I think I must tell you that
I think it would be inappropriate to produce those
schedules.  I am   certain in my mind that to do that
would be driving   a coach and horses right through the
rule against addressing me on the facts, so if I may say
that now so that it does not come as a surprise to you.
I don't suppose it would have come as a surprise.
                                                               35




      MR. PAYNE:  Sir, I of course will accept your
ruling about that   and it certainly applies to some of
the schedules more than to others.

      What   I have    got in mind is this: as you will have
seen it is   our intention to submit that there is in­
sufficient   evidence to leave the verdict of unlawful
killing to   the jury.

      Now in order to be able to consider the merits of
that submission it is necessary to go into what the evidence
is, certainly so far as it bears upon the submission and
I am only going to address you on that part of it so far
as it affects the Police.

      Now there is one particular schedule which deals
in particular with the evidence on the subject of what
was obvious and whether anyone were indifferent to a risk
of injury.

      Now I think it is a little difficult to address
the question of law whether that verdict can be left to
the jury without, as part of the submission of law,
addressing you on what the evidence is to found the
submission that it is insufficient for that verdict to
be left.

      It could be said that it applies to three of the
schedules, so perhaps I might just reserve that?

       THE CORONER: Yes.   I do appreciate one can do
an address on law without referring to any facts but
it does leave it very much in vacuo, I agree, and I
think it is not improper to make some reference to the
facts.   It depends how it is done and what the objective
is.

      If it is a question for instance arguing as to the
merits of one person's evidence against another then
clearly that is an address on the facts.   If it is a
proposition that given that we have facts a, b and c in
law you cannot leave that because it is not obvious, or
whatever you wish to   say, then that    is somewhat different.

      MR. PAYNE:  If   I may say so it is exactly on the
latter basis that I would address you.   I would entirely
agree that balancing one set of evidence against another
is prohibited.

      THE CORONER: Yes, thank you.       We will of course
be hearing from you,  Mr. King, so I        don't need to say any­
more on that.

      What I intend to do is when I have heard what you
have to say as it may well be I may want you to elaborate
on any particular points, I am looking at you but it could
be anybody, I have already indicated how I wish to deal
with it and I think what we will do is we will work in
the standard way down the line, everybody will have their
say, and then I am going to allow everybody to have one
come-back, so to speak, and then unless there is something
extraordinary to make me depart from that, that will be
it on the legal submissions because otherwise we will fall
into Mr. Isaac's trap of going on indefinitely on this
point.

      Mrs. McBrien, if I could just look at you for a
moment.  This part tomorrow is going to be quite difficult
because we are talking about issues of law.

       Now no way would I expect you to feel that you need
to know all the law because you are not a lawyer and why
should you be? I don't know everything there is about
teaching schoolchildren and there is no reason why you
should know everything there is to do about the law, but
I don't know what your intentions are, but if you were
intending to address me then you must abide by exactly the
same rules as everybody else and I want to say it now
because I don't want - if I can possibly avoid it - I don't
want to have to say:     "No, you can't say that, Mrs. McBrien".
I don't want to stop you saying anything that is proper
within the rules but it would be unfair to allow you to
address me on facts and then not allow anybody else to
do it.    That is commonsense isn't it? So it is not a
criticism in any sense of the word, I am just alerting
you to the fact that tomorrow's and possibly Wednesday's
aspects are in a sense specialist.     I know you have done
an awful lot of work and you may well have points on law
which you may wish to raise.     If you do and if they are points
of law then of course, providing they are relevant to the
Inquest, then of course you are entitled co do that.

      Well I can't think of anything else I need to do
today. Can anybody else think of anything?    (No response)
Well, ladies and gentlemen it has been a long time as far
as hearing the evidence but at least we have heard it.
You have heard the timings that I have in mind with regard
to the summing-up. My intention still is exactly as before
to send the jury out for their deliberations on the Monday,
so whatever happens I will not finish, or at least I don't
like saying "whatever happens", my plan is not to finish
my summing-up on the Friday.  How much will be left for
Monday will depend on what happens and how I do it and
how much time I have.  Okay, thank you all very much indeed.

              (The Inquests were adjourned until
             the following morning at 10.00 a.m.)
