                                                                                         MIR.15


                                                                                                            L (S >
  OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised      C> S                   Number


  T itle                      O     <                                                        Pi^<3>c<ZT&r<±
-^0;T (/ude source and any document number i f relevant)


 Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No ___
                                                                                                               Receiver




                                                                                                                 Indexer
  Document registered/indexed as indicated

  No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                           Statement Reader
  Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                 Indexer
  Indexed as indicated

  No(s) o f actions raised

  Examined - further action to be taken                                                                    0/M         SIO




                                                                                                                 Indexer
   Further action No(s)

  When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL,        1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


             WILLIAM ROY PEMBERTON




                      Before

 S.L.    POPPER,   LL.B, B.MED.Sci,      B M , B S , MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                        At

           The Medico-Legal Centre.
                Watery S t r e e t ,
                  Sheffield.

                        On

               23rd April,     1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                                  INDEX

                                                           Page


                        OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER      1


                        DR. J. C. CLARK Called




                                                              cn
                          By The Coroner
                    B




                                                             in
                          Cross-exainined by Mr. Fraser




                                                             1^5
                          Further by The Coroner


                        POL. INSP. M. R. SAWERS Called

                           By The Coroner


                        PET. INSP. H. LAYTON Called

                           By The Coroner



                    D




                    E




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        23rd April, 1990


                             INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF WILLIAH ROY PEMBERTON


                               MR FRASER:   Sir, the first case this afternoon is
                          William Roy Pemberton.  lie is known by his family as
                          Roy and I understand that the Officers will refer to
                          him as that.  His mum and dad are in Court, sir, with
                    B     his sister and the social worker and I appear as a
                          member of the Steering Committee on their behalf but
                          also as their own solicitor - they have been with me
                          for a year, sir.

                               THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed, Mr.
                          Fraser.  Mr. Pemberton, I believe you were here on the
                          first day, weren't you?

                                HR. W. E. PEMBERTON:        Yes, I was.

                                THE COROWER:    So you will know the general
                           format. Unless you particularly want me to I do not
                           intend to repeat it.

                    D           HR. W. E. PEMBERTON:        No.

                               THE CORONER:   Are you all right, ladies and
                          gentlemen of the Jury?  Everything is satisfactory,     is
                          it? Good.

                                This is the resumed Inquest which was opened on
                           the 18th April, 1989.  On that occasion Neil Anthony
                    E      Parkin, Acting Coroner's Officer said:

                                "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has
                                been identified to PC 2299 Carl Wilkinson of the
                                South Yorkshire Police as that of William Roy
                                Pemberton by William Ewart Pemberton, his father.
                                He was 23 years of age having been born on 17 1 66
                                at Liverpool.  He was a single m an and he lived at
                                                                  Liverpool.   He
                                was a student by occupation.  fie died at
                                Hillsborough Football Ground following an incident
                                there on Saturday 15th April, 1989.   PC vJilkinson
                                caused the body to be removed to the Hedico-Legal
                                Centre, and there he identified it to Detective
                                Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently
                                identified the same body to Prof. Usher and Dr.
                                Clark.  It is the family wish that the body should
                                be cremated."

                           And then as I did in all the cases, I wrote, we sent a
                           form, asking for details to be verified and Mr. William
                           Ewart Pemberton - that is you isn't it?

                H
                                                -   l   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                       DR.   J.   C.   CLARK



                                  MR. W. E. PEMBERTON:     Yes.

                                  THE CORONER:   Confirmed that we had got most of
                             it right apart from, I think, the address, which should
                             have read                                   Liverpool,
                             and the name was right, and the date of birth 18 1 66,
                             and we changed his occupation froin student to computer
                             programmer student.  In fact, you have gone back to
                             student.  How would you prefer him described, Mr.
                             Fraser - student, or do you want it designated as to
                    B        what precisely he was.

                                 MR FRASER:      Student, sir.

                                  THE CORONER:     Student - I personally think that
                             that is correct.

                    C             The alcohol levels were checked and the results
                             were given on the first day by Dr. Forrest, and as far
                             as Roy is concerned the result was negative.

                                 We will now listen to Dr. Clark.

                                       DR. JOHN CHALHERS CLARK Called:

                    D                            By The Coroner:

                                  THE WITNESS:   Dr. John Clark, Forensic
                             Pathologist, University of Glasgow.

                        Q. And Dr. Clark (a) you have taken the oath, and (b) the
                           post mortem that we are dealing with is the S<7illiam Roy
                           Pemberton, case number 65, and you are quite satisfied
                    E      that the body which you examined was this lad? - A.
                           Yes, that is correct.

                        0.   If you would be kind enough to just - there are       one or
                             two queries on this as you know. - A. Yes.

                        0.   But if we just deal with the evidence in the
                             conventional way first and then we will pick up any
                    F        problems which there might be. - A. Yes.   I certified
                             the cause of death as crush asphyxia, and this was
                             based on the finding that he had extremely marked signs
                             of asphyxia in his face, on the upper part of his body
                             and also internally.  This was the usual blueness of
                             the face and haemorrhages on the skin and on the
                             surface of the organs and these were really very
                             marked.  This was consistent with his chest having been
                    G        crushed preventing breathing.  Terminally he had also
                             inhaled vomit into his right lung, causing widespread
                             haemorrhage there.

                                  In keeping with this crushing on the chest he had
                             three fractured ribs on the left side of his chest.  ile
                             also had a considerable number of injuries on the
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                DR.   J.   C.   CLARK


                        surface of the body, mainly on the face, the arms and
                        the legs, probably caused by him being forced against
                        the ground or some other surface, but apart from the
                        fractured ribs there was no other internal damage, so
                        this was all just surface injuries, and apart from the
                        ribs no other internal damage.

                             The final comment is to say that he was not
                        suffering from any natural disease which could have
                        played any part in his death




                    c




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H
                                             -   3   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                   DR.   J.   C.   CLARK




                    B




                    D




                    E
                        0. The second thing that concerns Hr. Pemberton is the
                           height, because I think you have given it as 173
                           centimetres - 5.8? - A. 5-foot-8, that is right.

                        0. And Mr. Pemberton is quite satisfied that his lad was 6
                           feet tall.   Can you tell me how you arrived at the
                           height? - A. I didn't actually record the height
                           myself, all the heights were recorded, the heights and
                           weights were recorded with the bodies as they came in,
                           and there was a note, these measurements were left with
                           the body, and when I came to do the post mortem I just
                           accepted that information, so I physically did not
                           measure.   Having said that I am quite willing to accept
                           that there may have been a mistake and if you say that
                           he was six feet I would have to accept that.
                    G
                        Q. Can you just tell me, I think the measurement was
                           actually expressed in centimetres, wasn't it?- A. It
                           was expressed in centimetres.  It is 173 centimetres.
                           Now that is equivalent to 5-foot-8.  Six feet is 183
                           centimetres, so a difference of ten, and I would accept
                           that that may have been where the mistake is, that it
                    H
                                                -   4   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                          DR.   J.   C.   CLARK


                           has been recorded as 173 instead of 183 and I apologise
                           for that.  I would accept it if you feel strongly about
                           tnat.

                                MR. W. E. PEMBERTON:          Am I free to say anything,
                           Dr. Popper?

                                TilE COROWER:  Ho, I think Mr. Fraser should do
                    B      it.  I think I have dealt with that, Hr. Fraser, but
                           obviously Hr. Pemberton wants to say something to you.

                                MR FRASER:   Sir, it was just Mr. Pemberton's wish
                           to express his thanks to Dr. Clark for that
                           clarification.  He understands the confusion.  He was
                           obviously very distressed about the information when it
                           first came to light but he is satisfied that everything
                    C      that can be done to explain that situation to him has
                           been done, and thank you for tnat, doctor.

                                THE CORONER:   That is very, very kind of you,
                           thank you, Mr. Pemberton, and you of course, Nr.
                           Fraser, as well.  I don't think there is anything else
                           on the PH that I can think of, but Hr. Fraser have you
                           got anything else that needs explaining?
                    D
                                MR FRASER:     Mo, thank you, sir.

                                THE CORONER:     Mr. Fraser, your client does have
                           something.

                                      Cross-examined by MR. FRASER:
                    E   Q. Dr. Clark, is it possible for you to reassure Mr. and
                           Mrs. Pemberton about the time the ribs may have
                           fractured?   Is it possible from your findings to say
                           whether that was post or pre Roy's death?   I believe
                           that it may have been part of the resuscitation
                           attempt.   Perhaps you can clear their minds for them in
                           that respect? - A. It happened either before death or
                    F      just at the time of death.   How I can say that is that
                           the fractures were associated with bruising over the
                           surface and bruising only occurs if the person is still
                           alive.   That does not mean to say that they are
                           conscious but clearly these occurred while he was still
                           technically alive.   The fact that they were on the left
                           side and the upper ribs indicates they could well be
                           resuscitation injuries because that is where, that just
                    G      lies over the heart, and that is quite a common site
                           for fractures to be produced during resuscitation.    So
                           he was alive, he probably was deeply unconscious at the
                           time, but because the heart was still pumping that
                           would produce the bruising.

                        Q. I am obliged.

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                 -   5   -
                                                                          DR. J. C. CLARK
                                                                             it. R. SAUERS


                                  THE CORONER:    I will just ask a couple snore
                             questions because I want to try and help you with it as
                             far as we are able.

                                              Further by The Coroner:

                        Q. At the opening - you weren't here of course, Dr. Clark
                    B      - but Prof. Usher indicated that in his view in a crush
                           asphyxia situation the person would lose consciousness
                           within seconds rather than minutes, and that he would
                           die within minutes if things were not relieved. - A.
                           That is right.

                        Q. Would you go along with that? - A. I would say he would
                           probably lose consciousness within ten, fifteen seconds
                           or so of this heavy pressure being applied.   He would
                           become unconscious and would remain unconscious for^
                           three to four minutes and die after that.   He certainly
                           would have been unconscious very quickly.

                        0. So the perception of the disaster, once it had taken a
                           hold properly, shall we say, would have been relatively
                           brief? - A. Yes, it would.
                    D
                                     THE CORONER:     Anything else you want to ask on
                             that?

                                     MR FRASER:     No, thank you, sir.

                                  THE CORONER:    Anybody else want to ask any
                             questions of Dr. Clark?   (No response)
                    E
                        Q.   I am obliged to you, Dr. Clark.      Thank you   very much
                             indeed.

                                  THE CORONER:   And now we will turn to the
                             presenting Officer.

                                      POL. IMSP. MATTHEW ROBERT SAUERS Called:

                                                    By THE CORONER:

                        Q.   If you would give us your name, Inspector? - A. Matthew
                             Robert Sawers, Inspector, West Midlands Police.

                        Q. And if you would take me through the summary, please? -
                           A. At about 1015 hours on Saturday 15th April, 1989,
                           Mr. William Ewart Pemberton left Liverpool with his
                           son, William Roy Pemberton, to travel to Sheffield.
                           They travelled on an Amberline coach arriving in
                           Sheffield about 1230 hours.

                                  I shall now go on, sir, to refer to Mr. Pemberton
                             Senior as Bill Pemberton and to the deceased as Roy.
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                       11.   R.   SAWERS




                        Q. Yes. - A. Roy intended to watch the match, the FA Cup
                           Semi Final at Hillsborough Stadium and had a ticket for
                           the Leppings Lane terraces.  His father did not intend
                           to watch the football but had travelled with his son to
                           keep him company.

                                  Upon arrival in Sheffield Bill Pemberton remained
                           on the coach whilst his son left to make his way to the
                           s tadiura.
                    B
                                At about 1520 hours, following the severe crushing
                           in the West Stand terracing, Detective Constable Fox
                           was near to the goals at the Leppings Lane end of the
                           pitch.  He assisted spectators, who have not been
                           identified, to carry a man on a hoarding across the
                           pitch.  The m a n ’s head was covered by clothing but he
                    C      is now identified as Roy.     The Officer left the man
                           near to the gymnasium as he went to assist others.

                                Shortly afterwards Police Constable Wilkinson
                           found Roy outside the gymnasium and with assistance
                           carried him into the gyianasium where a temporary
                           mortuary had been set up.

                    D           At 1600 hours Dr. Curpen examined Roy in the
                           temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

                                At about midnight Bill Pemberton identified the
                           body of his son to Police Constable Wilkinson in the
                           temporary mortuary at the gymnasium.

                                Police Constable Wilkinson later escorted Roy's
                    E      body to the Medico-Legal Centre and confirmed the
                           identification to Detective Constable Weigold.

                                On Sunday, 16th April 1939, following
                           identification by DC Weigold Dr. John Clark carried out
                           an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of
                           death.
                    F           Found in Roy's personal effects was a half of a
                           match ticket although it has not been possible to
                           establish how or when he entered the stadium.

                        Q. There is just one problem.  I was looking through this,
                           I think it was yesterday, and if you look at paragraph
                           4. - A. Yes, sir.
                    G   Q. You have got,   "At about 1520 hours ...." - A. Yes,
                           sir.

                        Q. And I can't find the reference to 1520 in the
                           statement.  Perhaps you can help me on that - at least
                           in the statement I included in my bundle, I think would
                           be fairer to say. - A. Just bear with me a moment, sir.
                H
                                                 -   7   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                        M.   R.   SAWERS
                                                                             H. LAYTOil

                        Q. It is not a terribly important point because in the
                           visual evidence we have got a timed picture.  It is
                           merely a matter of accuracy.  If I allow Inspector
                           Layton to ....  Ue will see if there are any questions
                           of you and then perhaps we can see whether we can
                           clarify that later on. - A. Yes, sir.

                                THE CORONER:     Anything from any of you?    (No
                           response)
                    B   Q. I had intended to warn you of this, Inspector, but I am
                           afraid it slipped my mind, I am sorry.  - A. If I could
                           just make one comment, sir, I have available to you any
                           further documentation in relation to the height that
                           was recorded at the time of the post mortem and the
                           subsequent inquiries.

                                THE CORONER:   Are you satisfied with what you
                    C
                           have heard on the question of the height?

                                HR FRASER:     Yes, sir, thank you.

                                THE CORONER:   If you want to, we can assist you
                           any further, as far as we are able that is, but I think
                           probably you have heard enough.
                    D
                                    PET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                                               By THE CORONER:

                                THE WITNESS:   Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
                           Inspector, West Midlands Police.  Sir, an examination
                           of visual evidence has been made in respect of Roy and
                    E      he has been identified on a photograph in the enclosure
                           which we have referred to as number 4.  Mr. Bill
                           Pemberton, Roy's father, identified his son in
                           enclosure 4 on a photograph which has been referenced
                           PB16/30, and that photograph, sir, is timed at 1445
                           hours.

                                Sir, there is a further photograph which Mr. and
                    F      Hrs. Pemberton looked at.  It is one of these
                           photographs where unfortunately there cannot be a
                           precise identification, and if I can just come back to
                           that again in a second, sir.

                        Q. Yes. - A. On a further photograph, reference PR6/2A Roy
                           is shown being carried across the pitch on a temporary
                           stretcher and, in fact, sir, that photograph is timed
                    G      at 1532.  On a photograph which has been given the
                           reference number AH/11, this shows the stretcher party
                           at the Spion Kop end of the ground and Detective
                           Constable Fox of the South Yorkshire Police confirms
                           that he is shown on the photograph, and in fact he
                           signed a plan of the pitch area to indicate the
                           location at which he found Roy, and sir, that plan is
                H          referenced RAF1.



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                 M.   LAYTON


                               Mr. Gareth O'Leary, who was a spectator at the
                    A     match has identified himself on a number of
                          photographs, including the photograph referenced
                          PR6/2A, and AH/11 and at this stage he is assisting to
                          carry Roy across the pitch.

                                Sir, if I can just refer to the possible
                           identification made by the family, sir this refers to a
                    B      photograph which has been given the reference number
                           PR1/22A.   It is timed at 1504 and unfortunately there
                           just is not sufficient detail for us to     takeitany
                           further, so as such   it still remains an    unconfirmed
                           identification.

                        0. It is a possibility but you would not want to .... - A.
                           That is right, sir,   it is a possibility.
                    C
                        Q. And is it ...? - A.    It is on the pitch,    sir.

                        Q. It is on the pitch. - A. Sir, can I refer you to a plan
                           which I have prepared which has been given the
                           reference number HWJL88?

                        Q. C57. - A. And a second plan, sir, which has been given
                    D      the reference number HWJL39, which is of the pitch.

                        Q. C58. - A. And, sir, would you wish to refer to RAF1, DC
                           Fox's plan?

                        Q. Yes, I think we had better because it is a slightly
                           different position, isn't it? - A. It is, sir, yes.
                    E   0. So that will be C59.       Can you show us where they are? -
                           A. Yes, sir.

                              (The witness referred to the large scale plan)

                           Sir, if I can refer you first of all to HWJL88, that is
                           a plan of the terraces.    This is the area of enclosure
                           number 4, and the photograph that Mr. and Mrs.
                    F      Pemberton found shows Roy in approximately that
                           position there, in enclosure number 4.    In respect of
                           the plan t!WJL<&9, the unconfirmed identification, sir,
                           again made by the family, actually shows, or is
                           indicated in this location here approximately.    There
                           are a number of photographic identifications then which
                           basically show Roy being carried across the pitch.    The
                    G      first, in fact, is in this location he r e.

                        Q. At the other side, isn't it? - A. There is one that you
                           may not have on your plan, which is quite a late
                           addition, a photograph which is the one I have referred
                           to where he is being carried across the pitch.   Can I
                           just give you the reference number?

                H       Q. Yes, please. - A. Yes, sir.       On the photograph



J. L. Harpham Ltd                                 -    9 -
                                                                          M. LAYTOH


                           referenced PR6/2A, which I believe is not one that is
                           actually indicated on that plan, but in this position
                           here, that photograph is tinned at 1532 and is in that
                           position there, and then there then follows on that
                           plan a series of photographs which are, as it were,
                           duplicates of the same group of people carrying Roy
                           across the pitch.

                    B   Q. Yes. - A. To here.

                        0. To there, yes.  So really that one which we have not
                           got .... - A. That establishes a time for us across the
                           pitch.

                        Q. Perhaps we ought to include that on the copy which we
                           will be using.  What reference have you given to this
                           plan?  This is HWJL89, on C58, if you at your
                           convenience update it with that reference, please. - A.
                           Yes, and then, sir, dealing with plan RAF1 which is
                           again a plan of the pitch, in respect of the location
                           that DC Fox indicated, he indicated her e , so there is a
                           discrepancy in overall terras of one side to the other
                           which we cannot explain.

                    D   Q. Yes, but Hr. Fox's is not based on photographic
                           evidence, it is based on recollection, isn't it? - A.
                           That is right, sir, yes.

                        0. And after, I don't know when he did it, but whenever it
                           was, it is not easy to remember precisely? - A. That
                           has been the case, sir.
                    E           THE CORONER:     Hr. Fraser?

                                MR FRASER:     Thank you, no, sir.

                                THE CORONER:  Any questions of the Officer?     (Wo
                           response) Mr. Layton, thank you very much indeed.

                                Mr. and Mrs. Pemberton, thank you very much for
                           coming this afternoon and also, of course, for coining
                           on Day 1 to hear what was happening on that day.

                                I am very, very sorry that you had, if you like,
                           the added stress and anxiety to do with the heights and
                           these things which we have been dealing with today, but
                           I hope that those matters have been clarified to your
                           satisfaction.  Of course, in an ideal world mistakes
                           should never happen but I think bearing in mind the
                           time when a lot of this was being done, and also the
                           fact that the people who were recording were also under
                           some considerable pressure and stress and upset, it
                           isn't entirely surprising if somebody made a
                           transcription error, which is probably the explanation
                           for the differences in the recorded height as against
                H          what you knew your lad to be, but anyway we have tried
                           to do our best to clarify it as far as we are able.


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                 - 10 -
                             Those things are worries and upsets but the real
                        pain, of course, is having lost the boy and I quite,
                        quite understand that you have had - I have read your
                        statement ^
                                             and he has no doubt caused you
                        considerable anxiety from time to time but it does not
                        mean to say he is not very, very precious to you and I
                        am very sorry that you have lost him.

                             Thank you for coming, and we are now going to rise
                    B   before we start on our next Inquest.


                        (The Inquest into the death of WILLIAM ROY PEMBERTON
                                was adjourned to a date to be fixed)




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H
                                              11
J. L. Harpham Ltd
