                                                                                                       M IR .15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                  Date and tim e raised                                        ■   Number

             05                               _
                                   \ ________C L L         ^                 .vA ryJU -       t- + e     v"V

    jde source and any document number if relevant)


Receiver's instructions - urgent action - Y es/N o      ____
                                                                                                                                   Receiver




                                                                                                                                   Indexer
D ocum ent registered /indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                               Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                                   Indexer
Indexed as indicated                                 (TT                                  ■

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                                          SIO
Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




                                                                                                                                   Indexer
F urther action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
             PAUL ANTHONY HEWITSON




                     Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , B S , MRCGP

             (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                        At

            The Medico-Legal Centre,
                 Watery Street,
                   Sheffield.

                        On

                 25th April 1990




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. .Hafpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
M R . JACKSON
                                        INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                                                                    Page N o ,

                        PROF. J.S. JONES Called



                    B   POLICE IHSP. MATTHEW ROBERT SAUERS Called

                             13v THE CORONER                           4

                        POLICE INSP. 1HCHAEL LAYTON Called

                             By THE CORONER                            6




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                    A   2 5th April,   1990


                                 INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF PAXIL ANTHONY
                                               HEWITSON

                              TIIE CORONER:   Good morning everybody.   Please sit
                        down.    Good morning, ladies and gentlemen.   Are you well?
                    B   We will just wait a moment for Mr. Fraser.    Could one
                        of the presenting Officers who are not in the case just
                        do a sweep of the building and see where he is.

                             It is not quite as hot in here this morning,        is it?
                        I am comfortable.  I hope you are.

                             MR. FRASER:   Good morning.  I apologise, sir.
                        I was speaking to some families downstairs anci it took
                        a little longer than I anticipated.

                             Sir, the first matter you will hear toda}^ relates
                        to Paul Hewitson.  His mum and dad are present in Court,
                        his sister and a social worker who has supported them
                        through the last year.  I appear for the family, sir,
                        in my usual guise as a member of the Steering Committee.
                    D   The family’s solicitors are a member of my group.

                              THE CORONER:    Thank you very much indeed,

                              Mr. and Mrs. Hewitson,        good morning ----

                             A MEMBER OF THE FAMILY:          Actually it is his father,
                    E   sister and girlfriend.

                              THE CORONER:     I am sorry, I beg your pardon.

                             Let me just explain to you what we are going to do
                        this morning so that you know what happens.       First of
                        all, I am going to read the evidence which was taken
                        on the 1 9 th April, 1 9 8 9 and, if there are any mistakes
                        in that - in fact there is one small error that I know
                        of - I will read it as it was, then I will deal with
                        the corrections of the mistakes.       When we have done
                        that we are going to recount the blood alcohol levels
                        as far as they are relevant and then we are going to
                        listen to the pathologist and he will tell us what is
                        appropriate.    Having done that, we will then listen to
                        the presenting Officers xirho x/ill tell us what they
                        have surnmo.rised of the evidence.     When that is done
                        we will conclude the Inquest at this stage.       Now,
                        you will hear, particularly during the presenting
                        Officers’ reading, loads of references to plans and
                        numbers and goodness knows what else.       Do not worry
                        about it.    We need that for the record so we can find
                        our way round all the evidence later on if we need to,
                        but try and ignore that so you can pick up the sense
                H       of what is being said.       These ladies and gentlemen, of
                        course, are the Jury.       There is a big notice which says
                        so there.
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                    - 1 -
                                                                  PROF. J.S. JONES



                             This is the resumed Inquest which was opened on the
                        1 9 th April and,on that occasion, Neil Anthony Parkin,
                        the Acting' Coroner’s Officer said;

                                 "The body which is the subject of this Inquest
                                 has been identified to PC 2902 Roberts of the
                                 South Yorkshire Police as that of Paul Anthony
                                 Hewitson by William J. Hewitson, his father.
                    B            He was 26 years of age having been born on the
                                 18th September, 1 9 6 2 at Liverpool.  He was a
                                 single man and he lived at
                                        L Liverpool.    He was a general builder by
                                 occupation.   He died at Hillsborough Football
                                 Ground following an incident there on Saturday,
                                 15tli April, 1989.    PC 2902 Roberts caused the
                                 body to be removed to the Medico Legal Centre
                                 and there he identified it to Detective
                                 Constable Simon WeigoId who subsequent!}'
                                 identified the same body to Prof. Jones,     It
                                 is the family wish that the body should be
                                 buried."

                             You remember we sent you a form and asked you to
                        check the details and, in fact, you signed it on the 2 7 th
                    D   April and we had spelt            incorrectly.  It should
                        be          | but all the other information we had was
                        correct,
                             I should perhaps say one other thing before we go
                        on.  You will see people are not talcing the oaths when
                        they come down.  That is because they were already sworn
                    E   on an earlier occasion in respect of the Inquests.

                             The blood alcohols were calculated by Dr. Forrest
                        who gave evidence regarding these on the first day and,
                        in respect of Paul, the level was S8mg/100 ml.

                                     PROF. JOHN STEPHEN JONES Called;

                                             By THE CORONER:

                        Q. If you would just introduce yourself for the sake of
                           the shorthand writer - not all your qualifications,
                           just names? - A. John Stephen Phillips Jones, Home
                           Office Pathologist, Consultant Pathologist at
                           the City Hospital, Nottingham, and Prof. of Forensic
                           Medicine in the University of Nottingham.

                        Q. Good morning, Prof. Jones.    Prof. Jones, this case
                           relates to somebody who was identified to you, I.
                           believe, as Paul Hewitson and also had a reference
                           number h 2 ? - A. That is correct.

                        Q. If you would be good enough to take us through the
                           relevant parts of your post-mortem and give me your
                H          cause of death as well? - A. Yes,  He was identified


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                   -2-
                                             PROF. J.S. JONES



  to me by Detective Constable Weigold at the Medico
  Legal Centre.   The Deceased was a well-built young
  man of good general physique.   There was very
  marked cyanosis, that is a blue discolouration of
  the skin.   This was particularly marked in the
  region of the head, neck and shoulders and also
  of the fingertips.   There were multiple small
  haemorrhages present in the skin of the eyelids
  and of the eyes and these petechial haemorrhages
  are characteristic of a particular form of death
  which was that of traumatic asphyxia.   On external
  examination there were a number of abrasions, that
  is, scratches, and bruises to the head, to the face
  and on various parts of the trunk of the body and
  on the legs.   These were mainly associated with
  friction marks due to clothing being moved quite
  suddenly and in a compressed sort of way on the
  body surface.   The remainder of the examination
  showed these petechial haemorrhages to be present
  on various organs of the body, particularly on the
   surface of the heart and the lungs and these were
  all indicative of death due to traumatic asphyxia.
  There was no evidence of any natural disease.
  This appeared to be an otherwise very healthy young
  man of good physique.

       THE CORONER:   Thank y o u Q   Mr. Fraser?

     MR. FRASER;      P a u l ’s family have no questions,   sir,
thank y o u .

     PROF. JONES:   If it would help the family at all,
sir, I would be very pleased to go through with them
any doubts or questions that they have in private after
the Inque s t .

     THE CORONER:   You have heard that Prof. Jones is
offering to speak to you privately if it would help you.

       MR. FRASER:    I am sure that offer is appreciated,
sir.    Thank you,

     TITE CORONER:      What I would suggest for logistical
reasons so that we can deal with it best is, if this is
okay with you, we need Prof, Jones in the next Inquest
as well so when we have closed yours at the moment, if
you would be kind enough to wait a little while so that
I can take Mr. J o n e s ’ evidence and then he can go out
in the middle of the next Inquest and speak to you so
you will not have to wait very long.       Is that okay?

       MR. HEWITSON (Snr):   That is okay, thank you.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you, Mr. Jones.  Perhaps you
can organise it when we rise so that everybody knows
precisely what is happening.




                             -3-
 POLICE INSP. MATTHEW ROBERT    SAUERS Called:

                Bv THE CORONER;

     THE WITNESS;   Matthew Robert Savers, Police
Inspector, West Midlands, sir.

Can you please, when you are ready, take me through
the summary? - A. Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER;   One moment, I forgot to look at
you to check whether you had any questions of the
pathologist?  (No questions from the Jury ) Thank you.

Yes? - A. At about 1000 hours on Saturday, 1 5 th April,
19 8 9 Terence Mathew Moore left Liverpool in a motor
van with a number of friends including Paul Anthony
Hewitson to travel to Sheffield.    They intended to
watch the PA Cup Semi Final match at Hillsborough
Stadium.    Paul did not initially have a ticket for
the match but purchased one en route from an unknown
source.

They arrived in Sheffield at about 1300 hours and
sat outside the ground.  Terence Moore sat with Paul
in Leppings Lane and did not attempt to enter the
turnstiles due to the crowd.  Shortly before 1500
hours they joined the crowd and entered the stadium
via a large gate to the right of the turnstiles,
Gate C.

They went along the tunnel and stood together in
Enclosure 3 having been moved by the crowd pressure
to the front right corner of the enclosure.  Mr.
Moore was subjected to a surge of pressure and he
lost sight of Paul.  After some minutes Mr. Moore
found Paul lying on the terraces.

Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
terracing Police Constable Roberts was passed a
man, now known to be Paul, from the terraces by
unknown persons.  He carried him onto the pitch
but could not find any sign of life.

Mr. John. Crolley went onto the pitch and attempted
to resuscitate a man now known to be Paul.

Police Constable Beaumont saw a man, now known to
be Paul, lying in the penalty area near to Enclosure
3. The officer attempted resuscitation and saw a
doctor also try resuscitation without success.

Dr. Michael Alexander Hutson tried to resuscitate
Paul on the pitch but was unsuccessful.

Dr. Paul Sadior also tried to resuscitate him on
the pitch.  Again without success.
                                                                   II.R. SAWERS



                          police Constable Beaumont saw fans carry Paul to the
                          Spion Kop end of the ground on a hoarding.  After
                          some time he was carricd with assistance into the
                          gymnasium by Police Constable Roberts where a
                          temporary mortuary had been set up.

                          At 1555 hours Dr. Mathew Bull examined Paul in the
                          temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.
                    B     At 0030 hours on Sunday, 16th April, Mr. William
                          Joseph Hewitson identified the body of his son to
                          Folice Constable Roberts at the temporary mortuary.

                           Police Constable Roberts later escorted Paul *s body
                           to the Medico Legal Centre where he confirmed the
                           identification to Detective Constable Weigold.

                           On Sunday, 16 th April, following identification by
                           DC Weigold, Prof. Stephen Jones carried out an
                           autopsy and submitted a report giving the cause of
                           death.

                           Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
                           blood sample from the Deceased where the presence
                    D      of ethanol was detected.  The witnesses proving
                           continuity of the blood sample are Philip Rich,
                           Detective Sergeant Turner and Detective Sergeant
                           Fletcher.  Dr. Alexander Forrest carried out the
                           analysis.

                           Found in P a u l ’s personal effects was a ticket
                           counterfoil for the match.      The evidence of Mr.
                    E      Moore is clear that they entered through Gate C
                           without handing in their tickets.      It has not been
                           established what happened to the other part of
                           P a u l ’s ticket.

                        q . Just a couple of things.   If we turn to paragraph 2
                            and the evidence there, part of Mr. M o o r e ’s statement
                            which I think is on page 2 , I would like to be a bit
                            more clear about some of these times.    Am I right
                            in thinking that what Mr. Moore is saying is that
                            they spent some time in and around Sheffield and
                            eventually they returned to the ground about half-
                            past-two? - A. That is correct, yes.

                        Q. And at that point they did not make an attempt to
                           enter - they sat on a bridge, I think it says? -
                           A. The bridge adjacent to the river, sir, yes.

                        Q. And then he says that about five-to-three they were
                           still on the bridge? - A. That is correct, sir.

                        q . And he heard some conversation which made him think
                            it might be perhaps easier to get into the ground
                H           because of some gates being opened or something of
                            that nature? - A. lie docs say that, sir, yes.


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                   -5-
                                                                         H.R. SAUERS
                                                                         M. LAYTON


                        q . And having made his way, by various means,^into the
                            vicinity of a gate, ho then did notice it Doing
                            opened, is that right? — A, lie oid, sir.

                        q . And then I tliinlc he says:

                                     "I went through the gates.  I could see
                                     straight ahead the tunnel and the Forest
                    B                fans at the other end of the tunnel."

                                  A. He does, sir.

                        Q. So that gate must be, presumably, Gate C? - A. It has
                           to bo Gate C, sir, yes.

                        0. You cannot see the tunnel from the outer perimeter
                           gates, can you? - A. No, you cannot, sir.

                                       THE CORONER:  Jury, you remember all these gates,
                                  do you not? The outer porimiter gate, then Gate C.

                                       Mr. Hewitson, is that clear to you? You know
                                  the geography well enough to be able to ----
                    D                  MR. HEUITSON (Snr):     Yes.

                        0     .        THE CORONER:   The only other point - it is a
                                  very, very minor one - in paragraph 3 where we say
                                  he lost sight of Paul, I think that is really an
                                  inference, is it not, because what he says is that
                                  he was with Paul and then the next thing is that he
                    E             was looking for him? It says he was looking to find
                                  Paul so he must have lost sight of him at some point? -
                                  A. Yeso

                        o .       Uould you agree that that is correct? - A. I would,
                                  sir, yes.

                                       THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser?

                                       MR. FRASER:    No, thank you, sir.

                                       THE CORONER:   No questions from any of you?
                                  (No questions from the J u r y ) Thank you very much.

                                            POLICE INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                                                      Bv THE CORONER:

                                       THE WITNESS:   Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
                                  Inspector, West Midlands Police.

                        Q. Yes? - A. An examination has been made of visual
                           evidence in respect of Paul and he has, in fact, been
                           identified on the pitch.
                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                  M. LAYTON



                          Mr. Moore has signed a plan of the terraces indicating
                          the location at which he last saw Paul and that, sir,
                          is reference TMM 1• He has identified Paul being
                          treated on the pitch and that, sir, is shown on a
                          video, a BBC video tape, which is referenced MAP 3
                          timed at 1 5 2 2 :2 2 : 0 1 and at this stage, sir, it is
                          being treated by Dr. Hutson and one other person and
                          Dr. Hutson has, in fact, confirmed that identification.
                    B     If I could mention in respect of that particular
                          identification, sir, in this case it is quite a close
                          video shot and it does show a very clear attempt at
                          resuscitation.
                        Q. This is an unusual case because we actually have two
                           named doctors? — A. That is right, sir, yes.
                        Q. Which is rare, as we have already discovered? - A. Yes.
                           Sir, PC Roberts has confirmed that this video shows
                           the same person that he referred to as carrying onto
                           the pitch.
                           PC Beaumont has identified himself on a photograph and
                           that is referenced NGN1/37 and this shows Paul on a
                           hoarding on the pitch and he is also shown on a
                    D      photograph CS1/65 which shows lying on the pitch at
                           the Spion Kop end of the ground. The officer signed
                           a plan of the pitch indicating the position which he
                           saw Paul in and that, sir, is referenced MIB/3.
                           Sir, could I refer you to a plan TMM1, which is a plan
                           of the terraces?
                    E   Q. Yes, we will give that reference no. C84? - A. There
                           is a further plan, sir, which I have drawn up -
                           MWJL 6 7 .

                        Q c That will be C 8 5 ? - A. Would you wisli to refer to any
                           others, sir?

                    F   Q. I do not think it is necessary, thank you.
                                THE CORONER:   Mr. Hewitson, the Officer will now
                           show us on the big plans what he has got on the small
                           ones, so to speak*
                        Q. Yes? - A. If lire can refer to the plan TMM 1, Mr*
                           Moore *s plan, the location of these, sir, identify
                           Paul on the terraces in this Enclosure 3 and he has
                           located him in this position here. I have referred
                           to it before but the dotted lines indicate the
                           location of the barrier that subsequently broke.
                           Sir, in respect of the plan MWJL 67, the location
                           on the pitch which refers to this plan in respect of
                           the video identification on MAP 3 at 1522 is in this
                           position here. There is a further mark on thatplan,
                H          sir, which refers to a photograph SMIR 1/53. That
                           refers to a photograph showing Paul’s location at

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                   -7-
                                                                   M. LAYTON



                        the Spion Kop end of the pitch in that position there.

                             TILS CORONER:     Thank you.   Mr. Fraser, any
                        questions?

                             MR. FRASER:      No, thank you, sir.

                             THE CORONER:      I am grateful to you, Inspector
                    B   Layton.
                             That is all the evidence we are talcing at this
                        stage.
                              Mr. Hewitson, I can see how very distressing this
                        Inquest is for you and it is not surprising that that
                        is the case.   I am grateful to you for coming and you
                    C   being here and hearing the evidence and, obviously,
                        I am sorry if we have added to your pain but,
                        nevertheless, I am glad you are here.   May I say on
                        behalf of myself in particular, but also I am sure -
                        I have not asked them individually - but the Jury and
                        anybody else would join us and say how very sorry we
                        are that you have suffered this terrible grievous
                        loss.   Thank you very much indeed.
                    D
                             T/liat wo will do is rise for a moment or two and
                        then we will come back and as soon as Prof. Jones is
                        free he will be available to talk to you.

                                             (Short Adjournment)

                    E




                    F




                    G




                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                  -8-
