HER MAJESTY*S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

. S-L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                   At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                   On

           28th February, 1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
             INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT



MOLE Sworn

By The Coroner
Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne
Cross-Examined by Mr. Isaacs
              SIXTIETH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

             THURSDAY, 28th FEBRUARY 1991

               BRIAN LEONARD MOLE Sworn

                    By THE CORONER

 You are Brian Leonard Mole? - A. That is correct, sir.

And you are a Chief Superintendent? - A. Yes, sir.

I know that you are the Commander at Barnsley at the
moment, aren't you? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Prior to that I think you were Chief Superintendent in
other Divisions? - A. Indeed I was, sir, yes.

Because of that you had considerable experience of
policing not only football matches in general but
Hillsborough in particular? - A. I have indeed, yes,
sir.

In the briefest possible way just summarise your
footballing policing experience up to 1989? - A. Right,
sir, yes.   In the seventies I was the Sub-Divisional
Commander in Sheffield City with the responsibility for
policing Sheffield United at that time.   In 1979 I
became Head of the Operations Division as
Superintendent and served there for two years,
responsible for all public order matters within the
County of South Yorkshire, responsible for training,
for football, firearms, horses, dogs, underwater search
- all the operational matters within the County.    In
1982 I went as the Head of CID in the Sheffield North
Division, shortly afterwards becoming the Deputy
Divisional Commander responsible for policing
Hillsborough; remained in that post until '85 when I
became the Divisional Commander in the Sheffield North
Division; remained there until March of 1989, during
which time I policed Hillsborough throughout, with the
two semi-finals in '87 and '88.   I then transferred to
Barnsley and have been responsible for the policing of
the Barnsley Borough of the South Yorkshire Police
since that time.

Thank you.   It follows that, in fact, 1981 was a year
 in which you were not policing Hillsborough, is that
 right? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.  I was in
Operations Division but, in fact, I was away at the
Command course at Bramshill during the early part of
that year.
                                              B.   L.   MOLE


I take it when you started taking up duties at
Hillsborough in 1982 onward, because although you did
not take definitive command until 1985 .... - A. That
is correct, sir.

Over that period you. did actually, I think, study files
and acquaint yourself with what had gone on? - A.
Indeed, yes.  As Deputy Divisional Commander I had from
'82 to '85 when I became Divisional Commander, still
had responsibility for policing at the Ground, and when
the Divisional Commander was away I was the acting
Chief Superintendent, so I had to be fully aware of
what was taking place at those grounds.

On the basis that you were not present at that match
and had no responsibility for what happened or did not
happen, can you just briefly recount as far as you are
able what actually occurred in 1981 at Hillsborough, on
the Leppings Lane terrace? - A. Yes.  As Head of the
Operations Division I had an over-view of footballing
within the County and I know from reports and the
research that took place that there were difficulties
on the terraces, which at that time did not have radial
fences.  As I understand it, the situation was
addressed by the Working Group responsible for policing
the football grounds in the County, and the answer to
the problem experienced was the introduction of radial
fences.  From my point of view the problem experienced
in 1981 had therefore been addressed, dealt with and
put into a position where we could move forward to
operate matches in relative safety.

I think what your answer implies is that the '81
situation having been dealt by the radial fences,
ceased to be a consideration as far as you were
concerned in planning? - A. My understanding was that
problems had been resolved by the introduction of the
fences and therefore I had not got a problem with the
Leppings Lane terraces.

What I am wanting to find out, because it is difficult
actually to find somebody - we could find people who
were there but I don't want to broaden this Inquest
beyond what is absolutely essential - but do you know
what actually happened in '81?  If you don't, please
say so. - A. Not specifics.  What I can say is that
there was pressure towards the centre of the Leppings
Lane terraces from the sides because there was no
stoppage of the flow across the terraces, but because
of the radial fences that stopped the continual
pressure from all areas.  That was my understanding.

So what you are saying is that it was people who were
moving in towards the centre from the wings, because
                                             B.   L.   MOLE


presumably they wanted to be there .... - A. A better
view.

Yes, which created some pressure effect? - A. That is
my understanding of it, yes.

And the object as you understand it was that putting in
these lateral fences would reduce lateral movement and
therefore prevent this type of pressure effect? - A.
That is correct, yes, sir.

So then it is right, certainly from the time you
started operating, the radial fences were in situ? - A.
yes.

We know from other people, and I am sure you will be
able to confirm, that initially there were only three?
- A. Yes.

Then I think in 1985 another couple were added? - A.
The difficulties were that we were using that end of
the Ground for visiting and home supporters and
segregation was difficult, and in fact the others were
added to maintain segregation until such time as we
only had that for visiting supporters.

Before you were fully in charge was Mr. Lock somebody
who acted as Ground Controller from time to time? - A.
Indeed, Mr. Lock was the Sub-Divisional Commander, what
we refer to as FI Sub-Division based at Hammerton Road,
which had the responsibility for the Ground Control and
policing the football at Hillsborough on a normal
league match day.

So he presumably did this from time to time because he,
in fact, has told us that? - A. Absolutely.  He did a
regular job there and was very capable in dealing with
that operation, sir.

Did you sometimes have to stand in for him when he was
not available? - A. No.  I would not stand in for that
role; I would go and take command of an operation
depending on what grade the match was.  In fact, we
grade matches at the beginning of a season at A, B, and
C category, and normally I, as Divisional Commander,
would take command of an A category match.  Normally B
and C would be taken command by Mr. Lock overall, but I
would not stand in for his function I would not stand
in for his function I would just take overall command
of the operation.

At one stage you were, I thought, of equal rank with
him, isn't that right, in '82 to '85? - A. Yes, but the
Divisional Commander and Deputy are in hierarchical
                                             B.   L.   MOLE


terms Divisional Commander, therefore I would be acting
as Chief Superintendent when I took command but I would
not do the Superintendent's job as normal basis.

I see, so although there was a parity, if you did have
to move over you, in fact, would have taken overall
command? - A. Overall command as a Divisional
Commander.

Does that mean that you yourself never acted as, I
think the term is Controller, i s n ’t it? - A. That is
correct, sir.  On no occasion have I actually had to
sit in the Box and control.  I have been the overall
Commander responsible for inside and outside the Ground
policing.

One other question with regard to Mr. Lock, you
mentioned that as far as you recollect he would control
B and C matches? - A. Yes.

Does that mean that he would not control A matches? -
A. What it means is that he would be present at an A
match but usually the same kind of hierarchical
structure would apply as to the semi-finals, in some
degree, to a lesser degree in that I would be overall
responsible for the operation, operating both inside
and outside the Ground; Mr. Lock would be the Ground
Commander utilising the Control Room and deploying
resources within the Stadium itself under my direction.

Can we just try and get the terms right so that I
understand what we are talking about, because it may be
that we have been a bit lax in this? My understanding
is that there is an overall Commander, which would be
you, right? - A. Yes.

Then there were, in a big match, four Superintendents
of equal status, more or less? - A. Yes.

One was known as the Ground Commander, who was the
internal man?- A. Right.

One was outside Leppings Lane - I have forgotten which
sector it was - I think Sector 1? - A. Yes.

Who was the outside Commander.  The third was a
Commander dealing with the Penistone Road equivalent
job? - A. Yes.

The fourth man was the chap in the Control Room? - A.
That is right, sir.
                                      B.L. MOLE
                                          * #


What is the correct term so that we can distinguish
the man in the Control Room from all these other people?
- A. Yes, the difficulty is there are in fact three
levels and if I can help.

Yes please? - A. In .normal matches the Ground
Commander would assume the role of both Controller
and Ground Commander and would be like Mr. Lock who
would operate from the Box and would have Chief
Inspectors or Inspectors responsible for various
sections of the ground.

      MR. KING: Sorry to interrupt, it may be just me
and nobody else. I am finding it very difficult to take
it all in at the speed with which the witness is speaking.

      THE CORONER: I was waiting for the Shorthand
Writers to wave at me.

         THE WITNESS:   I apologise sir.   I will start
again.

      On the B and C category matches which are the
base line normal day to-day-match you would have a
Superintendent in charge, who would in those days be
Mr. Lock, and he would operate from the Control Room
with Inspectors and Chief Inspectors as Sector or
Section Commanders.

      As an example you would have an Inspector in the
West Stand, an Inspector on the Kop, an Inspector on
the perimeter track, but he would be in overall command
because normally the operation is not that widespread
on a low key match.

      The next level might be an A category match
which might be a local derby. It might be Leeds v.
Sheffield Wednesday or something like that which would
be attracting a particularly large crowd which might
have intelligence to suggest public disorder or other
aspects, and normally I as Divisional Commander would
take overall responsibility for that event.

      I would have a freedom of operation inside and
out with my Ground Controller Mr. Lock, or whoever he
was, in the Control Box taking action that he deemed
necessary which was brought to his attention; responding
to my instructions if I saw situations developing. I
would still have Chief Inspectors and Inspectors as at
the normal match but probably in greater numbers.

      The third category which Mr. Lock incidentally
did not come into because he did not do a semi-final,
                                  B.L. MOLE
      » *                             * f

would be the semi-final scenario, and that would involve
me again as overall Commander but I would then have a
higher level of command responsibilities within the
ground.
      The Ground Controller would be the Mr. Lock but
a different man in p6int of fact but same manning, who
would be in the Control Room in charge of communications
and directing on instructions from me and other sector
Commanders.
      I would sectionalise it to the Ground Commander,
who in fact at the 1989 was Mr. Greenwood, and then one
responsible for one set of supporters, the visitors, from,
one side i.e. Leppings Lane which on this occasion was
Mr. Marshall and Mr. Chapman for Nottingham.

      Each of them had two Chief Inspectors to them so
they had assistance to back them up, so as the event
grew in size and stature so did the hierarchical manpower,
so there are three levels sir, and they are Sector
Commanders, overall Commander myself and the Ground
Controller. Does that help sir?
      THE CORONER: And the Ground Controller in a sense
had a pivotal role because he was the communications
centre and a decision taker as well. Would that be
right? - A. Absolutely.
That is not to detract from other people's responsibility
or your overall jurisdiction, but you would have expected
him to act and to respond? - A. I would expect senior
Officers to act independently as situations arose.

Your task, if I can just deal with that for a moment
being in overall charge, you decided, I was going to
say play the game, that is not in any sense being rude,
and I think I am right in saying that on the whole you
preferred to roam, if I can use that expression as well.
Would that be correct? - A. My style of operation sir
is to be out and about and to feel and experience the
ground and the surrounding areas so I can evaluate
personally what I am dealing with and I have done that
not only in football but in public order, in the Steel
Strike when I policed Haafields and during the Miners’
Dispute when I policed many pits in South Yorkshire and
Nottingham, and that to me is the way I operate.

Presumably that is either on foot or by vehicle. How
would you normally do it, a normal football match I am
interested in? - A. Normally at the start of a match
and particularly the semi-finals I would look at the
ground and that is really just to get that I am all
right in the ground; look at the perimeter; look at my
pens; look all round the Stadium. I then used to have
                                  B.L. MOLE
                                      tV


a Land Rover operating to me. My driver was usually
P.C. Buxton who I think has probably been and given
evidence ....

Yes, we have heard from him. - A * .... who always worked
with me and he knew how I operated. We would then really
go out into the far lying areas of Sheffield looking
for public houses; build-ups of people; what was happening.
I know from experience a lot of the Clubs use certain
parts of the city. I would look down Oughtibridge and
Stocksbridge, the routes over the Pennines. I would look
out to Tankersley where I had intercepting vehicles. I
would look into the city to see what the town centre was
like, whether that was built-up and gradually make my way
back to the Stadium.   Penistone Road was not a great
problem generally because it is a wide sweeping area, but
at some point I would be into the Leppings Lane end, but
about 10-to-3 I would normally be at the tunnel, having
spoken to the ref. earlier to give my perception of control,
i.e. what is on the pitch is your problem, what is outside
it is mine, and I would be at the tunnel normally when
the players came out.

When you say the "tunnel" you mean the players' tunnel?
- A. The players' tunnel.

Not the tunnel which as featured so largely in our
Inquiry behind Leppings Lane? - A. No, no, the players'
tunnel in the centre of the South Stand, and in between
time I would liaise with the Club; I would visit to
look at the build-up of supporters because terminals
were in the Secretary's office, Mr. Mackrell's, and one
in the television room which would give me an up-date
on crowd arrangement. I would also liaise with head­
quarters for the flow of supporters coming in, whether
it be trains or whether it be coaches, and to see that
the routes into the city were either blocked up or clear
to give me an overall perception of what was happening.
I would visit the Control Room; I would discuss with
Sector Commanders throughout that build-up as to their
perceptions but generally I was out and about.

This was not something that you had been told you had
to do, this just happens to be your methodology? - A.
That is my style of operation.

It is not restricted as you have already said simply to
football, that is the way you would do any major
policing? - A. If I do any demonstration, policed all
the city from 1975 to 1979 with the various demonstrations,
exactly the same kind of operation would apply and with
the Miners' Dispute and the Steel Strike.

That means of course that whilst you are in Point A you
can't be in Point B? - A. Absolutely sir.
                                  B.L. MOLE
      *   *                           •9 .


And it follows then that what was happening within the
ground had to be dealt with by the people who were in
charge? - A. To operate in the style I operated I had to
have extreme confidence in the professionalism and
capabilities of my Sector Commanders and I had. They
were handpicked. They had worked with me for some time.
They knew my style arid I knew their capabilities and
trusted them implicitly in their decision making process.

That has been very helpful because it gives us an over­
view of the way you operate, so to speak.
      I want to turn for a moment now then to the vexed
question of the capacities and the filling of the
Leppings Lane terrace, and if we can start first of all,
although it is not directly relevant we might as well
clear it up, if we start with small matches, the B and C
category type.
      As briefly as you can, because it is peripheral,
and restricting yourself to Leppings Lane, what was the
method that you employed, so to speak, I know you may not
always have been there .... A. I endorsed the method
that was being taken place.
      I think first it is only fair to point out
historically and I have mentioned it once, at one stage
we had mixed supporters on Leppings Lane terraces so in
the early days we only used for visitors the centre
and South centre pens and moving to the South pen because
then the elevated or the North pens would be used for
home supporters, so there was a distinct difference there
in that I would keep a sterile area, that is the North
centre pen, which I may have dogs in or I may have
Policemen in or whatever for public order segregation.
That is the main basic difference there. Normally I
would allow that to fill, that is the home supporters
area, and move from the centre pens towards the South
with visitors depending on anticipated numbers. The
difference between would be barred by Policemen and/or
Policemen and dogs depending on the intelligence as to
whether it was a violent confrontation or whatever and
it would flow in that way.
      When we got away from home supporters being in
there then we had the free flow of the West Stand and
the Leppings Lane terraces.
      Once again because of the proximity of the North
Stand it was my policy to keep the North West terrace,
the elevated section and that North Pen sterile and
that stopped the habit of coin throwing and stone throwing
and bantering that took place during the early '80s,
so I would start off with probably the centre pen
                                                   9

                                  B.L. MOLE
      «-                               •§


having the gate at the top fastened with Officers in that
area again on the North side of it, not actually in the
pen but they are there and fill.
      Depending if my intelligence was that we were only
going to get 200 or a. couple of coachloads or whatever,
then we may only use 'that pen behind the goal because
experience indicates that people like to be behind the
goal. It is the best view, they can see all that is
taking place.
      The gate at the other side of the pen which would
be locked to ensure that only that area filled would be
manned.




                    Q. When you said
. When you say the gate, the gate at the back of the
  radial fence? - a . The gate at the back, at the top.
  It is about a four feet wide gate at the back of the
  radial fence. Stewards and Policemen had keys to that
  but I had a Policemaft there and that would be locked.
  If the Inspector, and I use the same people within the
  ground because I think it is important to use the same
  people who know and understand, and so people like Mr.
  Sykes and Mr. Creaser and latterly Mr. White, would
  probably crop in regularly in matches because they knew
  the area and worked it. If they saw that greater
  numbers were coming or it was now coming to what
  appeared to the eye capacity, then they would seek
  through Mr. Lock or whoever was in the Control, Mr.
  Freeman latterly and Mr. Murray at the end, to extend
  the pen areas. That would be to open that back gate
  and let it move into the next area. That would develop
  depending on numbers until such time as either it
  stopped coming or we run out.

     On bigger matches when we used the full area then,
 as I think I have said in the past, that was a find its
 own level with the gates fastened back and no policing
 actually on the terraces.

 I still want to stick for one moment to the smaller
 matches. Let us imagine you have got a match and your
 initial plan was to fill the centre section? - A. Yes.

You would do this no doubt by having, as you have
explained, locking the radial - or at least you would
have an Officer on that? - A. Yes.

To prevent people straying? - A. That is right.

Into the.. “ A. The north and south or whichever way,
yes.

You would have the tunnel open? - A. Right.

People coming through the turnstiles and walking into
the tunnel, through the tunnel? - A. Yes.

On to the section. Supposing the time came that for
whatever reason you, Mr. Lock or whoever was in command
decided, "Hang on, we have got a load more people. We
can't get them all into this area comfortably. We had
better unlock the gate towards the south"? - A. Yes.

Did you, when you took that decision, also take a
decision with regard to steering people round the west
block so that they would come in through the south
entrance? - A. No, Officers would be aware that we had
                                                             11

                                                     B. L. MOLE

   now opened the next pen and access to it would be from
   a different route and they would be briefed. The
   serial that was on there and the Inspector who would be
   asking the question in the first place normally, he
   would be saying, "Gaft I now open?”, he would have told
   his Officers and then by word of mouth would have
   merely directed them that way round. It would depend
   because what happens when you open the gate you will
   find a lot will go over there in any case. A little
   bit more room and they might want to stand at the back
   on the top of the steps and a lot will go through the
   gate or climb the fence. Once they know they are
   allowed into the next pen you will find that some from
   the centre will go that way. So then it is a matter of
   both areas open and rather than having Policemen across
   the narrow funnel at the corner, the south and the west
   stand which would have a serial there, stopping people
   coming round there when you have not got those pens
   opened, they would be moved so that people could then
   flow round there.

Q. Would you so far as you remember have placed a serial
   across a tunnel or even closed a tunnel gate in order
   to make it easier for people to realise they ought to
   come round the south corner? - A. I think the
   difficulty is that when we have filled in this manner
   we have never really filled centre pens to a point
   where you think it is bursting at the seams. The type
      filling in a graded filling is where there are quite
   a few people in and we have got plenty of space and so
   why not use it? It is a different filling. So really
   you are not saying that the centre pen is bursting at
   the seams and, therefore, do something. What you are
   saying is, there is quite a lot. We have another 300
   or 400 to come, open it up. So that is slightly
   different. I have never had occasion to seal the
   tunnel and I have no knowledge of it being sealed in my
   operational experience.

Q. The reason why I ask you is that we have had evidence
   from at least two, probably three, sources. I am not
   talking of people but sources? - A. Yes.

Q. We have had evidence from fans who talked of the tunnel
   being shut, the gates being shut? - A. Yes.

Q. I am not talking about just having a Police presence? -
   A. No, no.

Q. But the gates actually being shut. We have had
   evidence from ex-Sergeant Higgins who says the same? -
   A. Yes.
. There is I think other evidence as well which would
  support this proposition that from time to time,
  rightly or wrongly and I am not arguing about that, the
  diversion of fans was achieved by closing off the
  tunnel. We have also heard from Dr. Eastwood who,
  although he did not particularly approve of closing the
  outer blue gates, said he had specifically installed
  the inner blue gates in order to enable this to be
  done. Can you help me on that? - A. What I can say, as
  I have said, I have never ever given the instruction to
  close the tunnel off. I have not been aware of it
  being closed off. I have heard what you have just
  outlined that this has been said. My own explanation
  is that I expect Officers to act independently if they
  see something and likewise I would normally expect them
  to report that at debrief.

      I have taken time to check the debrief situation
 and it is not ever been brought to my attention that
 that tactic was used. I have to admit that it is an
 option open to me to use and I, as an Operational
 Commander not just for football but for any operation
 in public order terms, would be well aware of the
 possibility of using such a tactic. I have to repeat
 it has never ever been brought to my attention that it
 has applied. Knowing what human nature is I can accept
 if somebody has said they have done it that they may
 have done it and it is sad to say that on occasions
 people do things and when they have resolved the
 problem realised that they have not got a problem any
 more and so they do not tell anybody. It may well be
 that that is a possible explanation, that the Sergeant
 did it, resolved his situation and that was it, fine.
 There was no problem then, but it has never been
 reported to me.

I left one person out who was actually quite important
in my summing up and I have not got the exact wording
in front of me but the sense of what Mr. Lock was
saying was that in his day when he was policing the
ground this was certainly, I use the word sealing but
that does not mean hermetically sealing? - A. Yes.

I mean a closing which was certainly something which
was being done and that was, in fact, a known and
accepted method of doing things? - A. I am extremely
surprised. at that. Mr. Lock I am sure would have
passed that on to me if it had been the case. As I
say, it is an option. The only time - I think barriers
have been mentioned at some time to me - I have ever
been involved with barriers was to barrier a programme
seller in that area because going back to a match many
years ago before the wall in the back area was there we
                                    B.L. MOLE            13
                                         *#


had used barriers   to segregate.  In fact, they had got knocked
over and somebody   was injured. That is going back before the
wall was actually   built. But I can't imagine a match that Mr.
Lock, and I think   the biggest he has policed is may be 48,000-
ish....

I think that is what'he said. - A. He only ever policed
league matches. Let me say Mr. Lock was a superb football
commander and I don't criticise him. but what I am saying he
has only policed those, and did not to my knowledge ever
police a Semi-Final, neither the 1981 - I think he was a
Detective then - and certainly not the 1987 or 1988 because he
had retired, although he was at the ground. But I cannot see
the need with a 48,000 crowd, bearing in mind 21,000 of those'
at least are on the Kop, to have been a position to have to
start thinking of blocking the tunnel. bearing in mind the
description I have given of how we would fill that area.

     I know from experience that whilst we talk of 48,000. I
doubt if those figures are always correct. In those days we
had not got the counting system we have now got, so it was a
rule of thumb, click and climbing over and fighting your way
and one way or another that might get numbers quite
differently. As with the Semi-Finals, whilst we are a sell­
out at 54,000, to my knowledge we have never achieved that.
It has been less than that in real terms.

     So I cannot envisage that would come into play. If Mr.
Lock says it did I can't argue with him, but he has not
related it to me, and I cannot see the kind of circumstances
in my experience which have activated my mind to have had to
utilise such a tactic.

Would you agree with me what you are saying is (a) you did not
know anything about it, and (b) in the Operational Orders it
was not an option which was mentioned in so many words? - A.
That is right.    We have related to Orders in the past, and
the Orders are a skeleton of operation and policy decisions,
but also, when I am in charge of a match, I meet my sector
commanders the day before and discuss certain areas of policy
which might touch on such matters as that if the question was
raised. That would be an option. What we have to remember is
that Police Officers throughout their career are trained to
respond to situations, and to try and encapsulate every kind
of situation in an Order is I would venture to suggest almost
an impossibility.

     I have many options available to me in my experience and
training which I would introduce into a scenario which I am
facing, whether it be a siege at a premises, whether it be
public order, picketing, marches, football, whatever, but
there is no way I could spell down every option that is
available to me as a trained and experienced operational
Commander.

So that I don't mislead you, on the smaller matches, because
                                    B.L. MOLE          14
                                          mt

we have got a photocopy of one of the 1987 Operational Orders,
there is a reference to pens being filled under direction of
the Police control. I take it what you are saying is that
means what you have described, namely the sequential filling
of the centre and then moving people to the side? - A. That is
right. I cannot recall that paragraph, but that is what I
would see it as. That was the Coventry and Leeds match.

Yes, that is right. We can show it to you if you like but I
don't think that is necessary at this stage. If we turn to
the Semi-Finals, which is after all what we are basically
interested in, let us exclude one thing. You were not there
in 1989, at least not until about 5 o'clock or thereabouts? -
A. At about 5 o'clock I attended at the stadium.

So whatever may have happened on that, you had nothing to do
with it? - A. I was working in Barnsley, and in fact I was on
the Ml Motorway when things began to happen and I turned
about.

When you discovered it. - A. Yes.

You were   there in 1987 and 1988? - A. Indeed, Iwas, sir. yes.

1987 was a different time. The match was timed for a
different time? - A. Sunday at 12 noon, sir.

I think in fact, to get this out of the way, it was postponed
for a short period? - A. A delayed kick off. sir, because we
had a hold up of traffic on the motorways and approach roads
which to some extent I was responsible for because of the very
heavy checking I was doing, bearing mind the intelligence of
Leeds fans from previous experience.

Somebody told us, and perhaps I have misremembered. that the
problem was more of the Coventry fans being held up. Is that
right? - A. I had got check points out at Tankersley and on
the Ml at the Parkway, coaches were getting stockpiled
because we were vigorously checking for weapons as
intelligence had come that that was the case. People were
getting off coaches and walking on the motorway to use the
toilets, facilities or no facilities, and there was a long
build up and backlog which meant that a good number were
not at the stadium. I assessed all the connotations of
that and delayed kick off for 15 minutes.

So the delay on that occasion was not because of build up at
the ground but because of build up at a distance? - A. That is
right, which I knew could not get to the stadium in time.

1988, which was apparently amirrorimage of the    1989 match,
the same teams? - A. Yes.

Kick off was at 3? - A. Yes.

And as far as I know it was notdelayed? - A. It was not, sir,
                              .   B.L. MOLE       . ..15
       * **     '                       »/
And you were on that occasion in command? - A. I was. indeed.

Did you employ your normal method of roaming, if I can use
that expression? - a . All matches I operate the same style.

And who was in charge of the control box that year? - A. Mr.
Murray, sir.

Do you know when Mr. Murray took over that function? - A.
About a fortnight-three weeks before, not long before. He had
not long been in situ. It was Mr. Freeman before that.

That was Mr. Murray's first big.... - A. First Semi-Final. He
may have had a couple of matches. I would be wrong if I said
definitively he had a couple of matches, but certainly he had -
only recently taken over at Hammerton Road Police Station.

The Operational Order which was drafted for 1988. wouia I be
right in thinking it was based on the Operational Order for
1987? - A. If I used the term "only the names have been
changed" was   probably about right.The vast majoritv of the
plan and strategy was reintroduced into the 1988 Order from
the 1987 Order.

So the wording, if I can use that term, would have been
substantially the same, although names might have altered? -
A. Very much the same. I cannot remember the detail, but I am
quite sure 90% of the order would be exactly the same except
for the change of names that would arise.

We have been through these Operational Orders, not the 1988
one but the 1989 Order which you I think started off but
then.... - A. Right. I identified sector Commanders, bearing
in mind what I had said. I was to move on 27th March. I got
to know about the Semi-Final I think, guessing. 20tn March,
something in that region. Knowing Mr. Duckenfield was to take
over I called a meeting on 22nd and had all interested
parties. So I really did the ground work, but then left it to
the planning team to pull the Order together, which would
normally pull the Order together in any case, the Inspector at
Hammerton Road and the Sergeants who do the hard work.

You may not have looked at it at the time, but have you looked
at the 1989 Order since the event? - A. I think about 18
months ago when this first arose I looked through the Orders,
and they are very much similar.

Would it be fair to say it substantially follows the 1988
Order? - A. I think all three are very similar in most ways.

There were some differences with regard to manpower and
matters of that nature, because I think you had found there
had been some under-utilisation the previous year? - A. I
always have a debrief after a match, and I recognise some
areas of excess, and in the 1988 I had an additional
reserve Serial which I found was under-employed. That
was at the ground. We had three reserve Serials, and I
                                          B.L. MOLE            16
                                               »I

       suggested that be reduced to two. I had Hillsborough Precinct
       which I had previously had running people through the shops,
       disturbing and causing a nuisance, and we had manned that up
       specially to make sure that the citizens of Hillsborough were
       not unduly affected.    In the event they were not needed,
g      There was no problem. I cut the odd man off the various
       Serials.  I think at the ground overall a Sergeant and 20
       Officers, something 'ift that region, were cut out, ten of which
       and a Sergeant were the reserve Serial. The others I think
       came off the North Stand, about seven Officers and one
       Sergeant off the West because I had got two parading for duty
       on the day as it was instead of one, so we had got two and I
       did not need them.

            Overall, probably about 70 Officers inside and outside.
       If I can say, as far as the Leppings Lane area, the same
       level, four and 40, the North Stand and the terraces, the same
       kind of manpower level other than the one Sergeant who in 1988
       had been superfluous to requirements.

    Q. The Order refers to various duties of different Senais. in
       fact at great length - I don’t know how many pages - c j t it is
       quite substantial. - A. Yes, it is.

    Q. But it does not specifically refer except in its in tent ion
       section to the issue of safety.  In other words, it a oe s not
       direct in specific words that a Serial is to consid er :aietv
       as an issue. Can you help me on that aspect? - A.          I
       think, and I would be guessing without reading it. but tne
       overall intention would normally deal with safety a
       beginning of the Order.

    Q. It did. You are quite right. - A. But the s p e c i f ::
       operation, we have to admit, are geared in the saa tin.-.- we
       faced over the 1980s and 1970s to football hooliganisn r.r.3
       public order and the threat that had to the 90% honest
       goodness people who enjoy football, and I have to Sr.
       very small minority who are the hooligan element, tut
       cause tremendous difficulties. So sadly, much of trie .r:er?
       are geared to ensuring the comfort and ability to at ten-3 or
       families within the stadium.

            Safety is touched upon in my own personal briefing when I
       would brief, and I introduced for both Semi-Finals. I Driefed
       every Officer. In fact, I utilised the North Stand to
       physically brief them. That was later broken down to sector
       Commanders who would brief his Officers, and to Inspectors who
       would brief their Officers. So there is a continual briefing
       with an emphasis upon all aspects, not only the specifics of
       the Serials' duties on the day. It may well be it is not
       spelled out on paper, but so far as my own experience is
       concerned it is always a serious consideration and is
       reflected in the overall intention of the operation.

    Q. May I ask you this. Do you draw an absolute distinction
       between law and order and safety? - A. I think the two are
       very closely intertwined, sir. Disorder affects safety, and


H
         »
                                 B.L. MOLE             17
       » »                             */

therefore the maintenance of good order is in that interest.
You see various things, and I give minor examples, the
throwing of articles up and down the Kop affects safety in
that you see coats being thrown and people's eyes could be
damaged as a consequence of buttons being pulled out. They
are all minor things but they affect safety directly, and yet
it is public disorder we are talking about. The climbing from
the terraces to the West Stand is public order, but it affects
safety if it is not stopped. You only want somebody to fall
or land on somebody or whatever. So all those are so inter­
twined I don't think you can differentiate between the
maintenance of public order and safety.

     If I patrol Officers in the town centre of Barnsley or
Sheffield when I command there, my main thrust is the
maintenance of good order in the town and in the city. That
naturally in my view reflects the safety of the citizens of
the town or the city because it is a natural consequence, and
a Police Officer's ma*in duty is the protection of life and
property, which is what it is all about. So you have to go
back to what I was saying about a Police Officer does not
spell everything out, but his whole life and training revolves
about those basic functions. I don't feel the necessity every
time I mount an operation to spell every facet of a Police
Officer's role out on paper, because it is indoctrinated in
him.

     If I could draw an analogy with military personnel, they
are told to go from A to B and do it and have no discretion.
Policemen have discretion, and I depend upon that discretion
and ability to operate in the interests of the community they
serve.

I want to pick up now before we move into the ground one other
aspect which has featured quite a lot in this Inquest, and
that is in an all ticket match the position with regard to
ticketless fans, and in particular in 1988 the suggestion from
various people with ticketless fans that there was either
filtering or checking of tickets by Police Officers at a
distance to the ground. - A. Yes.

First of all, as far as you are aware were any instructions to
that effect given to Officers in 1988 to do that? Whether or
not they did it is neither here nor there. Can you help me
with regard to the instructional aspect? - A. It is sad to say
whatever match you have, particularly all ticket matches, you
always have an element who will travel in the hope of getting
a ticket. I have in other forums talked about ticket touts,
and while ever we have ticket touts we shall have people who
come for the opportunity. For both Semi-Finals I looked after
I made great emphasis in the media telling people not come,
and if they did I would take positive action to dissuade them
on coaches or vehicles, and send them away. In law I have
little power other than to arrest upon things like likely to
cause a breach of the peace.
     As far as the briefing of Officers is concerned,
they are as part of the overall briefing told to be
aware of ticketless fans who cause public disorder, or
the possibility, by their presence, the possibility of
theft, the possibility of robbery, the possibility of
obstruction in hanging around the turnstiles, in the
hope that (1) they could purchase from a tout, or (2)
they could grab the unsuspecting individual's ticket
from his hand and run.

     Part of the briefing is to take random checks of
supporters approaching the Ground and to check coaches
and minibuses when they are stopped at the various
checkpoints.  I have never put in a filter or, I think
it has earlier been suggested by someone, barriers, to
carry out such an operation because in particular with
the Penistone Road end, it is a very wide sweeping area
and I would have great difficulty.

     In Leppings Lane it is a much more confined area
and my policy, perhaps I should have mentioned this
earlier, semi-finals differ in that whilst there is a
phased operation nobody moves from their points, and if
I can just expand that, it just helps in the argument,
that in a normal operation before the match men are on
the route to the Ground, and then when it starts they
come inside and do a different task, and then they go
out again ten minutes before final whistle and do
another task.  In a semi-final they all stay where they
are and if I use my description I take the Ground, and
I mean the Ground overall, and keep it, so that I have
an awareness of any build up, I have a knowledge and
understanding of where people are roaming to and
whatever.

     Now those Officers, particularly on Leppings Lane,
would be at the end of various roads and they would
periodically pull individuals and check them and see if
they have tickets, if they have weapons etcetera,   but
other than that I have no knowledge and certainly gave
no instructions for a filter system of checking for
ticketless fans.

Can I just take two illustrations of this?  Supposing
that you were to check a coach, and you had a coach
where there was nobody with tickets and they were all
wearing colours, you might take the view these were
likely to be people who were wishing to come in, and
you may or may not turn that coach round? - A. I would
send them back under escort, sir, and point them south.

But supposing that you were to check a coach with, say,
50 people and three had no tickets, irrespective of
their excuses what, in fact, could you do with regard
                                             B.   L.   MOLE


to those three, and taking that 47 have got tickets? -
A. What I would do is allow the coach to come under
escort, with its supporters, would offload those who
have tickets, and albeit I have difficulty in finding
the legal power I would feel that I would detain those,
and I had two holding areas planned.  For Notts, it was
in Hillsborough Park and for Liverpool, I have a little
doubt on this, but at one time it was beyond the
bridge, going out towards Oughtibridge, or into the
Niagara Sports Stadium, and I can't recall, to be
honest, which area I utilised on this occasion, but I
had identified a holding area which would be an area to
take them once the match had started, with a view to
containment, rather than trying to cause disorder in
the Stadium.

     I had to find a balance as to whether or not I
would be complained about for that action, but as the
Operational Commander took that decision, that in the
interests of public disorder that was my right.  As it
happened I did not have to do that, but quite clearly a
contingency was available.

Are you saying either that the number of ticketless
fans who arrived were very small, or that the number of
ticketless fans matched the number of tickets which
ticket touts had in their possession? - A. I had not
got a problem with a crowd of ticketless fans and I
think one or other of the scenarios, or it may well be
that the sheer weight of presence moved them from the
area without difficulty.

It has been suggested that this did not occur in 1989
and that, in fact, there were substantial numbers of
ticketless fans milling around - I don't mean that in a
pejorative sense at all - in the Leppings Lane area.
You won't be able to have any views because you weren't
there, were you? - A. No.

So you would not know.  I won't ask you that question.
Let's move on to the issue of postponing a kick-off.
First of all if you could just tell me again what your
principle, if you like, would have been with regard to
that? - A. Yes.  Whenever in charge of a match I
always, at a point maybe 40 minutes, 50 minutes before
kick-off, liaised with the ref.  It is important to
know who is in charge of the Ground and how we would
react in the event of something that might affect the
game of play, so I would have an understanding with him
that if I were to consider delay I would talk to him
because he then would speak to the managers and the
players who, if I can use the term, are "psyched" up
before a match, ready to go out, and then they have to
                                              B.   L.   MOLE


draw off, so they need some time for that.   So I would
give that briefing generally.

     If as the day developed I had a problem iike I had
with Coventry and Leeds then that is something I am
totally aware of.    It may be that there was another
problem, shortfall of numbers in the Ground, or
whatever.  I would have to look at what I had got in
the Ground, because to be fair the effects of delay can
have public order and in tandem safety connotations if
I delay, because people do get rather anxious and angry
if they have come on time and they are being punished
for other's failure, so I have got that to think about,
what the attitude of the crowd is, how they are going
to respond to it.    I have to look at what point I am at
in scale of time.    I have to take into account
transport, because on large matches trains are linked
into a very tight schedule and if I can't get people
out within a certain timescale it may well I have got
10,000 in the city homeless and no transport ....

This is at the end of the match, you mean? - A. At the
end of the match if I have to delay.  It may well be
that coaches are the same, that various plans for
people to get away would be affected.  So all those
things would be taken into account, and drawing upon my
training and experience I would have to make a decision
as to whether or not I felt it as right to delay.   I
would then relay that message to the Club officials, in
the form of Graham Mackrell in this case, because
Graham and I had an excellent relationship, and I am
quite sure that Graham would accept any recommendation
I gave, that kick-off should be delayed or otherwise.

     In fact, with the Coventry match, because of what
I have described earlier, I decided it was right to
delay.  In fairness, it was suggested to me I should
delay it even further because they had not all come in
15 minutes, but on that occasion I decided that no, the
time was right to go ahead and, in fact, refused to
delay it further and the match went on.

Is the criteria for delay based on the reason why
people are not there, as opposed to the fact that they
are not there? Do you understand what I am trying to
get at? - A. I understand what you are saying, sir,
yes.  I think it is like everything, if it is self
inflicted one sometimes does not have the same sympathy
that one would have by imposition of a Police action.
I don't think that can be the turning point.  If it is
self inflicted it does not mean to say that we don't do
it, but there are problems with giving in to that every
time, because it becomes the norm, and sad to say there
was a developing situation where a number of fans did
                                              B.   L.   MOLE


come late on a regular basis and could, if we had given
in to that, force a regular situation where it was
delayed, and then one wonders how far it goes.   Do we
delay in 15 minutes, half an hour? Does that develop
to an hour, and somewhere you have to draw the line.
So it has to be a qonsideration, and in fact the Clubs,
and currently at Barnsley, quite openly say to me,
"Don't delay it if you can avoid it, if it is only
because they can't be bothered to get there".   I have
to take that into account.  It would not be the only
consideration but in fairness, like everything else, it
is one aspect which would have to be taken into
account.

I think you have already said it but I just want to be
quite sure I have understood, when you were saying that
you need to consider the number of people in the
Ground, were you saying you were considering the number
of people who were in the Ground, or the number of
people who were not in the Ground? - A. Two aspects
really, sir, because I think entertainment has been
mentioned in the past, and keeping the crowd in the
Ground interested is one consideration I have to take
into account.  They can get frustrated as well if they
are stood in the cold or the rain, and I am delaying it
a bit longer, and they shout and raucous at each other
and tempers get frayed, so there is that aspect.   There
is also the aspect of numbers, as to whether or not I
have got 30,000 in or AO,000 or I am 20,000 missing and
that is another one I would have to take into account,
and like on occasions when I have checked where people
are by having outside areas looking and they will say
they have all come, so where are they, and sometimes I
have to take that into account, but there are two
aspects to that, sir, I think.

I now want to move in, so to speak, and on to the semi­
finals, and in particular Leppings Lane, of course.   I
use the word packing of the terraces; it is not a word
I am very keen on but we are all tempted to use it.
You have described to me the smaller matches.  Now I
want you to describe for me what, in fact, you did, at
least what your understanding was of what was
happening, bearing in mind that something else might
have actually occurred which you were not aware of, but
tell me what your understanding was? - A. For the two
semi-finals that I operated I used the same kind of
policy.  That is that I knew I had got a sell-out and
we were anticipating full capacity in the Stadium.
Therefore there was no point in keeping areas for
segregation in sterility terms, and therefore the whole
Ground was open from minute one of the gates being
opened.
                                              B.L.   MOLE


      I mention sterility terms because part of my plan
was to keep buffer zones within the Stadium of non
contentious supporters, if I can best describe them as
that.   They were people who represented the FA, and the
buffer zones, in fact, were at the Kop end of the North
Stand and at the Leppings Lane end of the South Stand,
so that I had sterile areas, although they were sat
upon, as it were, of people who were honest to goodness
representatives of clubs etcetera, and I was not going
to attract a hooligan element.

      I would address my segregation methods in that
way, and therefore open the whole Ground from the
minute the gates were open, and so far as Leppings Lane
terraces are concerned, and I have said this in another
forum, the level was found by the supporters
themselves.   In '87 and '88 that worked, and I did have
a back up.   I think I have discussed in other forums
not putting Officers or stewards on the terraces
because they would be non effective, in my experience -
they would become overwhelmed and unable to respond to
any incident, and they would have no benefit - but
those on the track had the view, added to which the
serials and forgive me if I forget the numbers, 14, 15,
13, serials of the order, operated in Leppings Lane
terraces and on the West Stand.   They have an over-view
from above, the Inspector in the West Stand.   The
perimeter has a view and the Control Room has a view
and I, as part of my operation, used to go and look in
any case, and I would normally look at all sections of
the Ground, because albeit there are seating areas, you
can still have difficulties because you are back to
tickets, wrong seating, wrong places, people arguing
etcetera, causing build up on the planks between areas,
so they all need to be looked at and I would look at
them all, and hopefully identify any problems that
might arise.   But in answer to the query, the terraces
in my operations found their own level in filling.




            /Q. It sounds to me
                                                      23


                                     B.L. MOLE
        * *                              * # .


Q. It sounds to me though from what you have said that
   although that is what you were expecting to happen and
   in the events apparently it did, you still took the view
   that one had to keep an eye on them? - A. I think whenever
   you have got some 50,000 people in a confined space,
   whether they be at any event, not only football, they
   need to have an eye' kept on them.

Q. This is of course hypothetical because it did not happen
   to you but if you had viewed your terraces, really take
   Leppings Lane just for the time being, and you had come
   to the view that for whatever reason there appeared
   to be marked disparity in filling, in other words finding
   one's own level did not appear to be working at any point
   in time, what would your response have been to that?
   - A. Not having been faced with the problem, and I
   acknowledge that you have said that ....

Q. It is hypothetical but I am asking you as an experienced
   Commander? - A. I think I would have had to have looked
   at that first of all encouragement from the Officers
   on the perimeter track for people to move to the sides.
   Secondly the utilisation possibly of serials 14 and 15,
   I think they were the two operating on the Leppings Lane
   terraces, moving from the tunnel along the back and
   encouraging people through ....

Q. When you say "terraces" do you mean the concourse? - A.
   Yes, they were operating in the concourse with the
   responsibility for the terraces, so I think it was 14
   or 15, forgive me if I am slightly wrong.

Q. I think it was 15 and 16 but it does not really matter.
   - A. 16 was outside, so I know 16, 17, 18 and 19 were
   actually on the turnstiles. I would utilise them in
   approaching from the wings and from the tunnel to
   encourage by uniform presence to move along the back
   and to thin out into those other areas. I think that
   would be my initial tactic.

Q. So what you are saying is you would move the people
   who were in the concourse area? - A. Both. I would try
   and encourage them to move along the back of the terraces
   into the wider areas.

Q. In other words you would want to encourage them to use
   the radial gates? - A. Yes.

Q. Now it has been suggested by several people that once
   the terracing is full, reached a point where you think:
   "We ought to move a few people" shall we say, it is
   actually quite difficult for people towards the front
   to get back towards these radial gates. Would you
   agree with that? - A. I do. If it comes to that point
                                                        24


                                    B.L. MOLE
         * 5                             • t


  and it has not been my experience although I have moved
  people from the Kop and on occasions from the front gates
  and moved them out to the other ends.
Q. You mean you have opened the little perimeter gates? - A.
   That is right and taken a number out under control. You
   have got to be careful with that because again ploys
   come into being where people want to get into a better
   position and use that as a ploy, so you have to do
   very guardedly because when all said and done not
   everybody is honest and genuine and some people are trying
   to achieve other objectives., but I know I had to do it
   on the Kop on one occasion. In fact I had to have a new
   qate fitted eventually because I recognised or identified,
   a problem on the Kop where at the South corner crushing
   was taking place because there was nowhere for it to go
   and I had a gate put in there. The Club put it in, I
    recognise, they did it immediately, and we had to take
   some from the front and then take them along the front
   and put them into the back again so it relieved the
   pressure from the front, so that is another option and
    consideration that could be utilised. Not one I would
   encourage on a regular basis because it becomes
    accepted and we have to remember that most of the Clubs
    regularly play at Sheffield Wednesday and they know how
    our operation works.
Q. It has been suggested by several people, I don't need
   to enumerate them, that the radial gates at the bacK,
   in fact there is documentary evidence which says that tne
   radial gates were supposed to be under Police control and
   it has been suggested by several people that that in
   fact meant there should have been Police presence on
   those gates at matches, full stop. - A. One has to
   differentiate. I would accept that when we are
   operating a league match and are controlling segregation
   they would always be under Police control which in my
   interpretation is manned, i.e. if we locked a 9at® against
   the pen, i.e. not open, locked in situ, then in the
   interests of both public order and safety that would have
   to be manned and we had keys to unlock it if we needed
   to.
          Once you are faced with the situation of the semi-
    finals they are unlocked and fastened back and locked
    back so nobody can lock it again. Therefore the need for
    manning has gone. The only need for manning is to
    release the gate if the need arises so there is the
    difference.
          I would not expect or ever have agreed for the
    gates to be manned, that is at the back of the radial
    fences on the Leppings Lane terraces in semi-final
    situations. When I am controlling pen entry I would
    expect it to be manned. In my experience they were manned.
                                                            25


                                     B.L. MOLE
                                            tl


Q. What would you say then if it was suggested to you that
   the reason why you need an Officer or it could be a
   Steward, but a clothed person who is recognised, identifiable
   at those locations, is because you need (a) somebody to
   encourage movement be it inward.or outward depending on
   the perceived need at, the time? - A. I would say it is
   very much like putting Detectives into crowds, I don't
   encourage it because they are at risk and one has to
   take into account that a Steward or a lone Policeman in
   that situation would very quickly become ineffectual and
   would be overcome and I could not see any justification
   in allowing an Officer or Steward to be swallowed up in
   that kind of a situation because his effect and benefits
   would in my view be minimal.
         I did mention earlier that the Serial above in the
   West Stand always policed right to the front of those
   steps and passages and had an overview and they too
   could assist.
         THE CORONER: I think I am being reminded that it
   is time we had a little gap and I think that is right.
   We will pause for our statutory 15 minutes.
         Mr. Mole, I know I don't have to remind you but I
   always do, even though we are in a break you are on oath
   technically in the witness box, if you would please bear
   that in mind and not disauss the evidence. Thank you.

                      (Short adjournment)
                                                             26

                                                     B. L. MOLE


Q. I think we were just discussing the question of filling
   the pens and I think you told me what you had done but
   in fact, as it happens, you never had a situation where
   a problem arose as far as you were concerned? - A. No,
   sir, I did not.

Q. Can I just ask you this;   we have also heard from
   several people that in 1988 they found the centre pen
   somewhat uncomfortable.   Nobody has suggested that
   anybody was seriously damaged because of that but they
   were uncomfortable.   Do you have any knowledge of that
   other than what you have learned since the incident? -
   A. Certainly not prior to the Inquiry in connection
   with this matter.   I had no reports of any discomfort,
   injury or complaint regarding the pens in 1988 or 1987.

Q. I want to retrace my steps again and pick up one or two
   other things and the first thing I want to deal with is
   this; we, of course, have been concentrating on the
   Leppings Lane terrace? - A. Yes.

Q. In particular, two centre sections? - A. Yes.

Q. When you were in the position in which you were - it is
   a difficult question to ask and probably even harder to
   answer - what percentage of your concentration or time
   was devoted to that area as compared to the other
   activities which you had to be concerned with? - A. I
   think on normal matches, forgetting Semi Finals, the
   vast majority...

Q. I am sorry, excluding did you say? - A. Yes, forgetting
   Semi Finals.  The vast majority of my time would be
   addressed to the Leppings Lane end because that is the
   visiting end where most problems would arise.  In Semi
   Final terms they are both visitors and so the whole
   ground requires attention.  However, it is my
   experience that that end of the ground is the most
   difficulty to police because it is not as wide open as
   the Penistone Road end and, therefore, the higher
   percentage of my time would naturally and more often be
   spent at that end of the stadium.

Q. Are you talking about the outside or the inside at this
   stage? - A. I think an equal divide really, pre-match.
   Let me talk pre-match.

Q. Yes, pre-match? - A. An equal divide because, as I
   described earlier, initially I would take stock inside
   the stadium.  I would then go out and assess the
   extremities of the area, come back in the stadium, and
   I would normally think from about quarter past two-ish,
   bearing in mind the three o'clock kick-off if that is
                                                                27

                                                         B. L. MOLE

     the time, until I go in at ten to, I would be in the
     Leppings Lane area.

Q. On the outside? - A. On the outside.  Then, as I said
   earlier, I would normally head for the players' tunnel
   providing things were running correctly for kick-off.
   So that kind of split would normally be m y . ..

Q. The Kop then you are saying, although it is obviously a
   big area, at Semi Finals I am talking about, did not
   necessarily feature as a major headache in your
   experience? - A. No, the problem with the Kop and any
   all-ticket match is people's insistence - whether the
   objective is to infiltrate or merely to get to the game
   is a moot point - to buy tickets belonging to the other
   side and that is a contingency that we have to take
   account o f . So far as the Semi Finals were concerned
   we did take account of that and, in fact, used a little
   area to the north end of the Kop to put Liverpool, on
   this occasion, supporters in if we identified them in
   the Notts area of the Kop.   So some attention was
   needed to that albeit David Chapman, the
   Superintendent, had that under control and it was his
   role to look after it and he was well used to it
   having, in fact, being a Commander prior to Mr. lock at
   Sheffield and so he knew that area quite well and was
   quite capable of doing that with his two Chief
   Inspectors.

Q. You did mention, sort of almost in passing, that you
   had a gate put in I think you said.  I realise that you
   did not personally put it in. - A. No, sir.

Q.   But you recognised a need   for it? - A.   Yes.

Q.    What I want to just explore with you for a few minutes
     is the relationship which that might indicate between
     (a) yourself and the Club, on the one hand, and (b)
     yourself and the Officers' Working Group or Advisory
     Group - do you know what I mean by that? - A. Yes, I
     do, sir.

Q. On the other hand.  Can you comment? - A. In the first
   instance my relationship with the Club throughout, I
   think I do not overstate it as being first class.   I
   dealt with three Club Secretaries, Mr. England, Mr.
   Chester and latterly Mr. Mackrell.  Other than having a
   difference of opinion, which have always been very open
   and honest, we have agreed and had the utmost support.
   I think in other forums each year I have spoken or
   written to the Club to say, "Thank you for the help and
   assistance".  So far as the Working Group is concerned
   I do not think there has been a great difficulty with
that.  We have been part of the Working Group and quite
clearly not the only voice.     There is the voice of the
Fire Brigade, the voice of the Local Authority,
building, e t c ., and we have always had a good input and
a good response to anything we have said or responded
to on things other people have said.     I think fairly
there has been a good relationship at Sheffield
Wednesday.   It has been a ground that has been well
thought of, I think, in the past.     So much so that in
Police terms people have come from many parts to watch
our operation which they have thought as being very
good.

The impression I have gained from some of the evidence
of people which we have heard is that at annual
inspections, or biannual inspections as they used to
be, of the Officers' Working Group, apart from picking
up minor or maybe major defects, suggestions were made
from time to time and these were discussed, considered,
and then if appropriate implemented, in fact, by the
Club because it was their ground after all? - A. Yes.

Certainly some of the people who were here have
indicated - and I am coming back to this question of
the control of the gates - that they had understood
that the word 'control' meant manning putting it quite
bluntly and that meant manning it at every and each
match and if they had understood it differently they
might well have taken a different point of view.  Are
you able to comment on that? - A. Yes.

Actually before you do, just one moment.       I need
something which I forgot.   (p a u s e ) You can remember
the question? - A. Yes, I do.      In response to that I do
not accept that that is the case.       I think what I said
earlier, and I maintain is the position, whenever there
was a Police decision to restrict entry to a part of
the terracing, whichever part, which involved the
locking of the gates then I believe it was essential
and agreed by me that they would be manned.       When that
was not the case there was no purpose in manning and I
have never entered into an agreement for manning.       The
purpose of manning is to unlock the gate, to free any
problem that is arising or to gain entry to resolve a
problem, namely to effect an arrest or whatever but it
was essential in those circumstances that somebody was
there.  When it was not locked there was no purpose.

Would you go this far, and if you do not please say so,
that irrespective of what may have been your
understanding with regard to those gates was it
understood that the control of the spectators in the
Leppings Lane terracing was a Police function? - A. It
depends on the description of control, sir.    The
allowing of people into the stadium is a Club's
responsibility and one for stewarding.    The
responsibility for segregation is undertaken by the
Police Commander and-' his Officers. In terms of
segregation the decision to restrict certain areas and
to control restriction to certain areas is a Police
problem and responsibility.    The actual - I think you
used the word packing but I do not particularly like it
but packing is probably understood by people - packing,
if there is a need to pack is a stewarding
responsibility.  Because of the way that things
developed at Hillsborough and we had to utilise the
segregation aspect then we restricted entry to one or
two pens or whatever and as a natural consequence took
on the role of monitoring and identifying the point
when the restricted area we had identified, ie we the
Police, was at a point where we needed to use more
space and we took on that decision to extend it to A N
Other pen.  So that extent we controlled the amount of
use for segregation purposes.

     To have 200 people running free along the whole
width of the terrace creates problems in itself.    To
have a thousand in a 10,100 area can create problems in
itself.   So the purpose was for segregation to stop
them running up to various quarters, throwing, jibing,
climbing into whatever, and to that extent we had a
role and responsibility.   If the whole area is open
then there is no involvement in segregation terms of
determining a point when we move into another bit of
the area.   So my understanding, and I believe the
understanding with everybody, was that when we said to
Graham, or whoever it was at the Club, "I am going to
limit it", in fact, we had disputes about using the
elevated section I think.   Mr. Chester wrote to me
about it once, Dick Chester, and I used to keep it
clear.   He liked to be told when and we agreed to tell
him when it was going to be kept clear.   So that
rapport always went on.   It was when we were asking or
dictating the method of operation for segregation, that
was our responsibility.

Is it not right, because I think you told me this
earlier, that you would have expected (a) the
Officers...? - A. To observe.

On the stand, (b) the perimeter Officers, (c) the
people in the Control Room, plus anybody else, if they
noticed a problem to intervene? - A. Absolutely.

You would go this far that there was a monitoring
function? - A. Yes.
If a problem was perceived you would have expected it
to be...? - A. Exactly the same as I would have
expected a pop concert or any other event.  If the
Officers identified Something, then it is the
perception and identification that is the question,
then I would expect a reaction to it and a positive
reaction.

Were you aware that there were, in fact, no stewards on
the terraces? - A. In 1989, sir?

In 1988. - A. I would not expect in a full capacity
ground stewards to be on the terraces any more than I
would expect Policemen to be on the actual terrace
because they, I think I have said earlier, are
ineffective.

Of course, what you are saying is that you never had
the problem so that you did not have to face the issue?
- A. That is right, sir.   Can I just clarify that? Not
on Leppings Lane terraces.   I have mentioned earlier
the problem on the Kop which I relieved.

Yes, thank you for reminding me of that.  You have also
told me about your relationship with the Officers*
Working Group.  One of the things which I think Dr.
Eastwood told us about - and I have already mentioned
these before - were the gates on the inner aspect of
the tunnel.  I do not mean the big ones.  The tunnel
has got two ends, of course, one at the concourse with
the big blue gates up there? - A. Yes.

Then when you get to the terracing there are another
couple of smaller gates? - A. Right.  Which gates are
you referring to, sir? The one at the concourse end
or?

No, the other ones? - A. Right, sir.

Dr. Eastwood told us that he actually put these in for
the purposes of control of the fans so that they (a)
open correctly and (b) that they could be shut with a
view to restricting entry either to the whole of that
section or to the half, once the centre fence had been
put in. Was that ever communicated to you? -




                            /A. Certainly not
                                                                 31


                                              B.L.   MOLE .


       - A. Certainly not. and I would be loath to use them in that
       way. I think psychologically that could have a closing in
       effect upon a crowd in that kind of a situation, and while
       ever there is an opening, albeit a restricted opening,
       there is some semblance of comfort in that. If Dr.
Q      Eastwood would say he planned that I would question that
       because at the other end the planning would seem somewhat
       difficult because they would be opening against the flow
       of coming out and would have a    problem as I recall it,
       so I would not think of using those    gates.

    Q. No, the point was what I call the inner gates opened outward
       as far as the terracing was concerned, so they did not open
       against the flow. - A. Right

    Q. The gates at the far end, at the concourse end, did open the
       wrong way. so to speak, against the flow. - A. That is why I
       say I don't think the argument that these were put in for that
       specific purpose is one I could subscribe to, because if it is
       it it defeats itself in that the planning did not extend to
       the next set of gates because they opened the wrong way. and
       it was never communicated to me in that way.

D   Q. It   was not communicated. That is what Iam trying to find out
       basically. Whether it is a good idea or a bad idea I am not
       interested in. - a . The only time I would see those having
       been used by me is if I was operating a match when the
       terraces were not in use, i.e. seated accommodation in the
       West Stand and may be the North and I was not using that
       particular area. Then they would be useful.

    Q. You have already dealt with this point, but I want to put it
       go you again because it is very important to show we are not
       talking at cross-purposes.  I will pick out a bit of the
       transcript of Mr. Lock, because he deals with this point and
       he was there from 1982 to 1985 approximately. You are quite
       right it does say from time to time you were his Commander.  I
       misrecollected that.

            He is first of all talking about small crowds, sequential
       filling as we have been terming it, and the question he was
       asked is :

            "How did you render the centre section sterile".

            THE CORONER:   For those of you who   want to look it up it
       is Day 53 page 35 D-F:

    Q. I ought to make it clear, Mr. Mole, what I am interested in is
       what you knew then, not what we know now. I want to use this
       as a jog to see whether it makes any difference to what you
       have told me, not with retrospective scope.  I have just
       picked this one out:

            "Q. How did you render the centre section sterile? - A.
            There were two ways in which we could do that. We could
            close the gates in the centre tunnel or we could throw


H
         »                             B.L. MOLE
       » »
                                       mf

     across a barrier, and we always did have little barriers
     there for that purpose. We had to appreciate there are
     certain games .... I mean, if it is a small game we could
     have taken the action I have just described.  If it was a
     large game we might give the whole of the terrace
     exclusively to the away fans” .

I then go on to say i ‘was thinking about the small ones
because I was doing it in pieces. Have you got any comment on
that, because what he is saying is that in a small match he
would have used either the gates or the barriers to seal the
centre. - A. I think it depends on what Mr. Lock was saying.
If he is talking about the commencement of the match and
deciding not to use the centre pens then I am quite sure he
could use the option of either closing the gates or using some
form of barrier because he had made the decision not to start
with them. If he is talking about stopping the use of the
centre pens afterwards I have never ever used the gates and
have not used barriers across the tunnel because the situation
has not arisen.

     I think he probably alludes to the former description
when he is talking about a conscious decision not to use the
tunnel, and I would agree with him, he could do it in those
ways. I have not known when we have not used them. I am
surprised he describes the centre because as I said earlier,
everybody wants to use the centre pens because thev are the
best viewing point or one of the better viewing points.
Normally, in the small matches, they are the ones we would use
and would not therefore keep sterile. So I am surprised he
describes a need to keep them sterile and just throw in
whether or not he is confusing the times when we were using
away and home supporters at that end when possibly we did keep
them sterile for segregation purposes, and insist that the
visitors use the south and centre-south pens, leaving the
centre and centre-north pen sterile with our home supporters
in the elevated and north pen.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   To be fair to Mr. Lock, that   is
precisely what he is talking about. If you look at   the
question and answer at C-D he actually says, "....   and keeping
the remainder of the centre sterile we would allow   in our own
fans in the north-west and in pens 5 and 6 as they   are now” .

     THE WITNESS:   That is exactly what I am describing.

     THE CORONER:   Let us turn then to page 37. This    is a
rather longer answer, I am afraid. The questionI put     to him:

     "Q. Now let’s turn to the other method, where you would
     use the whole of the terrace for the away fans, or where
     you would expect larger numbers. What was the
     methodology employed in your days? - A. With regard to
     the centre pen in particular, it was always a bit
     difficult because as you emerged from the tunnel onto
     the terraces there was a barrier, and this barrier was
     an obstruction”.
                                        B.L. MOLE
                                        f»


He is talking about one of the crush barriers, 144 in fact:

           and this barrier was an obstruction to the free
     flow of supporters going onto the terraces. Quite often
     you would get a crushing so what we did, we had Police
     Officers, as I have described for the smaller matches, or
     the backs of the'terraces and looking after the gates,
     but the gates would then be unlocked and left open so
     there could be a free flow.

     The centre pen is always the most popular because it is
     directly behind the goal where the action is happening,
     and as a consequence I used to place Officers at each
     end of the barriers so that we would keep people
     moving because if they stopped, of course, there would
     be an obstruction, and we used to allow the people to
     come through and direct them through from outside,
     either around each end so they could go into the wing
     pens, or down the centre, but there were Officers
     there, and we used to have Inspectors who were in
     charge of that part of the ground.  I remember quite a
     number of them - I can remember Inspector Sykes and
     another one whose name eludes me for the moment....”

but he remembered it later.   It was Chief Inspector Greaser:

     ”.... but I have known them come up to my Box and say to
     me, ’How are we filling? Have we got room in the centre
     or in front of the Box?’, because pens 5 and 6 used to be
     the least popular and were always the last ones to fill.
     We used to look at it and say, ’Yes, we can get some more
     in’, and when the centre pen, which inevitably filled
     first, when that was full, comfortably full, I would give
     the order, ’Close the centre pen’.

     Now, we didn’t close the gate for obvious reasons,
     because if anything happened, of course, it would be
     obstructing the exit. We used to then put into effect
     the barrier system and Inspector Calvert, Inspector
     Sykes, have done that on numerous occasions, acting on mv
     instructions, and sometimes on their own when they saw
     that the situation was arising where the pen was full,
     but they would then inform me, ’W e ’ve closed the centre
     pen by putting the barrier across’”.

And then I asked him one question:

     ”Q. So have I understood you correctly, that in a
     situation where you were using the terrace as a whole you
     would lock open the radial gates? - A. Yes.”

Can you help me on that. Does that in any way help? - A. I
understand the drift of what he is saying.   I have to repeat.
I have never ever had occasion to block off the tunnel. If
Mr.   Lock has had it he has not transmitted that fact to me. I
did mention earlier that occasionally actions were taken by
                                        b .l   : MOLE , :
      ' •*                               m§

Officers and once the problem had been resolved then it is no
longer a problem, and that is always a possibility. Albeit, I
feel I would have known about it, and I certainly don’t know
about it.

     I think there is a little bit of confusion when Mr. Lock
talks about closing the centre pens, because in my experience
when working with him', even at a large League match, it has
never to that stage if we are staggering entry. It has been
when we know the pen is fairly full, not dangerously full, and
there is a lot more to come, that Mr. Greaser or Mr. Sykes or
Mr. Calvert who have all been mentioned, would pose the
question to the Ground Controller, not, "Do we close the pen”
but "Do we open the next one?” . and I think there is a
difference there. My experience has been in staggered terms
to do it that way. I cannot ever recall getting to the point
where I have said, "The centre pen is full. Close it".

     When we talk of Officers manning the gates, because of
that staggered operation. Officers are there initially, but as
the filling widens, that is to the south or north, whichever
way we are going, then so the Officers widen, because they
don’t become isolated at the back of the crowd again. I know
distinctly that Mr. Lock used to be very concerned when we had
Serials who were actually in the south pen because they tended
to help with packing, and I think at one time there was a
debate at the working group about that role, and really, their
role was to monitor public order.   They ran a line from the
corner of the West Stand seated area down to the pitch, as it
were, because not many people wanted to use that little bit of
area next to the Police box. If it did fill more than that
they would widen even further back so they were not swallowed
up, and they would take positions on the staircase you may
recall on the plan which goes up to the West Stand so they
could overview, and the mounted men used to come at the back
of the South section again to have an overview during the
course of the match to monitor the crowd.

Good. I will leave this point.   I want to turn back to the
Controller just to make sure I am using the terms right. You
are overall Commander? - A. Yes, sir.

There is the Controller in the control box in a big match.
There is a Ground Controller.... - A. Ground Commander.

No, M r. Greenwood. - A . Ground Commander.

I am sorry, yes. There is an outside Commander at the
Leppings Lane end, and there may be others, but we are not
concerned with those. - A. Liverpool, Notts, Coventry, Leeds,
whichever, yes.

Would I be right in thinking that the Controller - I use the
word "Controller” so that we know what we are talking about -
was his responsibility limited to the area within the confines
of the West Stand, the South Stand, the Kop and the North
Stand, or was it greater than that?
                                        B.L. MOLE
                                        *f


     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir,   who are you talking about now?
     THE CORONER:   The Controller:

In main terms. Mr.   Murray in 198-9; - A. Yes, sir, in 1988 and
1989. In fact, if I could describe Mr. Murray or Mr. Lock,
whoever it was in that function, as a receiver and giver of
information, deployment of resources, he is the hub of the
operation in terms of the Tango units, the Serials, the
contact with Sector Commanders, the messages to Sector
Commanders, to Serial Commanders, to all that is happening in
the operation. He had a wider burden in 1987 because he had
traffic responsibilities as well. One of my changes in 1988
and 1989 was to give traffic to somebody else to deal with',
and that was Headquarters' function. His overall running of
the operation stems from that control box. It is like a mini-
Police Station, because the Controller is removed from
Hammerton Road Police Station, if I can give it in real terms,
which really runs that area normally, and we establish a new
Police Station, Control Box Sheffield Wednesday Football
Ground. His responsibility is anything to do with the
football match. It might be football supporters raiding a
beer-off somewhere, running riot in so and so, and he would
deploy Tango units to deal with that, or Serials to deal with
it. It might be running riot in Hillsborough Park. Middlewood
Road, parking, pubs full, whatever. He would deal with that
as well and deploy resources from that point, guided by
information from Sector and Serial Commanders, from directions
from me within the overall plan.




                            /So he has an overview.
     So he has an over-view; he has a VHF radio coming
in, that is the main system that operates our traffic
cars, if I can explain that; and a UHF radio system,
which is the system which operates the normal man on
the beat.  So he has got both sets of communications
coming in, he has got telephone lines and he has got
links with the Club, and direct telephone lines and
radio lines, all in that mini Police Station.  I think
he is best described as the Operations Centre Command
with tentacles running out who are supporting him.
That is his function.

So he had a strategic and communication role and he
also had a tactical role, if one uses those terms, in
looking around and taking decisions as appropriate, and
I think you have already said that you would have
expected him, certainly when you were not present, to
take decisions? - A. Absolutely, sir, yes.

Were there any decisions which you would have expected
him not to take and to refer up to you, in relation to
the football match obviously, as described? - A. I am
running across my mind the various decisions he would
be likely to take.  If we were talking about delayed
kick-off, I would expect him to refer that to me
because it would be a recognised feature at a point
when he could, either by radio communication or by mere
presence, whichever it may be, and I would expect that
to be related to me because I would have the knowledge
of the referee's involvement, of the Club's attitude,
of the managers, of the general feel of things which I
have described earlier.

     If it was to respond to a developing situation, a
lot of bananas or something in the crowd, or a flag
being flown and causing an obstruction, a view being
obstructed, I would expect him to do it.

     If it was a blockage on a turnstile, or a slowing
down or, weapons, or suggestions of a bomb alert, he
would take the immediate action but the bomb alert
would come to me for reference to the Club.

     So there are a couple of areas there I have talked
about, that is evacuation, a major evacuation, a bomb
alert situation, the delay which has widespread
repercussions, but on normal events, shall we eject
that man, shall we arrest that, shall we move that
group of "A" supporters infiltrating somewhere to
another point, I would expect him to take the decision.

Thank you.  Supposing that the issue of delayed kick-
off - I will just use that simply as an example - had
arisen, and for some reason you were not in the Control
                                             B.   L.   MOLE


Room, you were somewhere, it doesn't matter where,
Leppings Lane, say, and he attempted to communicate
with you, of course he would not know where you, would
he? - A. Right.

And for some reason, sadio communication was faulty or
he did not get a response, would you have in that
circumstance expected him to act, or would you have
said no, he has got to wait until I order him to? - A.
If his mind was activated that consideration had to be
given to delaying kick-off then, and I have said it
earlier, each and every one of my Commanders I was
blessed with were very experienced and capable
Officers, and I say this without flattery of very high
professional standards.   I valued their judgment and
assessment of situations.   I think I said earlier I
hand picked them for the '89 match; I hand picked them
for the '88 match.   I made a change in '89, that was
Mr. Marshall for Mr. Greenwood, and I made that change
because of Mr. Marshall's greater experience in the
relevant recent time, i.e., '88-89, of the Leppings
Lane situation.

     If Mr. Murray, who had been thrown in the deep end
the year before but had policed big matches throughout
the season, could not contact me he knew that he would
have my full support in any decision that he took
because he had the knowledge of how I would address it
and he knows he had my support in making that decision,
as would my other Sector Commanders.

Supposing this is a situation where he has attempted to
communicate and for some reason has not been able to do
so, or you had not responded to his contact, whatever
the reason, if you were for instance, say as you have
described as part of your roaming activity you happened
to be up in the Control Box, which you were from time
to time, obviously? - A. Yes.

Did his role alter in the sense that if you were there
you took over as the senior Officer, or did he continue
with his responsibilities and only communicate with
you, if I may put it like that, in those situations
where he would have communicated with you in any event?
- A. Mr. Murray and others who worked there knew that
once they were given that function they would carry it
out, despite my attendance, absence or whatever, and
Mr. Murray, if I had gone into the Box, I am quite
confident would have carried on deploying resources,
reacting to situations, making policy decisions, in the
knowledge of my overall plan.

     My presence there would have no inhibition on him
until it came to one of those questions I have talked
                                              B.   L.   MOLE


about which he would normally refer to me, and he would
refer it to me, i.e., delayed kick-off, bomb call,
whatever, but I would not expect him to suddenly say,
"Oh, the boss is here, he will now deploy tango units",
he would carry on with his role.   I would expect him to
do so and, in fact,, know that he did.

Indeed, I presume that if he did refer something to
you, supposing that you were there, say it was a bomb
alert, and you said, "Do this", would it be reasonable
to expect him to do that, and indeed then continue with
all the rest of his functions without necessarily
referring all the consequences to you? Would that be
correct? - A. Absolutely.  If I had made the decision
that we were to evacuate, then the implementation of
the plan would be carried on by Mr. Murray.  I think we
have said in other forums we have tested our procedures
and he would do exactly that.  There would be little
point in me suddenly taking hold of the radio and
saying, "Serial 14,15, stand to", or whatever it may
be.  He would carry out that function.

Yes.  We have used his name simply, of course, as an
illustration but what we are talking about is the job
of the controller within that .... - A. Yes.  During my
time Mr. Chapman, Mr. Freeman, Mr. Murray, Mr. Lock,
all carried out those various functions.

This leads me on to one other tier of command and that
is the ACC.  In fact, I am not an expert in Police
hierarchy, but one of the ACCs is known as the ACC
Operations, isn't he? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

What role did that Officer have in relation, shall we
say, to yourself? - A. None, in effect, on the day.   I
very clearly determined who was in command and I think
it would be right, without going into great details,
that a discussion in 1987 took place, when I was
talking about delayed kick-off, as to who was in
command, because that was where the question arose when
I talked about a further 15 minute delay, and it was
made quite clear that I was in command, therefore the
decision was mine.

     On the two days that I dealt with '87 and '88, I
established that point with the ACC Operations, that I
was in command until such time as he had occasion to or
felt the need to relieve me of that command.  If a
point ever arose where he needed to relieve me of
command then that would take place, but up to that
juncture every decision, every deployment, every action
of Sector Commanders, Serial Commanders and Officers,
was my problem and my responsibility.
                                              B.   L.   MOLE


In other words, he could throw you off the job but
until he had done that it was yours? - A. That is
right, and I think that has to be made absolutely
clear, because you have to have somebody where the buck
stops, and up to a certain point that is where it
stops.

You said on the day.  What about pre day, and we are
really now talking about planning. - A. Again, I am in
overall command.  There is an element of ratification,
as it were, because operations of the scale of a semi­
final have Force implications, particularly in the
raising of manpower, particularly in the inconvenience
to the County, and these are things that have to be
considered when we first agree to do it in any case,
whether we can afford - not in financial terms
necessarily, although that does play a part - whether
we can afford to stage it, and one has to take into
account what other commitments we have.  If we had got
a number of major incidents applying that weekend, or
murders or whatever, it may be we could not afford to
stage it, so the ACC Operations has a role there in
whether South Yorkshire Police can accommodate the
event.  So there is one function.

      The second one is on the agreement when that is
done and the planning is down to me, as the Divisional
Commander, to do it.   I decide on various aspects, some
of which affect the Force as a whole.   I cannot decide
for other Divisional Commanders what I would commit
them to, but the ACC Operations can, so if I say I need
1,000 men and I command 370, or 500 as I do now, he has
to decide whether I can have those from somewhere else.
If I want horses and the Force then, I think, had 18,
and I wanted 30, they have to go to other Forces.   That
is the ACC Operations problem, as to where to get them
from.

     When all that is done I produce an Order, based on
his agreement to manpower, vehicles, commitments,
produce it and sign it and send it to him, and if he
then takes exception or differs with any of my
intentions, he would tell me so and I would either be
ordered to or suggested to alter it, re-think it and
re-submit it.

     In my experience I have never got to that point
because as with all professional organisations the
negotiation goes on before the final plan is drawn, so
once the plan is signed by me it is usually at an
agreed stage in any case, and on the two occasions that
I did the plan that was the case.  It was signed,
agreed and submitted, and I was not required, ordered
or whatever to alter it.
In addition to an ACC Ops. there is also, I understand,
an ACC who is always on duty? - A. Yes, the Duty ACC.

And indeed there was one, and as it happened, of
course, he happened to be at the match.   Was that --
no, I won't ask that.question.   Does he, this Duty ACC,
have any different function to what you have already
described, in relation to the control of the match? -
A. I don't think he has any role, except to say that he
is responsible for all operations in the County on a
day, one of which on that occasion would be the semi­
final.  He may, if there was a murder inquiry running,
attend at that incident.  He would not automatically
become the senior investigating Officer.   He could
assume command if he felt the necessity, but he would
not become the Commander.  There could be racing at
Doncaster which would be commanded.   He might visit
that but he would not become the Commander.   He would
be in exactly the same position as the ACC Operations I
have described, and could assume command because of the
hierarchy of the Police Service.

     Under normal circumstances he would not, he would
merely be visiting that, like he would visit a Police
Station, during the course of his duty cover.  The
purpose of his availability is to ensure the
effectiveness and the efficiency of the Force as a
whole, and to carry out those functions which are
peculiar to the Assistant Chief Constable, i.e., the
issue of firearms, the implementation of a Force plan
to respond to other areas, which are peculiar to a
decision making process of an Assistant Chief
Constable, but he would not, in my experience, usurp
the role of the Commander of an operation.




             /Q. I think this may
                                 B.L. MOLE
                                      mi


I think this may well be the final point, I hope it will
be. Your relationship with other Divisional Commanders,
and I instance just one because obviously there may be
more, but let's take traffic as an instance.  You have
described to me, you might have 1,000 men, I don't know
how many, a lot anyway? - A. Yes.

How was the relationship between people if you like of
equal rank sorted out? - A. Yes, there is no difficulty
with that.  I think I did say we had changed the plan
somewhat and we changed it so that traffic had a
responsibility and I think in the 1989 John Nesbit was
the head of traffic at that time and he had the
responsibility of ensuring the free flow of traffic
to and from the Stadium and the escorting of various
coaches etc. with his men.

      That in no way impinges upon my operation of the
actual practical carrying out of Police in the football
ground and because of the way we are in divisional
command terms I don't think there is a desire to own
any aspect of it and we consult each other quite freely
and there is no difficulty experienced in him carrying
out his function and me carrying out my function of
policing a football match.

      I think the same applies when we have cross
border incidents in every day-to-day life. If it starts
in one division I would assume command and remain in
command of it even though it might move into another
division, so that relationship and rapport continues
in all aspects of the policing role.

I said it was the   last thing but it isn't. What I want
to ask you now is this:   you have already told me about the
orders and the fact that they followed more or less, you
were building on previous experience.   Can you just tell
me when you first came into policing at Hillsborough
how was the information as to the sort of things you
might need to know conveyed to you? - A. I don't think
it was in real terms.   I think I said earlier that I
am trained throughout my service, the Police service,
to respond to situations.

      If you look at the area Police, that is Hammerton
Road area, there are many aspects of policing which it
would take months to describe in detail, not the least
of which is the Broomhall area and its peculiar problems;
the University complex and its peculiar problems; the
fact that nearly every hospital in Sheffield is located
within that division and their peculiar problems; the
fact - I have mentioned the University - but the fact
that we have a transient population in University terms;
that we have an ethnic minority group; the fact that
                                  B.L. MOLE
                                  “   —   rr—


Hillsborough is there; the fact that the Dog Stadium is
there, there are tremendous varieties of policing problems,
all of which are responded to by Officers who are con­
tinually throughout their service trained and experienced
in aspects of basic policing, the benefit of which can
be addressed to any situation and utilised to deal with
the problem being faced.

      When I arrived, bear in mind I have always served
in Sheffield all my life except in the last two years
when I have been in Barnsley, so that is some 30 years
on the job, in Sheffield 28, then nobody has sat down and
said:  "This is how you police Hillsborough" because as
a Divisional Commander/Deputy at that time, the main
function of policing Hillsborough is on a normal match
done by the sub-Divisional Commander, so during the time
I arrived and I arrived in the March I think of 1982
as the Detective Superintendent and then in the June/July
as the Deputy, I attended matches in the first season for
information like I would attend the University or other
places for general information to build my picture of
the area I am policing.

      In addition there is a Manual of Guidance on the
method of policing football matches, the South Yorkshire
Manual, and there is what is described as the ACPO Guide­
lines, that is the Association of Chief Police Officers'
Guidelines on the policing of football matches.

      That is the professional information I would be
privy to.  In addition the deployment of tactics is not
peculiar to football, it is peculiar to the policing of
large crowds in many circumstances and that is a subject
which all Commanders would be privy to on how to deal with
a multitude of incidents, not peculiarly football.  The
deployment of horses; the use of dogs; the use of what
we call Police support units, that is large groups of
Officers deployed to deal with a situation.

      The same considerations apply to moving a crov/d
of pickets as it does to moving a crowd of football
hooligans or football supporters, so we apply that as
a Policeman's mind of applying.

      The intricacies of a peculiar area is something
that one would gain with experience or lean heavily
in the early days upon those Officers who work to you
and that is why I have mentioned twice today "on the
selection of Sector Commanders".

      I was conscious that my successor, Mr. Duckenfield,
was coming only weeks before a major event, but the
strength of his support from the Sector Commanders was
in my view exceptional, very capable and could answer
most of the queries he might be faced with.
                                  B.L. MOLE
      *5                              m9

Do I deduce then from that when you handed over, in fact
I know that you had a meeting and Mr. Duckenfield was
invited prior to his appointment so that he had some
idea of your thinking, but the continuity of information
was the continuity of his Support Team? - A. Absolutely
sir, yes.

Have I got that right? - A. Absolutely.  In fairness to
Mr. Duckenfield he was called to the meeting on the 22nd
and listened, because it is a new venture, and I think
I met with Mr. Duckenfield in the last week of my departure
and talked generally, not specific, about the problems
facing the division and I have mentioned some, Broomhall;
University; Kelvin Flats, all sorts of things that attract
a mind, but not minutia detail and I would not expect
that.  I would probably have needed two or three months
to go into that.  The generalities would be expressed
and that is all.

One more point on this, I think, I have already said that
once.  One of the things which you I think addressed
when you were reviewing the Operational Order was the
manpower levels? - A. I did sir, yes.

I think I understood you to say that you suggested some
reductions but you did not actually stipulate them, did
you? Do you know who would in fact have implemented
that suggestion? - A. I think, and I am guessing when
I say the final decision was Mr. Duckenfield's and that
might be a paper decision, only he can answer that because
I was not there, but in essence when you have a major
operation there is a planning team and the planning team
so far as football is concerned would comprise over the
years of certain Inspectors from Hammerton Road Police
Station.  I think latterly it was Inspector Sewell.   I
don't know if he has given evidence here, but Inspector
Sewell, but it used to be Mr. Calvert or it might have
been Mr. Sykes or an Officer who regularly liaised with
the Club.

      They would head up the team with Sergeant Goddard,
I don't know if he has been here, but he was one of the
Controllers on the day in the Control Box.  P.C. Ryan,
P.C. Bichard, people who are in regular use with it and
they would give an indication of the manpower required
bearing in mind the previous year's plan, the year before
that, and taking into account my comments on the over
manpower that I experienced the year before and eventually
would go to may be Mr. Murray in the first instance and
Mr. Duckenfield and say:  "We recommend 920 Officers
to police this, 300 in the ground, 600 outside" or whatever,
the plan would be looked at briefly and approved, altered
or whatever, but the planning team would make the basic
                                  B.L. MOLE
                                      snr—

recommendation and again you are drawing upon a wealth
of experience to give guidance as to the kind of problems
and numbers that would be required.

But what you are basically saying is that the decision
would be taken within the Commander umbrella rather than
the ACC or higher level? - A. Yes, eventually we would
rubber stamp it and say:  "That is what is agreed, now
find that".

      THE CORONER:  I think we will pause anyway.  We
 will have lunch and we will come back at 2 o'clock.

                 (Luncheon adjournment)
              Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE

Mr. Mole, on behalf of the Chief. Constable, can I ask
you some questions please which I have already asked of
a number of other witnesses who have given evidence
from their various different points of view?   It is a
series of questions and in order to answer them you
need to do this little mental exercise.   I want you to
put yourself in the state of mind that you were before
the disaster occurred, some time before 15th April
1989, so that you did not know all the terrible
information that we have now, do you follow? - A. Yes.

You were in the state of mind which you have spent some
time this morning describing in answer to the Coroner
based on your previous experience in the job of
policing the ground. - Right, sir.

Here we go.  The first question, before the disaster
did you believe that the ground was perfectly safe to
be used for a full capacity crowd? - A. I did, sir,
yes.

The second question, did you believe that if there were
an emergency on the Leppings Lane terrace then that
terrace could be evacuated within the safe time worked
out by the Fire Service? - A. That was my
understanding, sir, yes.  I believe that that was
correct.

The third question, before the disaster did you ever
hear anyone say that he could foresee that there was a
risk of death by crushing on the Leppings Lane terrace?
- A. No, sir, not to me.

The next question, in all your association with the
ground and policing matches there, had you ever been in
a situation where you had been compelled to throw open
the concertina exit gates in order to relieve a risk of
crushing of people outside the turnstiles? - A. No,
sir, I had not.

The next question, in all your association with the
ground and all that you know about it as you have
described this morning, had anything happened which had
ever caused you to expect any circumstances in which a
disaster like this could occur? - A. No, sir.  I don't
think a disaster like this at all, no.

Finally, this is a different aspect of the same
question but I need to ask it for it may have legal
implications, did you foresee any circumstances in
which there would be an obvious risk of death or injury
to people by crushing on that terrace? - A. I did not
foresee any circumstance where that would occur, sir,
but like all large crowds there is always a risk of
some factor.

Did anyone ever say to you before the disaster that
there are circumstances in which there would be an
obvious risk of crushing on the terrace? - A. No, sir.

Several times in the course of those questions I have
used the word 'anyone' and taking the question beyond
yourself and asking you whether you had heard anyone
else say anything to this effect and you have answered
no.  Does that include the members of the Officer
Working Party? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

The representatives of the Fire Service? - A. That is
correct, sir.

The engineer? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

The Local Authority? - A. Yes, sir.

And representatives of visiting football clubs who had
attended at other big matches? - A. That is correct,
sir, yes.

You never heard anyone from any of those groups express
concern about the possibility of a risk of such a
disaster? - A. No, sir.  The only time I ever had
concern was with regard to the Kop, which I described
earlier, where I took positive action and the Club
responded.

 I am going to move on to a different topic now and this
relates to the responsibility of various parties for
the systems of capacity and control of the crowds.   You
have given your evidence based on your recollection of
events and so really going back over the past decade
and so have a number of other witnesses relying on
their memory.   The Jury will have observed that there
are differences of recollection not only between you
and other witnesses but also between other accounts
which have been heard.   So I am going to try to put
aside reliance on memory after the event and I am going
to ask you to look at some documents which were written
at the time and before anybody knew that any disaster
like this was going to happen to see whether they help
to see what the true state of mind was of people at the
particular times. These are mostly documents with
which the Jury are already familiar and I hope I will
be able to take it reasonably shortly.   It will be
   necessary for you just to remind yourself of the
   documents? - A. Yes.

Q. Can we start please with the events of 1985 which
   culminated in the layout of the ground as it was at the
   day of the disaster? The first document is 484. - A.
   Yes, I have the document.

Q. You see the date of this document is 4th February 1985
   and it is written by Chief Superintendent Moseley to
   Mr. Chester? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I take it that you knew Chief Superintendent Moseley
   very well? - A. We grew up together, sir.

Q. Although you are not the author of this document I
   would like you just to follow it through, the middle
   paragraph, and then I am going to ask you whether you
   knew about the proposals that were being put forward,
   just the main paragraph:

        "You will see that we favour the erection of a
       stone wall on the ground side of the current
       terraces, with such wall housing a bank of
       turnstiles. Our believe is that once a
       spectator goes through the turnstiles he should
       then be segregated from the other fans, and
       this can be achieved by the erection of
       permanent high metal railings on that concrete
       area at present behind the Stand.   Similarly,
       there should be a high metal railing down the
       centre of the West Stand.   What is then created
       is total segregation of all three portions of
       the Terrace and the two areas of the West
       Stand, with each of these segregated areas
       having its own refreshment and toilet
       facilities.”

   The question is, were you aware that this represented
   the wish of the Police as to what should be achieved in
   the 1985 revisions? - A. Yes, sir, because this stemmed
   from the insistence of home and visiting supporters
   using that end of the ground.

Q. Twice during that paragraph the purpose of the
   alterations is explained, as indeed you have dealt with
   this morning, that the idea of it was to segregate
   fans? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Q. Or to give the Police the ability to be able to control
   that segregation? - A. That is absolutely right, sir.
                                        * f                   48

                                                      B. L. MOLE

Q. The next one is 392.  Although this letter is earlier
   in numerical sequence it is the next date in
   chronological sequence.  The one we just looked at was
   in February 1985 and now we are coming to a letter here
   two months later in April 1985.  This is a letter from
   Eastwood to South Yorkshire County Council dated 9th
   April 1985 for the attention of Mr. D. Vaughan.  I want
   you just to look at this letter please and then I am
   going to ask you whether it reflects what you
   understood to be the intention of the other parties as
   well as to the purpose of this exercise.  He says:

      "Dear Mr. Vaughan,

      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Segregation
      of Visiting Spectators at Leppings Lane end

      The Club is anxious to segregate the visiting
      team's supporters as they enter the ground, and
      also to enable the Police to control their exit
      at the end of the game.

      We have prepared the scheme shown on the
      attached print of our drawing...This involves
      the construction of two new banks of
      turnstiles— and various runs of fencing and
      new gates.

      We would appreciate if the Working Party could
      consider this proposal at an early date.  Mr.
      Chester has already given a copy of the drawing
      to the Police so that they have had some
      advance notice."

  The question is, Mr. Mole, so far as your understanding
  of the purpose of the exercise is concerned, was it
  your belief that the other people responsible,
  including here the engineer, had the same belief as to
  the reason for the new constructions? -




                              /A. I understood.
                                                                &Q


                                              B.L.   MOLE


       - A . I understood they were believed to segregate visiting
       and home supporters at that end of the stadium, sir.
    Q. The next one is 475D. You may need a little help because we
       got into a muddle at one stage with the numbering of 475. - A.
B      The Eastwood letter?

    Q. This should be the note of a meeting.  It is headed "SAFETY OF
       SPORTS GROUNDS ACT, 1975”. We have moved on here now to
       August of the same year, so we have jumped a few months. Do
       you follow that, Mr. Mole? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Here is a note of a meeting held at Hillsborough Stadium,
       Sheffield, on 7th August, 1985. Present: Representing
       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club. Dr. Eastwood and Mr. Hough'.
       Representing the Officer Working Party, Mr. Atkinson of City
       of Sheffield Metropolitan District Council, Mr. Calver of the
       Police, Mr. Copley of the Fire Service, you of the Police, Mr.
       Sheriff of the District Council, Mr. Vaughan of the County
       Council and Mr. Waterhouse of the Fire Service. Quite a team.
       - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. Do you see-.   "Purpose of Meeting":
D           "The purpose of the meeting was to carry out the ’summer'
            inspection of the Stadium with particular reference to
            the Leppings Lane end improvement and the metal sheeting
            of the upper seated area of the South Stand".

       Just before we read on, Mr. Mole, can we establish this. In
       fact, as we all now know the proposals which we saw outlined
       in that letter from Mr. Moseley were not in the event put into
       effect. - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. So what you are inspecting here was a result rather different
       from   that which had originally been proposed? - A. That is
       right, sir.

    Q. In fact, what you are inspecting is the layout as it remained
       until the date of the disaster? - A. That is correct, sir.

    Q. Under paragraph 2, "Ground Inspection, Leppings Lane End":

            "The progress of the works to segregate visiting
            supporters behind and on the West Terrace and STand were
            inspected with particular reference to the points raised
            at the Officer Working Party's meeting held on 29th July,
            (forwarded to Messrs. Eastwood and Partners by the Chief
            Executive's letter of 30th July) and Messrs. Eastwood &
            Partners reply of 1st August.

            Messrs. Eastwood & Partners had confirmed that all the
            calculations which were likely to be required had now
            been sent to the Building Authority for checking and
            comment."

       Mr. Mole, I would be grateful for your comment on this and


H
                                                                  50


                                               B.L. MOLE   . .
                  * **   ' : '                  • f

         information to the Jury. It relates to the composition of
         this group of people who were having this meeting and the
         functions of each of them and their input into the meeting.
         We see there were two people here representing Sheffield
         Wednesday Football Club and various others representing the
j»|      Officer Working Party. What sort of part was taken in a
         meeting like this by Dr. Eastwood? - A. Basically on technical
         advice with regard to:the construction and usage of the grounc
         area which affected his engineering abilities rather than any
         input into the practical implications of control and guidance.

      Q. He was concerned with the layout and structure of the ground?
         - A. Stresses, structure, barriers, fences, gradients,
         technical matters which i would not be privy to.

      Q. In these meetings did he appear to speak with any authority? -
         A. I have known Dr. Eastwood for some time and he does speak
         with authority, sir.

   Q. One particular point in this memorandum which has attracted
      some attention which I think you have dealt with this morning,
      but since we have got the memorandum open can you turn over tc
      the second page. The 4th paragraph beginning "On the Terrace
 I    itself", I would like to explain what this meant at the time:

              "On the Terrace itself, it was noted that there was an
              existing gate in the new 2 m. wide gap formed by the new
              radial fence for use by the Police".

         This is the corridor which is being created and is sometimes
         known as Pen 5? - A. Yes, sir.

E|    Q- Right:

              "This gate would still be available for the use of
              spectators in an emergency as the gates at the top of the
              Terrace under the control of the Police would enable
              spectators to be directed down the 2 m. wide gap.
              However, it was agreed that steps or a longer gate would
              be required.  It was also agreed that a new gate would be
              required from the new South Central Terrace Pen".

         Can   you remember what was being envisaged here at this point
         in the meeting? - a . This is where the difficulty probably
         arises in understanding. When we talked about the gates at
         the top earlier on I was speaking about the whole of them when
         we use them. This particular section was the segregation
         barrier between visiting and home supporters. History had
         shown that Officers had become overcome, and I had used
         Officers before, and asked for a fence to be put in, a
         physical fence, but because of those gates at the top then we
         had the responsibility when that was being used in segregation
         terms to have the keys to open those gates if the need arose.
         But that was peculiar to that sterile area that runs down the
         area there, Pen 5.

      Q. Did you say history had shown that Officers had been overcome?


Hi
                                        B.L. MOLE
                                         .9
- A. Yes, because when the two opposing fans had tried to get
together and we had had to put a physical barrier of Police
Officers, then they were swallowed up in the mass and could
not control the opposing fans in segregation terms, whereas a
physical barrier which was constructed achieved that
objective in the days of home and visiting supporters.  It die
not apply when it became all visiting supporters.

So this passage here in the memorandum is referring to that
particular problem, is it? - A. That is as I understand it.
that that was to do with the segregation gap between home and
visiting supporters.

When Dr. Eastwood gave evidence - I hope I am paraphrasing hiir
accurately - he expanded on this paragraph and developed it
really on the point that all the radial gates would be manned
by the Police at all times? - A. That is not correct, sir. and
I think I expanded on that this morning, that when the gates
were locked for our segregation purposes they would re manned
so they were capable of being opened. When they were fastened
back they were not.

Quite. - A. I don't understand Dr. Eastwood's interpretation
of that.

On that particular point, and this has cropped up m:re t:.an
once during the Inquest, the particular point about :,avme a
Policeman there when the gates are locked open - a: v;u
understand? - A. Yes.

Can you envisage, what would be the function of a r:.:.*jr.on.
having a Policeman standing by a gate, when it is in m e
locked open position? - A. I see no function for n:r. r;r .
other than the fact he is stood there, but no funct:           is
capable of being utilised in any operational functirr. :: :.e
was just stood there amongst the crowd.

Can you return that letter and just continuing this       use
of looking at what people were saying at the time an-;. *
responsibility for a system of capacity and control. .an y o u
look at the next document which might be helpful,         Tn-
first page of this is a covering letter from the Footcaii
Association to Secretaries of Football League Clubs, and Mr.
Mackrell has already told the Inquest that he received a copv
of this document from the Football Association.   There is one
paragraph which has attracted some interest which is at page 3
in this particular document.   It is numbered in the bottom
right-hand corner, 386, and headed at the top "Segregation” .
Have you found that? - A. Yes.

If you look down this list of paragraphs under "Segregation",
the one which has attracted interest is No. 6 where the advice
from the Football Association to League Clubs is that wherever
possible segregation should be effected by a permanent
structure such as wall barriers or fences. Only in
exceptional circumstances should Police be called upon to form
a human barrier.  I think what the Jury might be interested in
                                      B.L. MOLE
      '   *   *   '   V                m§
is what your comment about the wisdom of that advice?
think that is excellent advice, sir. It was the kind
action I had taken and fought hard to achieve in that
the ground, and in fact did so.




                           /Q. Perhaps we can take.
Perhaps we can take that a little further.  As far as
the actual building, the design and construction of
walls, barriers and fences at the Ground itself, do the
Police have any responsibility for doing that? - A.
None at all, sir, no.  The difficulty with that end of
the Ground was the fact that the elevated stand, as it
is called, had been built by Sheffield Wednesday
supporters, they felt, and insisted on using that area
as their own, and that is why we had this split for
some years.  It was not until after this that, in fact,
we got it to be only away supporters, so we had
continually got the problem of segregation.

As an illustration of whereabouts the responsibility
and powers of doing things fall, can we just cast our
mind back to the letter from Mr. Moseley in which the
Police preference was being expressed, and then in view
of other unrelated events it became necessary for the
Club to spend the money on something else, as we know?
- A . I am trying very hard to go back to dates.  You
said earlier that work was not done.   Some work was
done because the wall was built and the back concourse,
and that stemmed from an incident when we had used
barriers and Policemen, which had collapsed and people
had been injured, and in fact we had the wall built,
which is in accordance with this comment, or we asked
or recommended that a wall be built, to prevent that
kind of situation arising, and as I recall it Brian
Moseley's letter was as a consequence of that, and in
fact that action was taken, the wall was built.   There
was also some work up in the West terrace, with a
higher rail and fence which we could move to segregate
visiting and home supporters in the seated area as
well, so some work was done but not probably the
turnstile work, as I recall.

Quite, it is just the responsibility aspect I think the
Jury will probably want to follow up, because we know
what the Police/Moseley proposal was, and we need not
look at it now, but the Jury have seen the drawings
made by Eastwood which proposed segregation on the
concourse area, lines of fences and walls and so on,
and separate batches of turnstiles to provide separate
access, which is just what Mr. Moseley was proposing. -
A. Right.

Now we know that, in fact, that was not put into
effect.  We are not blaming anybody because the money
had to be spent on something else, but in terms of
control did the Police have any control at all over
what actually was done? - A. None at all, sir.   To put
the suggestion there, in our experience, is our role,
to mention it as part of the Working Group, that that
would be an answer, but it is not ours to implement to
                                                           54
                                         »f
                                                B.   L.   MOLE


   take action in building walls, how it is achieved, it
   is merely to identify the problem, in inverted commas,
   and ask for action to be done about it.

Q* Thereafter when the works, whatever they are, have been
   carried out, is it the job of the Police then to do
   their policing function within the structure which has,
   in fact, been provided? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Q. Thank you very much.  Can you put that document back?
   On this question of responsibility for systems of
   capacity and control, can you go on to the next
   document now? We are going to jump on two years now to
   1987, which is document 390.  I don't know whether you
   have had a chance ever to study this document before? -
   A. Not this document.

Q. Do you remember whether you have seen this before? - A.
   I don't think I have actually because I am looking at
   pen capacities, and I was not aware of pen capacities
   to that extent.

Q. No, that is what I was going to ask you. - A. I have
   got a basic plan which I have always used in
   Operational Orders which is the general view of the
   Ground, but not with the detail that is shown on this
   plan.  I honestly cannot recollect having seen it.

Q. So really you have answered the question.  Somebody
   from Eastwood and Partners in 1987 has worked out the
   pen capacities and put them on the plan.  Now, here's
   the question:  was that ever shown to you at the time?
   - A. I have not seen this plan before.

Q. In terms of responsibility for doing this job, Mr. Mole
   from the Police point of view did the Police have any
   responsibility to work out what was the capacity of
   particular areas within the Ground? - A. None at all,
   sir, no.

Q. Thank you, you can put that back in, please, and the
   next document I am going to ask you to look at as an
   illustration of the ordinary working of the segregation
   system which you were explaining about.  It was
   mentioned when you were being asked questions by the
   Coroner but it might be helpful just to actually have
   it in front of us.  This is 512.  - A. Is that 512A or
   B, sir.

Q. It is 512A.  Mr. Mole, just take a moment to make
   yourself familiar with what this is.  It is headed
   South Yorkshire Police "F" Division, Operation Order,
   ^ifhas got the reference number 1986/7, Match Category
    C , Sheffield Wednesday and Queens Park Rangers, date
      J» *

                                             B.   L.   MOLE


Saturday 2nd May, 1987, kick-off, 3 p.m. So it is a
 C category match, routine league fixture in May '87?
- A. Yes.

The Police Operational Order starts off with the
information given anticipated attendance, quite modest,
and then it says, "Away Supporters", and under that
heading, number, details at briefing, colours, blue and
white, accommodation in the ground, south pen on
Leppings Lane terrace and part of West Stand,
information regarding away fans generally good, details
of travel at briefing.  In fact, this is what you said
in your evidence this morning.  Just explain what
actually is being contemplated here? - A. The south pen
was to be used for the visiting supporters, and a
segregated area of the West Stand of seating - usually
we used maybe 20 seats from the south end, left a gap
for other people, for a sterile area, and then home
supporters in the other part of it.

Just go over to the next page, which is 512B.  We have
jumped a lot of pages here, we have not got the whole
Operational Order because we don't need it, but here we
have got Serial 6, Leppings Lane Terrace, Phase 1,
Before Match - maintain order, ensure pens are filled
in accordance with instructions from Control, occupancy
of pens by away/home fans will be given at briefing.
Is this the kind of thing that you were talking about
in your evidence this morning? - A. That is correct.
The instructions from Control would be that it would
start off with maybe the south pen as this Order
relates to, and if that became excessive, as it were,
we would develop into the next pen, and they would
receive instructions from Control to that effect.

So this is an example of the segregation system or the
allocation of pens system being put into effect? - A.
That is correct, sir, yes.

At an ordinary league match? - A. That is right, sir,
yes.

Thank you very much.  You have explained that at semi­
final matches a different system was operated when it
was known that the whole of the end was to be dedicated
to one particular lot of fans? - A. That is right, sir.

And in that case the terrace was left open for access
by fans wherever they wanted to go? - A. That is
correct, sir, yes.

That is your evidence and you have explained that from
the point of view of the Police.  I want you just to
spend a moment looking at a document to see how this
                                              B.   L.   MOLE


squares up with the view of others at the time, that is
before the disaster occurred, and to see whether what
they were saying at the time, or apparently saying, is
consistent or not with the view you have expressed.   We
may be able to see this from 483;  This has got two
pages to it, it is 483A and 483B.  Can you first look
at "A", which is headed at the top, Eastwood and
Partners Consulting Engineers, Memorandum? - A. Yes,
sir.

Of course, this is not a Police document but I want
your comment on it, as to whether it is consistent with
the way the Police worked the system.  It is a
memorandum from Sharon to Eastwood and Partners, Mr.
Strange and Mr. Eastwood, you see that? - A. Yes.

And the relevant paragraph is number 3.   There is just
a particular bit of it I would like your comment on at
the bottom, so I am going to read it all:

     "Has any account been taken for alterations done
     on Leppings Lane over the last few seasons?  Is
     the 10,200 or so figure still correct?  I said
     that in my opinion it needs to be adjusted, better
     do it now than later.  It could also affect ticket
     sales for Coventry game.  She will speak to
     Graham."

Now, just have a look at the date on this, 26th
February '87. - A. Yes.
                                                                  57


                                           B.L. MOLE
                                                *f


    Q.   So this is in the run-up, is it, to the     1987 semi-final?
         - A. Coventry v Leeds sir.

    Q. I am guessing at that.    Do you actually     know that? - A.
g I    No, I mean ....

    Q. It is possible that' the teams weren't known yet? - A.
       Looking at the date I would have thought they weren't.
         I would normally have not as much notice as that.
         More like four weeks at the most of when the semi-final
         was. Now whether they played earlier, and in fact it
         was in April the semi-final in 1987, whether they played
         earlier and achieved that position because Coventry
         is mentioned I don't know.

    Q. You see it might in fact relate to a league game.

               MR. CATCHPOLE:  Sir, perhaps I could help.  If
         one looks at the top of the very first memorandum it
         actually says:  "Ground Capacity for possible Semi-final"
         and is the Coventry/Leeds match.  It is in anticipation
         of the Coventry/Leeds semi-final.

                THE WITNESS:  I would think sir if it is helpful
         that may be one Club had got through Coventry to the
         point.   Leeds had not been determined but was determined
         later.

    Q.         MR. PAYNE: Well we are right then.   So we are
         definitely talking about the semi-final here and that
         is the context in which this question is being asked.

               Now go over to 483B and here is the answer a few
         days later from Mr. Strange back to Mrs. Lane.

               Now we have got to bear in mind that Dr. Eastwood
         has given evidence and Dr. Eastwood has disowned most
         of this paragraph 3. Do you see that? - A. Yes.

    Q. Saying that it is a misunderstanding or a mistake by
       his Assistant Mr. Strange, but what I want you to do is
       just look at it with me please and then say how it
       squares or not with what in fact the system truly was.
       Do you see at 3:

               "Dr. Eastwood says leave the capacity at
               Leppings Lane end as it is providing police
               have gates under West stand open so that
               people can distribute throughout the terrace
               evenly."

         Now what is your comment about that in the light of the
         system which you did in fact operate? -A. That is exactly
         the system I operated sir.




H
                                  B.L. MOLE



We are talking not with hindsight here and after the
event but we are talking about what was actually said
at the time? - A. That is correct sir.

Now there is one more document in this bundle that I would
be grateful if you would look at but merely as a point
of reference because I am going to ask you some questions
about the disaster itself please, so can you turn to 277?

      Just come to the moment in the time column where
we have got "External:  1452.06 Gate C opened, large
numbers of supporters enter"? - A. Yes.

Now I would be grateful, Mr. Mole, if you can help the
jury please from your great experience in connection
with the running of matches as you have been describing
this morning about the situation which confronted the
people in the Control Room at this time, 14.52.

      First of all in all the time that you had had
anything to do with the ground had you ever experienced
a situation such as took place at 14.52? - A. No sir.

As far as you know, Mr. Mole, from all your years of
policing and everything that you have ever heard about
running football matches and all the training that you
have been given, had anything occurred within your
knowledge to prepare the Police for such an event where
these gates were thrown open shortly before the kick-off?
- A. No sir, no.

I know this is an obvious question but I need to ask it:
had anything been included in any of the planning or
briefing or Operational Orders which contemplated an
event like this? - A. There was no anticipation of such
an event and therefore nothing was included in the Orders
to deal with it sir.

Now one more question and I want to draw on the whole
of your experience as a Police Officer, the years you
have spent in the Force and the number of things you
have had to investigate because we all know that the
Police have to deal with many difficult situations of
all different sorts.

      Now here we have got a situation of people outside
the turnstiles just before 14.52 who are at risk of
being crushed to death causing the need to take this
action to open the gates. Now where does this sort
of event rate on the scale of emergencies that the
Police have to deal with? - A. I think very high sir.
The preservation of life is most important and in those
circumstances described it is a high priority for
positive action to be taken.
                                  B.L. MOLE
                                       • I


I don't know whether you are able to answer this, but
if you were at that moment in the Control Room and you
were confronted with such an emergency outside the
turnstiles, what would be your priority at that moment?
- A. To relieve the pressure and the threat that was
being exerted to the members of the public outside those
gates.

Now we know now that after the gates had been opened
a lot of people entered Pens 3 and 4 and some people
pushed hard into those centre pens.  Now in all your
experience have you come across a situation where a
body of people have pushed their way into a heavily
populated pen? - A. No sir, in looking at the situation
I was facing I think the opening of the gates was intended
to relieve the pressure described.

      In public order tactical terms in my view was the
right decision because we were moving from a confined
area into space and the concourse area ....

You mean confined outside the turnstiles? - A. Confined
outside the turnstiles into space and the concourse
area is space, a larger area where in my experience of
public order generally, and I am not talking football,
people would wish to recover and gain their faculties
after being subjected to crushing outside.

Can I just ask you a question, sorry to interrupt you
Mr. Mole, but this is the important question in the
case.

      In the situation that we are looking at where you
would relieve the pressure outside the turnstiles in
the circumstances you have described, can you say whether
it would be obvious to you that in consequence of this
a body of people would then push their way into the
heavily populated Pens 3 and 4? - A. I certainly would
not sir.  I feel ....

      THE CORONER:  Mr. Payne, before Mr. Mole answers
it may or may not be correct that people pushed in but
I think it would be better and we would get a more
correct answer if you used the word "entered" because
the word "pushed" carries .... That is a matter for the
jury to decide whether or not the people pushed or didn't.

      MR. PAYNE:  Well I have in mind particular evidence
which in fact I can put it before you.  I have in mind
the evidence of the man who was standing at the back of
the crowd at the front end of the tunnel when a group
of people launched themselves into the crowd.
                                                                60

                                        B.L. MOLE
           * *                              • f   .




           THE CORONER:  You are thinking of Mr. Hewstone.
   I   know who you are thinking of.

         MR. PAYNE:  Right, and there are other witnesses
   to the same effect.  I don't mind using a neutral term.

           THE CORONER: • I would prefer if you used a neutral
   term.

        MR. KING:  Sir, the difficulty with the technique
  of my learned friend at the moment is that it is very
  selective sir and I don't want to rehearse ....

         THE CORONER:     That is why I have asked him to use
   a neutral term.

        MR. KING:  Of course.  And if I may say so sir,
  if my learned friend would oblige, it is verging on a
  technique which ought not to follow because if I followed
  it I am sure I would be shouted down very quickly by
  my learned friend.

         THE CORONER:  Mr. King, you don't have to stand up.
   I have asked Mr. Payne to change the word.

           MR. PAYNE:   And I have accepted what you say.

Q. Would it be obvious to you, this is the question Mr. Mole,
   in those circumstances, that when in the emergency outside
   the turnstiles you had taken the action which we are
   talking about, that a large body of people would then
   enter Pens 3 and 4 causing a serious crush? - A.   If as
   the scenario was described to me of people under pressure
   outside I would not expect that.   I would expect them to
   get into space and recover themselves before going anywhere.
   The priority is to regain composure and move into an area
   of safety.

           MR. PAYNE:   Thank you very much, Mr. Mole.


                    Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

Q. Mr. Mole, I am not going to ask you any questions about
   what you would or would not have done in the heat of
   the moment faced with the emergency as we have heard
   about because with hindsight one can say all sorts of
   things and I think it would be unfair to you to put you
   in that position though we have heard what you have said
   based on your experience.

         I want to deal with some other matters, if I may,
   and I ask these questions on behalf of Chief Superintendent
   Duckenfield. - A. Very good sir.
                                                           61

                                      B.L. MOLE



Q. First of all may I ask you about your experience putting
   it this way:  it is clear, is it not, from what you have
   told us that you have very great experience of policing
   Hillsborough as a Commander? - A. That is correct sir,
   yes.

Q. And the evidence that you have given us is based to a
   very large degree upon that accumulated experience of
   policing Hillsborough? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

Q. Of course when one is faced with a situation whether it
   be at a football ground or in a town centre or during
   any other public order situation, you seek to react
   in accordance with one's Police training? - A. Indeed
   sir, yes.

Q. But any individual area has its own specific and particular
   problems? - A. I think every area of policing does
   that sir, yes.

Q. Not only area of policing but any specific location has
   its specific problems? - A. It does sir, yes.

Q. And Hillsborough to that extent is no exception? -
   A. Absolutely sir.

Q. To take one example which I know was touched upon in
   another place though not I think so much here, one has
   the situation of the lettering above the turnstiles where
   I think the lettering as we can see from ....

          MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, can I object to this.   I don't
   think describing it as a "problem" is necessarily very
   fair.   The evidence has always been you can see it above
   the gates.   Now what   you     make of that, we have had very
   little evidence from any        fans that anyone was confused
   by it other than simply coming and going.     We know it
   was an odd order.     To describe it as a "problem" is putting
   it in the wrong context with respect.     If one wants to
   choose a neutral subject say the Spion Kop, something
   like that, I would be more than happy for him to continue
   this line of cross-examination.

         MR. ISAACS:   I am happy to take some other example.
   I was choosing that because effectively it is a neutral
   matter and I had not intended by using this to be
   criticising the Club and       their system,  only to point out
   or to use it as an example of the sort of things one
   has to be aware of.

         THE CORONER:   Well use a different one.

         MR. ISAACS:   Perhaps not so neutral, I don't
   know, the signposting.
                                                                 62


                                          B.L. MOLE



Q. We know there was a sign over the tunnel that said
   "Standing".  We know that there was a relatively small
   sign on the right-hand side as you went around the
   terrace.  We know that there was a sign I think on the
   left-hand side.

              THE CORONER:  That is right, Mr. King, on the
        left-hand side of the West Stand.  Right in the corner
        but you could not see it because of the wall.

             MR. KING:   That is probably why I was puzzled sir.

q   .         MR. ISAACS:  And the point the Coroner makes is
        exactly Mr. Mole the one I am going to ask you about.

              You could not see the sign on the left-hand side
        from the concourse unless you looked through that doorway,
        although there was no door there, in that wall? - A.
        Since this Inquiry that matter has been brought to my
        attention.  It was not a factor that I was conscious of
        whilst policing at Hillsborough.

Q. Certainly I am not suggesting it was, Mr. Mole.  What
   I am saying is this:  if that be said now to be a problem,
   that ....




                     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I am very sorry sir
      MR. CATCHPOLE:  I am very sorry, sir, and I
 apologise for interrupting but Mr. Mole both here and
 in other places has said in his. experience the signs
 caused him no problem.  That was what was relevant at
 the time.  If my friend wants to find a problem, let
 him find a problem that M r . Mole experienced at the
 ground in his time as Police Commander.    I have
 suggested an area where he might do because I knew if
 he touched on the signs I knew what the answer would be
 because I have heard Mr. Mole give evidence before.

      MR.   ISAACS:  I know, sir, that Mr. Mole did not
 consider   that to be a problem but it is a matter, with
 respect,   I am entitled to ask this Officer about.  I do
 not know   what my learned friend is being so touchy
 about.

     ®   _CATCHPOLE: I do not intend to be touchy. I
know it is very rude to bounce up and down but this
cross-examination opened up with questions, "Each
location has its specific policing problems".  Problems
have now been put to Chief Superintendent Mole which in
his view are not problems.  If my learned friend can
identify a problem and explore it about Hillsborough,
please do so, but to make up problems this Officer does
not agree with is not, in my respectful submission, an
appropriate way to proceed.  I am quite happy if he can
find a problem which he can explore with Chief
Superintendent Mole.

     MR. ISAACS:  Let me choose another area, Chief
Superintendent, and hopefully my learned friend will
not object to it.  I appreciate what he is saying.   It
has been suggested that the radial gates at the back of
the radial fences are somewhat difficult to see if you
have a capacity crowd.   I do not know if you
appreciated that or not.   Could you help us? - A. I do
not think with the capacity crowd and the gates
fastened back you would be able to see them.

That is something one would have to see for oneself
before one would know that that was a possible problem?
- A. I have difficulty with the word ’problem’. I do
not see it as a problem, sir. I say I can say with a
capacity crowd you could not see the gates but I do not
see it as a problem.

It is entirely my fault because I see that I am causing
all sorts of fuss and bother by using the word
’p r oblem’. That is a particular part of the ground and
the effect that that had upon controlling the ground
would be a particular matter which, unless you had the
experience of the ground, you would not be able to see.
That is right, is it not? - A. That is a facet of
policing Hillsborough that is within my knowledge.     Is
that what you are saying, sir?

Yes. - A. Yes.

But one would require experience at the ground to
determine that that was, in fact, the case? - A. Yes.

I am helpfully reminded by those behind me that I
should be using the word 'feature' which perhaps is a
better way of putting it.  You, as a person in charge
of a football ground, are not in a position to
recognise the various features that exist which make
that ground different from other grounds until you have
had a good deal of experience? - A. Personally, no,
sir.

I understand this to be the case that when you became
involved with policing Hillsborough, you had the
benefit of many discussions of your then Chief
Superintendent.  Could you help me as to who that
was? - A. Initially it was Robin Herrold.

Mr. Herrold. That is right, is it not? - A. The term
'many discussions' is somewhat probably excessive but
we did have discussions about that and all other
aspects of policing that Division, sir.

I think you said in another place that when you first
took over as Deputy Commander at Hallam Road:

    "The Divisional Commander was Mr. Herrold who,
    in fact, was involved in the operation in 1981.
    I have discussed many times with him various
    aspects of Sheffield Wednesday."

A. That is correct, sir, yes.

Those discussions, Mr. Mole, would have been of
assistance to you? - A. Definitely, sir, yes.

As to the policing of Hillsborough as a Commander? - A.
Yes, sir.

So over the years - and you talk with a good deal of
experience - you became familiar with the ground and
with its features? - A. I did, sir, yes.

You did that - and tell me if I am wrong in making this
assumption - through a combination of experience over
the years, yes? - A. Yes, sir.
Of being given information from people who had prior
experience? - A. Yes, sir.

And your    ability to deal with the various features of
policing    Hillsborough as a Commander would have
improved    and developed over the years? - A. I am sure
it would,    sir, yes.

You have told us that you did not consider the
signposting at the Leppings Lane end with all your
experience as anything of a problem? - A. That is
correct, sir, yes.

You did not consider, as I understand it, any of the
matters relating to ticketing or the turnstiles as a
problem, that is the numbering and the like? - A. All
matters that I found to be problems I acted upon.  In
regard to tickets and turnstiles colour coding was one
of the problems I had identified and with the help of
the Cl u b ....

You resolved that? - A. Resolved.

That was something that again was   based upon your
experience.  You found that there   was a potential
problem in one game and you asked   the Club to deal with
it for another game? - A. That is   correct, sir.

The 1989 game was announced I think on the 20th
March? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

You at that time were still in control? - A. I was
still the Divisional Commander, sir, yes.  On notice   of
moving.  I knew I was moving at that time.

You were responsible, as I understand it, for putting
in place the arrangements for preparing the Operational
Order for the 1989 game? - A. I did, sir, yes.

Save for a number of minor amendments which were the
result of the accumulated experience from 1988 the
Operational Order which was, in fact, effected for the
1989 game was exactly the same as for 1988? - A. Yes, I
put the plan into being.   I have looked at the order
since - I did not see it when it was first published -
and, yes, it was the same basically.

You appointed the planning team who were to prepare the
plan? - A. I did, sir.

Mr. Sewell, Mr. Beale, overseen by Mr. Murray? - A.
That is correct, sir.
 Q. I think you also allocated the respective Sector
    Commanders? - A. I selected them purposely, yes.

 Q. Indeed you made the choice that on this particular
    occasion Messrs. Greenwood and Marshall would change
    round? - A. I did, sir, yes.

 Q. Would it be fair to say that had you remained in
    control for the 15th April 1989 the operational plan
    that eventually was signed by Mr. Duckenfield would
    have been signed by you? - A. I am quite sure that
    would have been the case.

Q. I am very grateful.  I ask you against your background
   of accumulated experience some of these matters
   relating to the operational plan? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. As you have been good enough to accept the plan as
   essentially yours, if I may say so? - A. I think that
   is fair comment, sir.

Q. I say this in the context of matters that have been
   raised already during the course of this Inquest, and I
   ask you questions as to why certain things are not in
   the plan.  I do not say it by way of criticism.  I make
   that clear, but I am asking for your comment now? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. It may be said, and I ask you, why there is nothing in
   the plan as to what should be done to cater for large
   numbers of late arrivals, not just a small number but a
   large number of late arrivals? Why is that? - A. Yes,
   there is no anticipation in the preparation of the plan
   stage that that will occur.  An all-ticket match
   normally indicates a sell out and if, during the build
   up stage to the operation, intelligence suggests that
   there will be additional numbers attending the ground
   and that information usually comes through if it is the
   case, then that would be part of the personal Sector
   Commander briefing through the Operational Commander
   immediately prior to the event and contingency plans
   drawn up to cater for that eventuality as with any
   other eventuality which might arise in the build up
   time to the operation.

Q*       in fact, as it were out of the blue large numbers
     of fans come late in the day and, as I say, not just a
     small number or the number you might expect but an
     unexpected number, would you expect the Sector
     Commander for that side of the city, Mr. Marshall in
     this instance, to deal with it? - A. I would, sir, with
     the help and support from myself or other Officers
     depending on the size of the matters being experienced.
                                                t #                  C7
                                                             B. L. MOLE


     Q. If he asked for it? - A. Absolutely, sir.
B    Q. If he had a problem, or anticipated a problem, would
        you expect him to make that known to the Control Box? -
        A - If it was a matter he could not deal with
        immediately I would expect him to seek advice from the
        Control Box and support.   If he could, I would expect
        him to deal with it and report.

    Q* Going back then to the Operational Order, we see there
       is nothing in the Operational Order to cater, it is
       said, for the possibility that these large numbers of
       fans coming late might cause congestion at the Leppings
       Lane end. Why is there nothing in the plan to that
       effect? - A. There was nothing to suggest that that
       situation would arise.  There was no intelligence,
       information, within my knowledge.  My experience from
       the preceding two years had shown that that was not the
       case.  If my mind had been activated to the possibility
D      then it may well be that there would have been a need
       to incorporate a contingency in the actual order.      No
       such activation was made to my mind or anyone e l s e 's so
       far as I am aware to dictate that contingency.

    Q. You with all your experience did not anticipate that? -
       A. I did not, sir.

    Q*      ^ be said, Mr. Mole, that there is nothing in the
         plan to give guidance to Police Officers to monitor the
         numbers going into the central pens, the numbers, what
         do you say about that? - A. I address the comment
         earlier that I had no knowledge of the numbers which
         were allowed into the centre pens.  My knowledge of the
         Leppings Lane end was 10,100 capacity.  My only other
         knowledge, which was a rough rule of thumb guide, was
         to do with the elevated section which did not apply at
         Semi Finals and that was only because I kept that
         sterile but I would only have indications as to numbers
         in the overall term from the computerised facilities
         provided by Mr. Mackrell and the Club.

    Q. What is your view   as to this;  so far as you were
       concerned had the   Police accepted any duty to monitor
       the numbers going   into the individual pens? - A. That
       is not one of our   functions, sir, as far as I am
       concerned.

    Q. Was this the case, Mr. Mole, that it was the view so
       far as you understood it to be, of both the Police
       through you and the Club, that the terrace was safe up
       to its certified capacity as a whole? - A. My
       understanding as a Police Commander is that the




H
                                             *f                 68
                                                         B. L. MOLE

       capacity is determined by those with the experience in
       that field and I accept that figure as being the safe
       figure for capacity on the terrace, seated area or Kop
B      and operate to that figure.

    Q. On that basis the idea was that the fans would move
       from pen to pen as they wished? - A. That is correct,
       sir.




D




                                 /Q. This idea of finding.




H
                                       B.L. MOLE
                                          »I

This idea of finding one's own level? - A. That is the
evidence I have given previously, yes.

And you accept there is nothing in the Operational Order that
suggests that the Police should in some way go against that by
being prepared to take steps, for.example, of closing off the’
tunnel and redirecting? - A. There is nothing in the Order to
that effect, sir, and-'as I have said earlier I anticipate
Officers who are Police Officers to use their experience and
training to be aware of any developing situation.

There would be nothing for anybody looking at that Order fresh
without any experience which would suggest there was any
system of closing the tunnel and redirecting fans? - A. None
at all, sir.

Can I ask you then about this.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Isaacs, may I ask you. I think we
ought to have a break at some point.

     MR. ISAACS:   Now is a perfect time.      I am moving on to a
slightly different topic.

     THE CORONER:   We will pause for a few minutes.      We won’t
finish too late, depending where we get to.

                    (Short Adjournment)

     MR. ISAACS:   Mr. Mole, could I ask you a few more
questions just relating to the Operational Plan, but only
insofar as it involves the selection of certain Officers to do
certain jobs. I think you have told us that the senior
Officers were hand picked by you? - A. That is correct, sir.

And why was that? - A. I think it is essential that when
dealing with a large matter of this nature Officers with
experience and knowledge of their roles and responsibilities
and because of what I said earlier this morning about the
dependency of the overall Commander upon the decision making
process of those Commanders is something which is of paramount
importance, and I wanted to ensure that Mr. Duckenfield had
that team of experienced senior Officers able to assist him in
carrying out this operation.

Clearly important to Mr. Duckenfield to be able to rely on
that expertise? - A. Yes, sir.

So far as the command structure is concerned, do I understand
you to be saying this, that it was your practice to be out and
about? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

That, as you said to the Coroner, if you were out and about,
if you were at point A. it meant you could not be at point B?
- A. That is correct, sir.

A matter of common sense, I expect.   But that the Sector
'U




                                                    B.L. MOLE
                     .   S                           mt              '




              Commanders and indeed those at lower stageis in the hierarchy,
              would have their own responsibility for taking decisions which
              were within their field? - A. I think every Officer on duty
              has a level of discretion and can take decisions, right from
              PC upwards. The Sector Commanders and their sub-Sector
     H|      Commanders clearly were in a position to take more serious
       *     decisions, and that is what I would expect of them.

           Q. You mentioned you would be out and about. That was your
              preference, but it was not something which was a requirement
              of the job? - A. No. sir. My style is to feel what is going
              on, to have a look at everything, to see that my Sector
              Commanders are in place, to see that they are supported, to
              see the deployment of my plan is as I would see it, and that
              is how I operate.

           Q. Just turning to 1988 for a moment, there has been    an abundance
              of evidence that at some stage, some say earlier,    some say
              later, there was a closure of the tunnel, that is    the central
              tunnel to the central pens. We know from you that    you were
              not aware of that? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

           Q. You have told us that you would feel if that had happened it
              should have been part of somebody's debriefing note? - A. Not
              only the debriefing note but at half-time of every match,
              Semi-Final or others, I hold a briefing of all Sector and
              sub-Sector Commanders in the South Stand, and go over any
              points which have arisen and any changes which are needed to
              the plan. So if there had been that action at some stage I
              would have expected that to have been reported to me, added
              to which at the end of each match there is a debrief sheet
              completed by every Serial Commander, i.e. a Sergeant, as to
              any unusual action which has taken place, including such
              things as the drawing of staffs if they had to be involved in
              some public order matter, or any positive action, and I had
              no information that such action had been taken regarding the
              tunnel.

           Q. Now. the closure of the tunnel would have been a matter which
              on your criteria should have been reported, whether or not at
              half-time, certainly at full-time? - A. It should, sir. yes.

           Q. Again it may seem obvious, but why is it important that such a
              matter be reported? - A. Because there must have been a reason
              for having to close the tunnel, and if that reason became
              apparent then as with finding the colour coding on the ticket,
              I would expect to take some action. That action might be
              nothing if I had analysed the situation and found it was not a
              problem, but more likely it would have been to introduce some
              change in the plan to prevent or to assist such a future
              occurrence.

         G. It would mean, therefore, that on being given that information
            those in control, you in 1988 and to a degree in 1989. would
            be in a position to make an informed decision as to what
            should flow from that action? - A. That is correct, sir. It
            might, as I say, dictate a change in my plan. It might.


     H
                                                           y?.




                                         B.L. MOLE
                                          »t


Q. If this did happen, and whether it did or not is entirely a
   matter for the Jury in this instance, it would suggest if you
   did not know about it that it was a decision taken
   independently of you or those in the control room? - A. That
   is correct, sir.

Q. Which supports, I expect, your view that one who was in
   control can rely upon the initiative of more junior Officers?
   - A. I encourage and would expect that initiative, and
   likewise would expect the reporting which would appear not to
   have followed this time.




                                   /Q. Of course.
      »»
                                             B.   L.   MOLE


Of course.  If this decision to close the tunnel was
taken at Inspector level, it would suggest that the
Inspector concerned had on that occasion in 1988
appreciated the need to close the tunnel.  That must be
right, must not it? - A. If that is the case.

Is it important so far as you are concerned that
somebody say of Inspector level should stay within the
area for which he is responsible during the time of the
game.  Do you understand what I mean?  Not only the
game but the time of the game and the period leading up
to the game, during the time of the effect of the
Operational Order? - A. That is right, and I did try
and explain earlier with the semi-final, I expect them
to be in that allocated position throughout the
operation, and that is phase 1, 2 and 3, because this
was peculiar in that they only had one job, and that
one job would be to be in charge of, let's say, the
West Stand enclosure, or the Leppings Lane terraces or
the turnstiles, but that would be the job and I would
expect them to be there throughout, basically.   I do
know, in fact, that someone was pulled away for an
arrest but that is a one off situation which would take
the Inspector away with the prisoner.

Of course, if that was the case that expertise in
charge of that area would be missing for a period of
time? - A. It would, except to say that he would have
"x" number - I don't know how many serials each
Inspector had at that particular time - of Sergeants
who once again have experience and back up in the event
of the short term loss of the Inspector.

There could be no excuse for a short term loss --- let
me put it another way, how long would you say such a
short term loss should be, five minutes? - A. It
differs completely.  I would not expect normally an
Inspector to be involved in an arrest situation.   I do
know, and I mention it because it happened I believe
when one of the Inspectors was involved in an arrest,
and he was away for some 15 minutes, I think, I would
not normally like to see an Inspector away and I would
expect that that would be dealt with by junior
Officers, but sometimes you cannot avoid your
responsibility of being a Police Officer whatever your
rank, in carrying out a function, and if he had to
arrest and deal with it then that is something I could
not really cater for, but I would not like to encourage
it or see it as a regular feature because his presence,
in my view, has the prime importance.

Certainly if you did that you should report the fact
that you are going away from your area to Control? - A.
I would expect that, sir, yes.
                                              B.   L.   MOLE


Gould I move on to another matter, and that is
briefings? As I understand the position, when you had
charge of games such as this you would give a general
briefing to   all the men? - A. Yes, sir. If I could
take it back a stage, I would start the day before with
the Sector Commanders and Serial Commanders, who were
shown the Ground.   They were taken round the Ground
because in a large operation you have people from other
areas who do not regularly police Hillsborough, and
they would be shown the locality in which they are to
operate.  In addition, I used to arrange for the Force
coach to beavailable, and they were taken on a tour    of
the area to   familiarise themselves with the approach
routes of visiting supporters, and be briefed generally
on the prevailing conditions at Hillsborough and
surrounding area.

     On the day of the match all Officers engaged,
including mounted and dogs Officers, would report for
briefing by me personally.  I would brief them in the
North Stand, as I said earlier, seated, all 1,000 men
if that was the case, and brief them on the
generalities of my expectance of their attitude and
professionalism in carrying out this operation.  That
would be followed up by an intelligence briefing, and
that ties in with the earlier comment with the latest
intelligence of what is happening, and then by a Sector
Commander's briefing for each of the individual groups.

And then to go on from there, you would expect then the
men to be given specific briefings by their Sector
Commanders or Inspectors, rather than by you? - A. That
is correct, sir.

Just to make it clear to the Jury, you would not be
saying, for example, in your general briefing, what
exactly you expected in particular from those on the
perimeter fence? - A. Exactly, sir.

You would leave that to those lower down the
hierarchical line? - A. My briefing would generally
follow the Operational Order in broad principle, i.e.,
the intention, the objectives, the dress, the feeding
etc.  The main principles of policing the operation.

Did you feel that you could leave the specific
briefings to those men whom you had hand-picked? - A.
The short answer is yes, and the reason is that to try
and brief 1,000 men and ensure that that message gets
through to everyone is almost impossible, whereas to
brief the small numbers of Sector Commanders,
Operational Field, you can ensure that 50 or 20 men all
get the message, rather than me thinking that 1,000 has
got it.
      » »
                                              B.   L.   MOLE


Did you feel it was necessary when you did this to tell
each Sector Commander or each Inspector at the earlier
briefing exactly what you wanted them to tell their men
at their individual briefings? - A. No, as a broad
sweeping principle of policy on the day which I would
give to Sector Commanders, I would receive their
queries, and often there are queries from Sector
Commanders who would say, well what if, and how are we
going to deal with that, we would on that occasion
devise policy to deal with that.  As an example, I can
say the utilisation of horses to block roads, such as
Penistone Road, the utilisation of the safe area, or
sterile area, at the back of the South Stand and how we
contain it, and that policy would be derived at the
Sector Commanders' briefing with me personally, and
they would interpret that to their individuals when
they did their briefings.

The reason why you were able to leave those matters,
those specific matters, to your Sector Commanders or to
their Inspectors, was because of the faith you had in
those Officers' expertise and experience? - A. Yes,
sir.

One final point, Mr. Mole, it is to do with delaying
the kick-off, you were asked about considerations that
might affect any decision you were making to delay the
kick-off, and we know the kick-off was delayed in 1987,
if I understand what you are saying, one of the reasons
being that you felt it was largely or partly due to the
Police operation that people had been delayed? - A.
That was one of the considerations, and  the fact that I
knew what I had got to deal with.

And when you made that decision, as I understand it,
you knew that you still had people on the motorway? -
A. I did, sir.

You told us of some of the matters that would be taken
into account in any decision to delay the game.    One
matter I think you did not mention was the effect of
players actually being on the pitch, having come out
ready to kick off.   How important a criteria is that? -
A. I think it is very important. There is an air of
expectancy when the players are on the pitch.    The
normal procedure at football matches is for them to
come out half an hour before for a warm up, and then go
off.  The next appearance is a signal to the crowd that
we are going to play.   If we have got to that stage
then the consideration I spoke of, of the attitude of
the fans, is a very serious consideration because quite
clearly their frustrations are something I would have
to cope with if I decided to send the team back in and
wait for another 15 minutes, and then bring them out
                                              B.   L.   MOLE


again for another 5 minutes and carry on in that way.
So it is a serious consideration.

Similarly, not only the fans but also the players, who
as you mentioned before are by that time, to use the
vernacular, very hyped up for the game that is at hand?
- A. Absolutely, and I am always conscious of that and
it is one of the many considerations I would have to
take into account.

I am sorry, Mr. Mole, I said that was going to be the
last series of questions by like the Coroner there is
always something else.  You have talked about
experience.  May I just ask you about this - it is to
do with one's perceptions of crowds.  The perception of
whether a section of a ground is full or comfortably
full, or over-full, depends very largely on experience,
doesn't it? - A. It does, yes.

And that is borne out of, I don't know whether it be
attendance at many matches where there are large
crowds, or many years of policing Hillsborough as a
Commander? - A. I think the former, generally with
large crowds, and my experience initially started with
assessing crowds at demonstrations and marches, so I
knew how many people I had got.   I have to admit that I
don't always get it right, and it is a precise science
to be able to look at the Kop and say it is full or
half full, because it is not that easy.   Often with the
counting system I have looked at it and been totally
surprised when I have realised there are about 5,000
less than I thought, and it is not an easy or precise
science, it is very difficult.   I think anybody who has
been involved in that kind of a situation would have to
agree with me that to be so precise is extremely
difficult and only experience can give you that little
edge, but not always enough even then.   It is a
feeling, and I utilise my own style of being there to
feel, and I use the term feel the air.   After a lot of
matches you can tell if it is going to be a good day or
a bad day.  I mean that in terms of aggression and
violence and that type of thing.   It is really through
experience that you pick that up, sir.

So your ability to judge a crowd within a specific area
of the game would undoubtedly improve with your years
of experience of looking at such crowds? - A. Yes.

That must be right? - A. Yes, absolutely.

Against that background you were asked, I think,
something in relation to the disparity, I think by the
Coroner, the disparity between a central pen that was,
I was going to say full, and wing pens that were less
                                                            76
                                             * f
                                                     B. L. MOLE


       full.  Could I ask you this, the fact that there is
       such a disparity does not in itself mean (a) that the
       centre pens are over-full? - A. It certainly does not,
       sir.  I expect them to be more densely populated.   It
B      is like a football match with young boys, if you look
       for the best viewing :point, that is full, the rest is
       very sparse, and it is natural that occurs.   It does
       not automatically activate the mind to say that it is
       excessive or it is causing a problem, and there are
       other indicators to look for:   movement, playing with
       things, balloons, balls or whatever.   You see all those
       things and pick them up, which gives you some
       indication of discomfort or comfort, or an awareness of
       a problem.

    Q. I am very grateful because that was the point I was
       going to come to.  I can now move on to the point I was
       going to come to after that and that is this, the fact
       that there is a disparity between the numbers or
       apparent numbers, in the centre pens, as opposed to the
       side pens, also does not mean in itself that the self
       find your own level system is not working? - A. That is
       correct, sir.

    Q. And the reason for that? - A. I think I said at the
       earlier hearing that most people will not remain
       uncomfortable if they can avoid it.   There is sometimes
       a situation where it goes beyond them doing anything
       about it, and it is not for me to judge, but most
       people will not and they will seek alternative
       positions and on the two games that I was involved with
       they did, in fact, just that, so I don't think it is
       totally impossible.  People do move.   I have seen them
       come to the tunnel top and turn round and go back.
       Normally there is a steady flow into the ground, not a
       mass, and they make a decision.   I would come through
       the gates at Leppings Lane and have a look at it from
       the back and the front, and I have walked down and
       walked back, even at times at quarter-to-3 and 10-to-3,
       again to get the feel of the mood of the situation, and
       I could only operate in my style by feeling the mood
       and the ability of people to be - comfortable is
       probably an easy word to use - but I can feel when they
       are comfortable and uncomfortable.

    Q. But you might get a situation, might you not, Mr. Mole,
       where at quarter-past-2 there would be centre pens that
       were full-ish, and the side pens had virtually no
       people in them, but that would not indicate that the
       self find your own level system was not working,
       because there would still be people to come? - A. I
       would expect that to happen.




H
                                               B.    L.   MOLE


And the idea as I understand it from the Police's point
of view, at least when you were in control, is that
people start in the middle and fan out to the sides? -
A. That is exactly as I would see it.

That, so far as you. understood it, is the way that it
was put to Mr. Duckenfield when he took over? - A. I
certainly did not put it to him but I presume the
Commanders would put it to him in that way and I would
expect them to do so.

I am very obliged.   Thank you very much indeed.

     THE CORONER:  Mr. Manning, it depends how many
minutes you are going to be, but if you are going to be
more than five, then I think we should not start, and
we will start tomorrow morning.  What do you say?

      MR. MANNING:   Are you prepared to take a vote on
it?

     THE CORONER:   No.   We will start tomorrow
morning.  It is quite a hard day for the Witness when
we are going all day.   Tomorrow it is 9.30.

     MR. ISAACS:    Sir, I understand that to
accommodate Mr. Mole, who has a holiday to go to on
Monday, that it may be necessary to sit a little later
tomorrow.  I don't know whether it will be necessary to
warn the Jury as to that?

      THE CORONER:   I did not know about the holiday.

     MR. ISAACS:    Well, it is good then that you
should know because nobody wants to prevent Mr. Mole
from going on his holiday.

     THE CORONER:  In that case, shall we sacrifice
the half hour this afternoon?

     MR. ISAACS:    I think we should be all right,
sir, if we start tomorrow at half-past-9 but I did not
want anybody to be possibly disadvantaged by not
knowing the possibilities tomorrow.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.  Be prepared tomorrow, half-
past-9 start, but goodness knows what time we will
finish.  Hopefully not too late.

      (In the absence of the Jury and the Witness)
                                       B.L. MOLE
          • ’                              * 9


      THE CORONER:     Mr. King.

      MR. KING:  I had no knowledge of the holiday plans.
I am personally fully prepared to sit on tomorrow throughout
the day and I say that from a personal point of view, I
have not consulted my colleagues, but if we are not sitting
for the whole day sir I would not want to be under pressure
on time for obvious reasons, especially as he is an important
witness.

      THE CORONER:     Oh he is an important witness.

      MR. KING:  I raise that now, sir, in case you have
to plan for tomorrow.   I suspect if we sat the whole day
we will finish him but there may be a risk that we would
not finish him if we sat our normal hours.

      THE CORONER:  Well I have warned the jury about the
need to sit on, so to speak.  We have got an extra half-an-hou:
in the morning.  I would not want to go on beyond 4, I don't
think he could take it and I don't think we could take it,
but I can't really see even with the greatest of latitude
that we should need longer than that.  Let's face it, I
know how long it took in another place and if we did that
we would have taken longer than there, so there is no
good reason for that, but does that help you, Mr. King,
because I would not want you to feel that I am pressurising
you in any way although it would be nice to think we could
finish.

      MR. KING: My learned friend merely said, and I can
understand it, we would not want to interfere with Mr. Mole's
holiday, but in a sense sir Mr. Mole's holiday is less
important, with all due respect to Mr. Mole, than the
proper carrying out of the Inquest and I don't mean that
in any pompous way sir, but I think it is important that
we regard him as a witness who should be taken carefully
and properly.

      THE CORONER:     I don't think Mr. Isaacs meant anything
other than that.

      MR. ISAACS:  Oh sir I thought that everybody knew
Mr. Mole was going on holiday.  It was just something I
had overheard.  I thought you might like to advise the jury
that it may be necessary to sit later.

      THE CORONER:  I am glad you mentioned it because I
had not know it, but that is not complaint either because
Mr. Mole may have felt that he did not want to mention it
to me, but be that as it may it did give me the chance to
tell the jury that we may be sitting a bit longer.

         MR. ISAACS:   That, I thought, was the important
thing.
                                    B.L. MOLE
                                    •-- rr—

      THE CORONER:  Anything else we need to deal with,
discuss?   (No response)

      Then let us call it a day then.  Mr. Manning, if
we may we will start with you in the morning.  Thank you
very much indeed everybody.

             (The Inquests were adjourned until the
                 following morning at 9.30 a . m .)
