                                                                                           M I R . 15




 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                 Date and tim e raised   _                          Num ber
                                                                                 \ =   4

 T itle   N                     £> >       c lu                i52>
'^ j^ d u d e source and any document number i f relevant)


^Regeiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                          Receiver




                                                                                                                          Indexer
 Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

 No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                   Statement Reader
 Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                          Indexer
  Indexed as indicated
                                                cX
 No(s) o f actions raised

 Examined - further action to be taken                                                                             0 /M          sio

                                                                                                             saw

                                                                                                                          Indexer
  Further action No(s)


 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE ,
                      (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL,        1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


         STUART PAUL WILLIAM THOMPSON




                      Before

DR. S.L. POPPER,   LL.B, B.MED.Sci,      B M , B S , MRCGP

             (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                        At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                        On

               23rd April,     1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                                  INDEX

                                                            Page


                        OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER       1


                    B   DU. JOHN CHALMERS CLARK Called

                           By The Coroner                      2


                        PET. SGT. GRAHAM McCOMBIE Called




                                                               *vl O'* CO
                          By The Coroner
                          Cross-examined by Mr. Fraser
                          Cross-examined by Mr. Catchpoie


                        PET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called


                    p      By The Coroner                      9




                    E




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        23rd April, 1990


                         INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF STUART PAUL WILLIAM THOMPSON


                               MR FRASER:   Sir, in relation to Stuart Thompson
                          and his family I am here as a member of the Steering
                          Committee to look after the family interests.  Mrs.
                          Thompson, his mum, and members of his family are
                    B     present in your Court, sir.

                               THE CORONER:   Was Mrs. Thompson here on the
                          opening day, do you know?

                               MR FRASER:    No, sir.

                               THE CORONER:    Mrs. Thompson, I will just very
                          briefly tell you what is going to happen so that you
                          know what to expect, so to speak.   I am going to read
                          what happened last April when I opened the Inquests so
                          that I could release the bodies for funeral
                          arrangements, and when I have done that if corrections
                          need to be made I will make them, because there were
                          one or two where there were some mistakes, and then we
                          will deal with the alcohol levels, then we will listen
                    D     to the pathologist, who will tell us about the causes
                          of death.   When that is done the presenting Officer
                          will come along and tell us what they have to say and
                          then one of the other Officers, Inspector Layton, will
                          tell us about the visual evidence, and then we will
                          finish.   So is that reasonably clear to you?

                    E           MRS. W. THOMPSON:   Yes, thank you.

                               THE CORONER;    These ladies and gentlemen are the
                          Jury, and the rest o~E us you know who we are.

                               This was an Inquest which was opened on 18th
                          April, 1989, and on that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin,
                          Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

                                "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has
                                been identified to PC 2051 Jackson of the South
                                Yorkshire Police as that of Stuart Paul William
                                Thompson by Martin Thompson, his brother.  He was
                                17 years of age, having been born on 17th
                                September, 1971 ...."

                           Sorry, he was born on 16th September, 1971, that is
                           what we have got:

                                "... at Liverpool.  He was a single man and he
                                lived at                             Liverpool.
                                He was an apprentice joiner by occupation.   He
                                died at Hillsborough Football Ground following an
                                incident there on Saturday 15th April, 1989.
                H
                                                - 1 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                           DR. J. C. CLARK


     PC Jackson caused the body to be removed to the
     Medico-Legal Centre and there he identified it to
     Detective Constable Simon Weigold, who
     subsequently identified the same body to Prof.
     Usher and Dr. Clark.  It is the family wish that
     the body should be buried."

And then I wrote and Martin Thompson signed the
statement to confirm that we had got the facts right -
Stuart, S-t-u-a-r-t, Paul William Thompson - T-h-o-m-p-
s-o-n, and the address
Liverpool, and we have got the code as well, place of
birth Liverpool, date of birth 16 9 71, that is right,
isn't it, apprentice joiner.

     The alcohol which was measured by Dr. Forrest and
the evidence in respect of which was given on the first
day, but which I now repeat as far as Stuart is
concerned, in this particular instance the alcohol
level was measured at 78 mg. per 100 ml.

     Now, if we may turn   to Dr. Clark.

          DR. JOHN CHALMERS CLARK Called:

                  By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:   Dr. John Clark, Forensic
Pathologist, University of Glasgow.

     THE CORONER:   Dr. Clark, can you just confirm
that you are satisfied that the evidence which you are
now going to give to me relates to a young man who you
had identified as Stuart William Thompson? - A. Yes.

And case number 53, that   is right, isn't it?   - A.   Yes.

If you would be good enough to tell me what your
findings were? - A. Yes, I established the cause of
death as (la) crush asphyxia, and that was based on the
finding of asphyxial signs in his face and internally,
the usual congestion and blueness of the face and small
haemorrhages on the skin and also over the internal
organs, and this was consistent with his chest having
been crushed preventing breathing.  He had also inhaled
a little vomit into the air passages - that would be a
very terminal event.

      He did have quite a number of injuries on the
surface of his body - grazes on his face, a few bruises
on his trunk and arms, and some old injuries on his
legs.   These were all consistent with him having been
forced against the ground or onto some other surface,
but there was no internal damage.   There were no
fractures or any damage to the organs.   He was not
suffering from any natural disease which could have
played any part in his death.
                                                                       DR. J. C. CLARK
                                                                           J. McCOMBIE


                        Q. There is one very trivial point which I don|t think you
                           knew anything about, but which I am just going to put
                           to you.   One of the Officers, in fact Mr. Jackson, when
                           he looked over the body to try and record identifying
                           marks, mentions a one inch crescent scar on the left
                           knee.   You didn't notice any scars.  I am not saying
                           that you should have noticed that scar but could it be
                           one of the injuries which you have described which the
                           Officer has identified as a scar? - A. I have recorded
                    B      that there were two small abrasions, two small
                           scratches on the front of his right knee.

                        Q. Anyway, you have not recorded - it wouldn't have played
                           any part .... - A. No, I have to admit I may not have
                           actually seen it if it was a very small scar, but I
                           think if I saw the two injuries beside the right knee I
                           would have noticed the scar as well.
                    C
                        Q. I think he said on the left knee actually. - A.  Sorry.
                           Well there were some old bruises on the front of the
                           left knee so that was looked at closely as well.

                        Q. Yes.   Thank you very much indeed.

                                  THE CORONER:    Any questions?
                    D
                                  MR FRASER:     No questions, sir, thank you.

                                THE CORONER:   Now, the presenting Officer.  All
                           the Officers have been sworn, as has the pathologist,
                           in respect of all the cases, so that we don't have to
                           keep on doing it.
                    E
                                      PET. SGT. GRAHAM McCOMBIE Called:

                                                 By THE CORONER:

                        Q. Just tell us your name so that we know who you are. -
                           My name is Graham McCombie, I ara a Detective Sergeant
                           in the West Midlands Police.
                    F
                        Q. If you would take me through the summary, please? - A.
                           Yes, sir.  At about 10 a.m. on Saturday 15th April,
                           1989, Martin Christopher Thompson left home, together
                           with his brother, Stuart Paul William Thompson.  They
                           travelled to Sheffield to watch the FA Cup Semi Final
                           football match at Hillsborough Stadium.  They travelled
                           in a car drive by Shaun Boardman together with Simon
                    G      Hughes and Jason Kirwin.

                                The group arrived in Sheffield at about 1.45,
                           after stopping en route at an off licence where they
                           purchased sweets and lager.  They parked the vehicle
                           and made their way to their respective entrances.
                           Stuart Thompson and Simon Hughes were the only ones in
                           the group with tickets for the Leppings Lane terrace.
                H
                                                    - 3 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                       G. McCOMBIE


                           Whilst making their way to the entrance they met up
                           with a friend, Anthony Grier.  The three of them joined
                           the queue and entered the ground through the Leppings
                           Lane turnstile.

                                Inside the stadium they went along the tunnel and
                           into enclosure 3 at about 1440 hours.   They made their
                           way towards the front of the enclosure and ended up
                           approximately ten to fifteen feet from the perimeter
                           fence.  Stuart Thompson and Anthony Grier stood on one
                    B      of the barriers singing.   Simon Hughes felt
                           uncomfortable in the crowd and moved to the back of the
                           enclosure.  Stuart and Anthony Grier remained where
                           they were.  Shortly after the teams had come onto the
                           pitch Mr. Grier positioned himself directly in front of
                           one of the crush barriers.   He recalls Stuart crouching
                           to move under the barrier and saw him start to stand up
                           but did not see him again due to the pressure of the
                    C      crowd.

                                Shortly after 1506 following the severe crushing
                        in the West Stand Police Constable Eamon Larkin made his
                        way to the Leppings Lane end of the pitch.  The Officer
                        started to assist supporters but was accidentally knocked
                        unconscious and found himself in the recovery position on
                        the pitch.  Once he had regained consciousness he made his
                    D   way to Gate 3 where he saw a man who he now knows to be
                        Stuart lying across the bottom of the gate.  Police
                        Constable Larkin, together with Chief Superintendent
                        Nesbitt removed Stuart from the pen and carried him onto
                        the pitch.  Police Constable Walton together with Police
                        Constable Jackson attempted to resuscitate for some ten to
                        fifteen minutes but were unsuccessful.
                    E
                                Police Constable Jackson, together with WPC Dudley
                           and other Officers carried Stuart across the pitch to
                           the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had been set
                           up.

                                At 1604 Dr. Curpen examined Mr. Thompson in the
                        temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.
                    F
                                At 5-past-midnight - that is 0005 hours - on the
                           morning of Sunday 16th April, Martin Christopher
                           Thompson identified the body of his brother to Police
                           Constable Jackson in the temporary mortuary at the
                           gymnasium.

                                PC Jackson later escorted the body to the Medico-
                    G      Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to DC
                           Weigold.

                                On 16th April, following identification by DC
                        Weigold, Dr. John Clark carried out an autopsy and
                        submitted a report giving cause of death.

                                Do you wish me to read the last paragraph?
                    H
                                                - 4 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                       G. McCOMBIE


                        Q. Dealing with the blood/alcohol. - A. Evidence is
                           included regarding the analysis of the blood sample
                           from the deceased where the presence of ethanol was
                           detected.  The witnesses providing continuity of the
                           sample are DC Bardell, DS Turner, DS Fletcher.   Dr.
                           Forrest carried out the analysis.

                                Also found in the personal effects of Stuart was a
                           part ticket for the serai final.
                    B   Q. Now if we can just turn back for a moment to paragraph
                           3, I think, if you will just bear with me for one
                           moment, from page 10 I think, and indeed you may have
                           said it - yes, you have - they got into the pen, into
                           the enclosure, at about 1440, that is right, isn't it?
                           - A. That is correct, sir.

                        Q. And I think it is fair to say that they were having a
                    C      good time, from the description of Simon Hughes? - A.
                           Correct, sir.

                        Q. And it was actually only Simon who, he began to feel
                           uncomfortable after a while and he moved back to the
                           back wall, is that right? - A. That is correct, sir,
                           yes.
                    D
                        Q. And it is right, isn't it, that just before kick-off
                           his friends signalled him to come, to rejoin them, that
                           is right? - A. That is correct, sir.

                        Q. That is page 11, and in fact on the back wall he was
                           standing with another friend whose name was Adrian, I
                           think, that is right? - A. Yes, sir, Adrian Clark.
                    E
                        Q. So he left Adrian, went down to Tony and Stuart,    that
                           is right, isn't it? - A. Correct, sir.

                        Q. And then still did not like it and in fact returned to
                           his other viewing position up at the back, against the
                           wall I presume? - A. That is indeed correct, sir.

                    F   Q. But Tony and Stuart stayed where they were near the
                           barrier, and just as he got back to Adrian, on the^
                           second occasion, the game started? - A. Correct, sir.

                        Q. And then things got a bit rougher as far as crowd
                           pressure was concerned? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. And the other thing that I just want to take up with
                    G      you is more a technicality, but in paragraph 10, where
                           we talk about the continuity, Ian Bardell, Thomas Ian
                           Bardell, I think identifies the blood sample as having
                           been collected from Prof. Usher? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. Am I right in thinking that - we know it was Dr. Clark
                           who did the post mortem? - A. Yes, sir.
                H
                                                - 5 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                         G. McCOMBIE



                        Q. Am I right in thinking that that is being dealt with at
                           the moment and correcting .... - A. Yes, sir.  Prof.
                           Usher has actually countersigned each of the reports
                           and DC Bardell took the name Prof. Usher off that.

                        Q. So we are crossing t's and dotting i's and getting a
                           supplemental statement on that? - A. Yes, sir.

                                  THE CORONER:   Have you followed this, Mr. Fraser?
                    B        It may not be entirely clear to you.  In the cases of
                             Dr. Clark, Prof. Usher countersigned all the post
                             mortems for reasons which I don't need to go into at
                             the moment and we think that Thomas Bardell took the
                             wrong name, so to speak, but it is being dealt with and
                             it is a matter of just getting it right.

                                  MR FRASER:   I understand that, sir.  Will you
                    C        just give me a minute with the family, as a result of
                             something the Officer said?

                                  THE CORONER:   Of course, yes, certainly.   Dr.
                             Clark, this is the last Inquest this morning.   I know
                             you are in this afternoon but if you wish to leave us
                             at this stage you are very welcome to do so, but of
                             course we would like you back in the afternoon.
                    D
                                  MR FRASER:   Sir, this is a minor matter but it is
                             something that I am very conscious of that may be made
                             more of elsewhere than in your Court.

                                        Cross-examined by MR. FRASER:

                    E   Q. Officer, you describe Mr. Thompson as having a good
                           time, a perfectly accurate description, I am sure.  Can
                           you confirm, because inferences may be drawn elsewhere,
                           sir, that this young man had in his blood stream less
                           alcohol than he would have been permitted to drive
                           with? - A. That is indeed correct, sir.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   Yes, I think we said 78 mg? - A.
                    F        Yes, sir.

                                  MR FRASER;   Yes, sir, but there are inferences
                             being drawn elsewhere and the family are keen to have
                             those inferences dealt with.

                                  THE CORONER:   Well I am sorry if I raised it.      I
                             would not have wanted that to happen.
                    G
                                  MR FRASER:   No, sir, you mentioned it, you
                             mentioned the blood alcohol, but I was keen to put the
                             excited behaviour of a young man cheering his team on
                             into the context of what may be said in places other
                             than your Court.

                H


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                  G. McCOMBIE


     THE CORONER:       Anything else arising out of that?

               Cross-examined by MR. CATCHPOLE:

Just one or two questions.  Is Mr. Grier able to
identify which barrier he was standing in front of, or
which barrier he was actually standing on? - A. That
might be a question you would like to direct to
Inspector Layton, who deals with the visual evidence.

     THE CORONER:   Are you going to be able to deal
with it, Inspector Layton?

     DET. INSP. M. LAYTON:        I don't think so, sir, no.

      THE CORONER:   Well in that case, are you able to
help?   I think the answer is probably not.  Page 10, at
the bottom of the page, what it says is:

     "Because Stuart was      small the   three of us made our
     way to the front of      the crowd   and were only about
     ten to fifteen feet      back from   the perimeter fence.
     Stuart stood on top      of one of   the metal barriers
         ff
     • • • •



- I am skipping a little bit there. - A.  It is also
mentioned on page 17, sir.  It is about half way down,
sir.

That is right.  This is Anthony Maxwell Grier's
statement.  He said:

     "We made our way forward to about half way down
     the terrace ...."

and he said:

     "We had no trouble in doing this ...."

and he says they had space to climb onto a metal
barrier and to sing.  He says:

     "I climbed on the same barrier three or four
     different times."

but they don't actually say in their statements which
barrier they climbed onto.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Does Mr. Grier remember Mr.
Hughes coming down to rejoin them on the second
occasion?  Does he refer to that?

     THE CORONER:        He does not mention it in his
statement.
                                                G. McCOMBIE


It is page 18, I think you will find, where he
describes the team coming out.  - A. No, sir, not in
the text of the statement.

     THE CORONER:     Any other points?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   In the evidence     you have given
you have said that Mr. Grier recalled     Stuart crouching
to move under the barrier and then he     saw him start to
stand up again? - A. That is correct,     sir.

He then went on and said he did not see him again due
to the crowd pressure? - A. Correct.

Is the inference to be drawn from that that simply his
direction, or his focus was turned in another direction
because he was being pushed away? He just lost .... -
A. Whichever way, he disappeared from his view, whether
i t was ....

Just lost sight of Stuart. - A. Yes.

I am grateful, thank you.

     THE CORONER:   Can I read you that bit of Mr.
Grier's evidence because ....  It is Anthony Maxwell
Grier.  I will just read a section about the crouching
and standing up:

    "Stuart came up to me, he stood facing me with no
    one between us.   Stuart said to me, 'I am getting
    under'.  I told him not to as I feel you are safer
    with the metal barrier against your back as in
    this position it stops you being pushed as the
    crowd builds up.   Stuart Thompson then crouched
    down and went under this metal barrier.   I was
    looking over my right shoulder and I saw Stuart
    start to stand fully up again.   I could not turn
    my body because of the crowd pressure but I turned
    my head as far as I could and I did see Stuart
    standing up with the barrier immediately in front
    on his body.   I never saw Stuart Thompson or spoke
    to him again."

Does that help you?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     I am grateful for that, sir.

     THE CORONER:   That is Anthony Maxwell Grier's
statement and the date of that is 25 4 89.  Any other
questions arising out of any of this?  (No response)
Thank you.  Inspector Layton.
                                                                         M. LAYTON


                                    PET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                                             By THE CORONER:

                               THE WITNESS:   Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
                          Inspector, West Midlands Police.  An examination has
                          been made, sir, of visual evidence in respect of Stuart
                          and he has been identified, apparently already dead, in
                          enclosure number 3.  He has also been identified being
                          carried from Gate 3, and being carried across the
                    B     pitch.  Specifically in relation to enclosure number 3
                          he is shown on a photograph which has been given the
                          reference DAC3/1.

                               Police Constable Larkin has identified himself on
                          video, this is on a BBC video tape, with Stuart on the
                          pitch, and this is on a BBC video reference MAP 7,
                          timed at 1520:54:00.  The Officer has signed a plan of
                    C     the enclosure area indicating the approximate location
                          at which he first saw Stuart and also a plan of the
                          pitch showing where he placed him.  Sir, those two
                          plans are referenced EFLl and EFL2.

                               Chief Superintendent Nesbit has identified himself
                          on video and on this occasion again it is a BBC video,
                          in enclosure 3, and it is on MAP 7, timed at
                    D     1519:57:07.

                               PC Walton has identified himself on the BBC video,
                          again reference MAP 7, timed at 1520:54:00, and at this
                          stage he is attempting to resuscitate Stuart on the
                          pitch.

                    E          PC Jackson has identified himself helping to carry
                          Stuart across the pitch and on this occasion again it
                          is a BBC video tape, reference MAP 3, timed at
                          1528:05:18.

                               Martin Thompson, Stuart's brother, agreed to view
                          visual evidence, and although I know it caused him a
                          great deal of distress he did in fact assist us in
                    F     confirming the identifications.

                                THE CORONER:  We are grateful - is that Martin
                           sitting there? No, well, we are grateful to him for
                           doing it.

                        Q. So just to go back to these timings, Chief
                           Superintendent Nesbit, 1519, taking Stuart out? - A.
                    G      That is right, sir.

                        Q. I think - that is paragraph 14? - A. That is correct,
                           sir, yes.

                        Q. And then 1520, PC Larkin and PC Walton attempting
                           resuscitation on the pitch? - A. That is right, sir,
                           yes.
                H
                                                . 9 .
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                            M. LAYTON


                        Q. I am not giving the seconds, just the minutes.  Any
                           other timings that you want to draw my attention to? -
                           A. No, sir.  I think we have mentioned PC Jackson's
                           time, which is 1528:05:18, and that, as I have said,
                           refers to him being taken across the pitch.

                                Sir, can I refer you to a plan which has been
                           given the reference number MWJL/75, which is a plan of
                           the pitch, and also MWJL/76, which is a plan of the
                           terraces?
                    B
                        Q. Yes.  Perhaps we ought to take 76 first? - A.
                           Chronologically, yes, sir.

                        Q. Yes, C55, MWJL/76, and MWJL/75 is going to be C56? - A.
                           Yes, sir.

                        Q. I don't think we need any more, do we?  I think your
                    C      plans cover the positions substantially accurately.

                              (The witness referred to the large scale plan)

                           - A. If I could deal with the first plan, MWJL/76, this
                           is a plan of the terraces and this is actually
                           enclosure number 3, and the p o i n t o n video which has
                           been given the reference MAP 7, at which we believe
                    D      Stuart is, is actually he re , at the front, directly
                           adjacent to Gate 3.

                                In relation to the pitch plan, sir, MWJL/75,
                        basically there are a number of references, on video in
                        fact, which show initially the location here , directly in
                        front of Gate 3 on the pitch, and then basically moving
                    E   across almost diagonally in the direction of the Spion Kop
                        end of the pitch, the bottom end of the pitch.

                        Q. In effect you have got three positions showing him
                           being taken across the ground? - A. That is right, sir,
                           yes.  those are shown on the video I have already
                           mentioned which is reference MAP 3.  Do you want me to
                           put those three positions ...?
                    F
                        Q. Just point to them very, very quickly. - A. The first
                           one is there; the second one is there; we have another
                           one approximately h e r e ; and then a further one which I
                           think is the last one we refer to time-wise, which is
                           about there.

                                THE CORONER:     Any questions?
                    G
                                MR FRASER:     No, thank you, sir.

                                THE CORONER:   A lot of the plans actually show
                           one more position which we don't refer to but which you
                           might see if you ever request them, and that is a
                           position within the temporary mortuary, but that was
                H
                                                  - 10 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        taken long afterwards and it is not relevant at all,
                        but just in case you query if and when you see it.

                             Now then, Mrs. Thompson, I am most grateful to you
                        for having taken the trouble to come and you have heard
                        what we are able to tell you at this stage with regard
                        to Stuart, and of course I am exceedingly sorry that
                        this has happened to you and to the rest of your
                        family.  I am sure we all are in that respect.

                    B        We are going to terminate the hearing at this
                        stage and in fact we are going to rise now for lunch.
                        It is a bit unfair that the pathologist got an extra
                        ten minutes, isn't it, but what we will do is, shall we
                        say we will come back at 5-past-2, that is about 55
                        minutes?  Can we sacrifice five minutes?  Okay, thank
                        you very much indeed everybody.
                    C    (The Inquest into the death of STUART PAUL WILLIAM
                            THOMPSON was adjourned to a date to be fixed)




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                    H
                                             - 11 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
