HER MAJESTY*S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER

         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                   At

             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                   On

           18th February, 1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                  INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                                            Page
G.H. MACKRELL Sworn

    By The Coroner                           1
    Cross-Examined    by   Mr. Payne        28
    Cross-Examined    by   Mr. Isaacs       56
    Cross-Examined    by   Mr. King         57
    Cross-Examined    by   Missi Sinclair   84
    Cross-Examined    by   Mrs. McBrien     85
                                               G. H. MACKRELL

              FIFTY SECOND DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

               MONDAY, 18th FEBRUARY 1991

               GRAHAM HENRY MACKRELL Sworn

                     By THE CORONER

It is Graham Henry Mackrell, isn't it? - A. That is
correct.

Is it still
              - A. It is.

I think I am right in saying that you have been
associated with football clubs since about 1974? - A.
That is correct, sir.

We don't have to go through all the history of your
involvement with clubs, but I think it was Bournemouth,
Luton and then Sheffield, is that right? - A. That is
correct.

You joined Sheffield Wednesday Football Club as the
Secretary, when was it, in 1985 sometimes? - A.
December, 1986.

I think I am right in saying that there was not an
overlap because your predecessor ...? - A. That is
correct, my predecessor, Mr. Chester, had left in the
autumn, the September/October.

So there was a hiatus and you took over when you were
appointed in the middle of December? - A. That is
right.

Your position at that time, I think you were described
as the Secretary of the Club? - A. That is correct.

But you would also say that, in effect, that is
equivalent to being the Chief Executive of it? - A.
That is correct.

Just so that we can clear this out of the way, another
designation, if that is the right word, which you carry
is that of Safety Officer? - A. That is right.

That is under the terms of the Safety Certificate,
because there has got to be somebody by that title, so
to speak? - A. Yes, sir.

Sheffield Wednesday is a limited company? - A. Yes, it
is a PLC.
                                            G. H. MACKRELL

As such, of course, it has a Board of Directors, of
which you are the Secretary, presumably? - A. Yes.

I don't know what the position is now but in 1989 you
were not actually on the Board as a Director, that is
right, isn't it? - A. That is correct.

I think I am right in saying, correct me if I am
mistaken, that the Board is in fact what is known in
company law as an non-executive Board? - A. That is
correct, sir.

So all the Directors have other jobs and activities and
they do this, in a sense, as a part-time activity? - A.
That is correct.

Whilst, of course, they would wish to take important,
particularly important financial decisions, they would
expect to look to you and to other members of the staff
for the day to day running of the Club? - A. Yes.

Would that   be fair? - A. That is correct.

We are not   going to go through every singleperson who
worked within the Club, but we will just mention two
whom we might mention.   One was Mr. Douglas Lock? - A.
Yes.

Is it right that he is an ex-Superintendent of the
South Yorkshire Police? - A. Yes.

He retired   and then a period of time laterwasinvited
to join the Club? - A. That is right, yes.

His designation, I think, was Security Officer? - A.
Yes.

Amongst other things he concerned himself with   the
Stewards in particular? - A. That is right.

And, of course, the security.  Presumably by that you
mean external security against break-ins and so on? -
A. Yes, sir.

We will hear from Mr. Lock so we do not need to explore
any further what his credentials are, and there is a
young lady called Sharon Lane? - A. Yes.

Would you describe her as an administrative assistant?
- A. Yes, the Admin. Manager of the company.

She reports to you? - A. That is correct.
                                          G. H. MACKRELL

In fact, everybody reports to you and then you then, as
appropriate, may report to the Board? - A. Yes, sir.

Having taken up your position in 1986      did you ever
meet Mr. Chester, as a matter of interest? - A. I have
met him, but not in relation to Sheffield Wednesday.    I
have met him socially and at other events.

Not in any sense that he sat down with you and took you
through the difficulties or problems which you might be
faced with? - A. No.

So you had the unenviable task of taking over the
biggest job and familiarising yourself with what the
situation was like, that is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.

At that time, not that it matters very much, Sheffield
Wednesday was still in the Second Division, I think? -
A. No, the First Division.

They were already in the First - I am not a football
fan, as you will discover in a few moments.  I don't
want to take you through every single document that you
read, because obviously that is a waste of our time and
yours as well, but one of the documents you did look at
was the Safety Certificate, that is right, isn't it? -
A. Yes.

You found it?. - A. Yes, I found a Safety Certificate
that was there which was issued by the Metropolitan
Authority.

Yes, South Yorkshire, and we know that was issued in
1979, you would agree with that? - A. Yes.

That was the one you found, and prima facie it had no
amendments to it? - A. No.

I think I am right in saying - I am taking you through
this fairly fast because there is no point in being
slow about it - you checked with somebody as to whether
or not that was, in fact, the Safety Certificate that
applied? - A. Yes, sir.

Did you check with the local authority or did you check
with Eastwood's? - A. I checked with John Strange of
Eastwood's, who is Dr. Eastwood's assistant.

Basically what you asked him was, "Am I looking at the
right document? - A. That is right.

He confirmed that you were? - A. Yes.
                                         G. H. MACKRELL

You asked him whether or not there were any amendments
to it? - A. Yes, sir, because obviously the Ground had
changed considerably since it had been issued in 1979.

Which changes were you thinking of at that time? - A.
For one example, sir, the Kop had been extended
considerably.

You knew that? - A. Yes.  The Kop had been opened by
Her Majesty the Queen a couple of days before I joined
the Company so I was obviously aware of that.  It was
apparent that there was a new Kop, that it had been
extended and increased the capacity of the ground.
There was considerable correspondence with the local
authority.  Obviously it was a major structure to be
dealt with and the approvals given, but there had not
been a formal alteration to the Certificate.




              /Q. You took this up
                                                  G. H. MACKRELL

    Q. You took this up with Mr. Strange? - A. Yes, sir.

B   Q. To find out what the score was really. What was
       conveyed to you? What were you given to
       understand? - A. Basically that the Local Authority
       were in the process of issuing a new Safety
       Certificate.
    Q. You then accepted that? - A. Yes, because of the fact
       that there had been correspondence and approvals
       given by the relevant parties to the work that had
       taken place at the ground.
    Q. Did you at that time — you obviously know now —
       know that there had also been alterations to the
       Leppings Lane end? - A. No, sir.
    Q. You did not? - A. No.
    Q. Because presumably when you got there you looked at
D      Leppings Lane. I expect you walked round it and you
       noticed, I have no doubt, that the terrace was
       divided by lateral fencing.

    Q. At that time you had no idea when that had been
       installed? - A. Not at that time, no, sir.

    Q. When was it you first became aware the installation
       of those lateral fencings had been done subsequent to
       the issue of the Safety Certificate? - A. I cannot
       really say at this stage, sir. I cannot just
       remember.

    Q. Do you think it was before the disaster, after the
       disaster, or can you no longer say? - A. I cannot say
       with any conviction.

    Q. At some point you must have discovered that the
       annual or biannual inspections were being carried out
       by the Working Parties or Advisory Groups? - A. Yes.
    Q. Can you remember when? - A. The first one that took
       place when I joined the company was in the August
       following and so that would have been August 1987.
    Q. I right in thinking that we have heard that the
       barrier had been removed in what we now know as Pen
       3, or part of a barrier? - A. Yes.

    Q. Am I right in thinking that had been done before you
       joined the company? - A. It had, yes.

    Q. That was at one of the inspections prior to your
       time? - A. Yes, sir.



H
                                                     G. H. MACKRELL


    Q. In a nutshell, so far as you are concerned from your
U      own direct personal knowledge, no major alterations
       apart from painting and maintenance and stuff like
       that occurred to Leppings Lane terraces since you
       have been in post? - A. Only some minor work at the
       request of the Police. So in the summer of 1987 when
       an additional gate was put into the lower north west
       terrace, Gate 7 and one or two other minor
       alterations.
    Q. Gate 7 was a 1987 edition? - A. Yes.
    Q.    No new radial fencing, no alterations to the
         turnstiles in Leppings Lane? - A. No.
    Q.    The wall which divides the concourse, was that in
         being when you arrived? - A. Yes, it was.

    Q. I know it has disappeared but at that time? - A. It
       was there.
D
    Q. At that time it was there. You had nothing to do
       with its installation or alteration in any way? - A.
       No, sir.

    Q. I want to just find out what you knew prior to 1989
       and so be careful because it is easy to get confused
       between what you now know and what you knew then.
       Prior to the 15th April 1989, had you been aware
       there had been a problem on the Leppings Lane terrace
       in 1981? - A. No, sir.

    Q. You did not know? - A. I was not aware of that, no,
       sir.

    Q. Had you been aware of what I would call major
       problems on that terrace? - A. No, sir.

    Q. Presumably you now know about 1981? - A. Yes, sir.
    Q. Presumably that is because you have now studied the
       papers? - A. Exactly, sir, yes.

    Q. In your time as Secretary there had been three Semi
       Finals in fact, had there not? - A. Yes.
    Q. 1987, 1988 and 1989? - A. Yes.

    Q. Leave 1989 and let us just deal with 1987 and 1988.
       Were you aware of any problems with either of those
       two Semi Finals? - A. No, sir.




H
                                                      G. H. MACKRELT,

    Q. I understand the 1987 Semi Final was in fact
       different to the 1988 kick-off in that it was a
B      Sunday kick-off and it was a noon kick-off? - A. Yes.
    Q. Can you remember that? - A. Yes, it was a noon kick-
       off. In fact it ended up kicking off at 12.30, sir.
    Q.    A bit   later than expected. Can you tell me why that
         was? -   A. Yes, the Semi Final in 1987 involved Leeds
         United   and at the request of South Yorkshire Police
         it was   moved to a Sunday which met the criteria....
    Q. I am sorry? - A. It was a mutual agreement between
       the Police and the Football Association.
    Q.    Was the kick-off delayed or not? I thought you said
         it was delayed? - A. It was delayed for half an hour.
         There were problems on the Ml motorway and certain of
         the Coventry supporters had not arrived.
    Q. Which end of the ground did the Coventry supporters
       have so far as you remember? - A. Coventry supporters
       had the Kop.

    Q. Which is the Penistone Road end? - A. Penistone Road
       end, yes.

    Q. Would I be right in thinking that in 1987 the
       turnstile arrangement, the split shall we say between
       the turnstiles, was the same as in 1988 and 1989 or
       was it different? - A. It was the same, sir.
    Q. So Leeds people were expected to come in through
       Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes.

    Q. And the rest through the others? - A. That is right.

    Q. It was delayed because the problems were with people
       coming up the Ml? - A. Yes, it was a comparatively
       early delay, sir. It was not just taken just before
       the kick-off time.

    Q. To the best of your recollection were there any
       problems in 1987 with getting the Leeds people into
       Leppings Lane? - A. I was not aware of any, sir.
    Q. Perhaps you could just outline for me, and you may
       pick whichever of these Semi Finals you wish, very
       briefly what happens so that we can understand the
       inter-relationship between yourself representing the
       Club, shall we say, and the other bodies who have
       something to do with the running of the game? - A.
       Normally the Club are contacted in around February
       time by the Football Association to see if they would



H
                                             G. H. MACKRELL

be willing to stage a Semi Final. We replied in the
affirmative and it was then left then obviously
dependent on the teams which are likely to be the
last four teams in the competition because of
geographical location to see whether Hillsborough
would be acceptable as a ground. Once the sixth
round takes place then on the following Monday, as it
was then, the draw took place. We were then
contacted by the Football Association who said they
wanted to stage in 1987 the Coventry and Leeds Semi
Final. We would then consult with the Police.
Obviously I had already sounded the Police out. They
knew that we were possibly in the frame to have a
Semi Final and it would be then any particular
requirements that they would have that I would then
take back to the Clubs vis-a-vis the allocation of
tickets and the numbers of tickets available to the
relevant parties.

When you say the number of tickets which are going to
be issued, that would be dependent, of course, on the
capacity of the ground, that is right, is it not? -
A. That is right but the Police require segregation
of supporters and so, therefore, it is not possible
to have a perfect split in relation to tickets to
give teams equal numbers of tickets as per the rule.
What you mean is that you and the Police would get
together and decide how to split the ground up for
segregation purposes? - A. That is correct, yes.




                  /Q. You then look at it.
                                                           9



                                       G.H. MACKRELL


Q. You then look at it and says "Well we have got 24,000
   and the Leppings Lane terrace Stand plus the North Stand
   as it was in 1989 for 26,000 or whatever the figure is,
   Kop and South Stand” and then you issue the tickets on
   that basis. That is what you are saying? - A. Yes.
Q. And I suppose if one had said North Stand, South Stand
   and Leppings Lane to go to one Club, Kop to the other,
   if that had been acceptable you would have just printed
   a different number of tickets. That may not have been
   practically possible but that is theoretically possible,
   isn't it? - A. Indeed. Well the Police obviously have
   to police the actual event and obviously one listens
   very carefully to their opinions on this matter.
Q. And segregation unfortuantely has proved to be necessary
   because it is no secret there have been problems on
   pitches in the past. Is that right? - A. That is right.
   It is the current policy at football matches.
Q. And in fact still applies, does it, segregation? - A.
   It still applies at most grounds, yes sir.
Q. I assume that policing away from the ground and outside
   of the ground you would not have concerned yourself with.
   Is that correct? - A. That becomes an operational policing
   matter, yes sir.
Q. Because that is on highways and byways, so to speak? - A.
   Yes.
Q. But the policing within the ground or within the curtilage
   of the ground, to what extent did you get involved with
   that? - A. To a degree, sir, but it was mainly obviously
   the Police have their opinions of how it should be policed
   and when it becomes an operational policing matter I don't
   really think it is for outsiders to voice their opinion.

Q. So what you are saying is if the Police says "We want
   to have 20 Police Officers standing outside the turnstiles"
   you would not have saids "We think that is too many or
   too few" you would have left that entirely to them? - A.
   Well I am not competent to comment on policing matters
   sir.
Q. You would be bound if you like by the Police, or you would
   accept Police guidance as to the segregation of the ground
   I think you have told me? - A. Yes.
Q. But would you expect the Police to sit down and calculate
   whether or not that segregation would actually enable the
   ground to for example be filled through the turnstiles?
   Have you understood the question? - A. I am sorry sir.
                                                               10


                                         G.H. MACKRELL


Q. I will start again. Let's take 1989. It was agreed
   presumably between you and the Police and the Clubs that
   the ground would be split North Stand plus Leppings Lane
   Stand and Terrace to Liverpool, the rest to Nottingham.
   Right? - A. Yes.
Q. And it was also agreed that the turnstiles which would
   be used would be the Leppings Lane turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q. Because those were the only convenient ones that could
   be used if you were going to have segregation. That is right,
   is it? - A. That is right.
Q. And in fact that has always been the problem, you had
   plenty of turnstiles but they were in the wrong place?
   - A. If you wanted to adopt segregation.
Q. Whose task was to decide whether given that split the
   available turnstiles would be adequate? - A. When it was
   first adopted in 1987 I had a meeting with Mr. Mole of
   South Yorkshire Police and he expressed a view that he
   wished to have the Penistone Road turnstiles, the access
   to the North Stand closed. It was felt, and we agreed,
   that there were sufficient turnstiles at the Leppings
   Lane end of the ground to access the NorthStand,  the
   West Stand and the Leppings Lane terrace.
Q. So that was a view which was taken in 1987? - A. Correct,
   yes.
Q. You have already told me, but you can confirm it, that
   in 1987 as far as you know there were no problems? - A.
   Same in 1988 sir, yes.
Q. Just as a matter of interest, in 1987 was it a capacity
   crowd? - A. It is always numbered slightly under.
   Statistically you always turn up with 2 or 3% less than
   capacity but it could have been a capacity crowd, yes
   sir.
q   . put it another way, did you sell the tickets? - A. The
      tickets were sold, yes.
Q. And I take it in 1988 all the tickets were sold as well?
   - A. Yes sir.
Q. And are you saying in 1988 the crowd was as you have just
   described, a couple of per cent, 2 or 3% below anticipated
   levels? - A. Yes sir.
 Q. We won't deal with 1989. We will leave that for the time
    being. I think you said in 1988 it worked as far as you
    know satisfactorily? - A. I was not advised to the
    contrary sir.
                                                        11


                                      G.H. MACKRELL


Q. Do you remember what rate of throughput per turnstile
   you were working on in 1987? - A. Basically I was of the
   opinion that you can comfortably accommodate 800 persons
   through each turnstile , particularly as it is not a cash
   situation.
Q. And the turnstiles I think are open, were usually from
   about 12-3 or thereabouts? - A. That is right.
Q. So what you are saying then is that if people come over
   that period they should be able to get access. Obviously
   if everybody comes together either at the beginning
   or at the end then you may have some problems. That is
   right, isn't it? - A. That is correct sir.
Q. Apart from the 1989 semi-final where we know that there
   were some problems outside the turnstiles we have also
   heard of a match from one of the supporters in I think
   January or February time, I think a Manchester United
   match where there appeared to be a crowd of people
   outside the Leppings Lane turnstile. Do you know
   anything about that? - A. I was not informed about that
   at all sir.
Q. You weren't? - A. No.
Q. Let me ask you the question another way. Did you have
   reason to postpone any match because the number of people
   could not get through - this would obviously be a league
   match - did you have to postpone any league matches in
   1989 because people did not get through the turnstiles before
   kick-off? - A. No sir.
Q. Perhaps I ought to just ask you this: whatever arrangements
   you make would I be right in thinking there is always a
   number of people who will come in late? - A. To a degree
   sir. My experience though was for the first two semi-finals
   that supporters tended to get their early because of the
   fact they wanted to actually be there early because it
   was an occasion and so therefore they were there to soak
   up the ambience or whatever.
Q. So are you saying in fact everybody was in before 3 o'clock
   on those two occasions? - A. I would not say everyone
   sir, but the majority.
Q. What I was really asking you is would I be right in
   assuming that whatever arrangements you will always find
   somebody who is late, for whatever reason, they may have
   had a puncture? - A. That is right. You find it more sir
   with our own supporters at Sheffield because they have
   the least journey to come and so they are the ones who
   often leave it late to arrive.
                                                       12


                                      G.H. MACKRELL


Q. Is there any obligation on the Club that you are aware
   of, indeed anybody else, to ensure that everybody is
   in before the match kicks off? — A. No sir.
Q. There isn't? - A. No, there isn't sir.   It really would
   not be practical to be so.
Q. It would not be practical, did you say? - A. No, they
   remain in the pubs or wherever. They just would not
   arrive until they came, you know, because it is a natural
   reaction for some people to turn up late.
Q. You have already said that you would have expected the
   policing outside the ground to be a Police matter and
   that you would not be involved in that, but what about
   stewarding outside the ground, was there, did you have
   any views on that? - A. No sir, the only stewarding
   at the ground, there would be an element of Stewards out­
   side the ground may be in the car park areas, sir, just
   as a safety measure. The car park was an area whereby
   often people were queueing and people were accessing
   cars through there so it was an area that needed looking
   at.
Q. You would not be expecting, you would not be surprised
   if there were no Stewards outside the ground? - A. No
   sir.
Q. Within the concourse area you did have some Stewards I
   believe?   A. The concourse at Leppings Lane end?

Q. Yes, I beg your pardon, that is the bit that I am
   concentrating on. Stewards were positioned in that area.
   Is that right? - A. There were Stewards on the lateral
   wall that bisected the concourse, there were Stewards then
   on the inside of the relevant gates B and C and there
   were also Stewards on the two entrances that went into
   the West Stand.
Q. My impression from some of the evidence which I have
   heard is that the Stewards who were on the staircases
   leading up to the Stands, their primary task was to check
   that people who were going upstairs had tickets for
   the Stands? - A. That is right.
 Q. Their task was not to control the terracing.   That is right
    is it? - A. Yes.
 Q. What about the chaps on the gate, what was their primary
    role? - A. Obviously their prime task sir is that for
    the emergency evacuation procedure that is required,
    but obviously they are there because if one looks at
    Gate C, for example, it is adjacent to Turnstiles A"G
    so on the normal flow they, are in a position to assist
    if required.
                                   G.H. MACKRELL



And indeed if you go through Turnstiles A-G you have got
a tunnel in front of you. You would agree, wouldn't
you? - A. Yes.
And it is has got a sign saying "Standing" which we know
about which I am sure you will accept. Am I right in
thinking that sign was there when you joined in 1986?
- A. Yes sir.
And it has not changed in any way? - A. It had not in
that time sir.
You may have cleaned it but essentially it was the same?
- A. Yes sir.




                      Q. Then you can get
a
                                                                     14
                                                        G. H. MACKRELL

        Q. You can get round to the terracing by going to the right
           and there is in fact a small sign on the pillar? - A.
           That's right.
    B   Q. That hadn't changed over the period.   Then you could get
           round to the left if you went through the gap in the
           wall? - A. That's right, sir.

        Q. I think I am right in saying that that gap wasn't signed?
           -A. No.

        Q. Was there a reason for not signing that as far as you
           know? - A. Miss.

        Q. You don't    know? - A. I just don't know.

        Q. It just wasn't? -    A. It wasn't.

        Q. It wasn't    that it was not signed because you didn't want
           people to    go that way or anything like that? - A.That's
           right.

        Q. I have never asked this question.   On the other side of
           the wall - in other words, between turnstiles 1 to 16 -
           if you go through turnstiles 1 to 16 you finish up in the
           concourse area but the wall is now on your right? - A.
           Yes.

        Q. The gap is still there? - A. Yes.

        Q. Now some of the people coming through those turnstiles
           would have stand tickets, wouldn't they? - A. Yes.

        Q. To get to their seats they could either go up the
           staircase immediately in front of them, or they could go
           up the staircase which was in the other half? - A. The
           other side of the walls.

        Q. Were those staircases labelled? - A. They were, yes.

        Q. Did the tickets for the stands have labels which directed
           people to the gangways? - A. No.

        Q. They didn't? - A. No.

        Q.   So you could use any gangway? - A. Yes.

        Q.   So you wouldn't necessarily expect people to cross
             through that gap in the wall in order to get to their
             correct gangway? - A. No, I wouldn't, sir.

        Q. This is not a terribly important point, but I can't
           resist asking you.   If the allocation of tickets was
           such that the people coming through A to G were all going




    H
                                             G. H. MACKRELL

to go on to the terracing, which I believe to be the
case? - A. Yes.

The people who were going into the stands were supposed
to come through 10 to 16? - A. Eleven to 16.

Who would have used the staircase on this side of the
stand, because allthe people would be on the wrong side
of the wall if you know what I mean? - A. Yes, it was.
It was a situation that the people there, they had to be
there as part of the safety aspect for the evacuation so
the majority of them would access the stand by the
entrance, which is the north-west entrance.

Yes.   In other words, the one immediately opposite their
turnstiles? - A. Yes.

While we are on the turnstiles I will get you to confirm
something else which we know.   The outside of the
turnstiles were marked: A, C, B? - A. Yes.

You would agree with that? - A. Yes.

That had some historical reason? - A. Yes.

Would I be right in saying that they were marked like
that A, C, B, certainly from the time that you were in
post? - A. Yes.

This was nothing new? - A. No.

That marking was in existence in 1987 and 1988? - A. Yes.

As well as 1989 of course? - A. Yes.

You have told me you had turnstiles on these gangways, on
the gates, and by the wall in the concourse area? - A.
Yes.

I want you just to confirm for me that the information we
have received from Mr. Thorpe and others is correct,
namely, there were no stewards allocated to the
terracing? - A. That is correct.

That is correct? - A. Yes.

Would you agree with Mr. Stuart who said he wouldn't put
any of his stewards on the terracing when it was
populated by away supporters?   I am not just talking
about Liverpool, any away supporters. - A. Yes.

Apart from that reason was there any other reason for not
having stewards on the terracing? - A. No, sir.
                                              G. H. MACKRELL

In other words, you are saying it was for the safety of
stewards? - A. It was the policy that was adopted at that
end of the ground, sir, in that there were certain
stewards at the Kop end of the ground who were mainly
there for looking after keeping the gangways clear.
Obviously there wasn't a gangway situation at the
Leppings Lane end and therefore there were no stewards
there.

What you are saying is if there had been gangways you
would have had to have stewards there? - A. That may or
may not be the case.

Certainly if the Kop was the example, but because there
were no gangways and therefore it didn't have to be
cleared there wasn't that absolute necessity? - A. That
was it and that was the system which was in operation
when I joined.

To what extent, if at all, did you concern yourself with
how the fans once they had come through the turnstiles
got on to the terraces and then got into the right
position on the terraces? - A. Again that was a situation
which one had inherited previously and it was a situation
whereby the Police had control of the supporters on the
terraces.

I am interested not so much from what was happening on
the field side, I am more interested in what was
happening when they entered into the concourse area in
the first instance.   What I want to find out is this:
were you aware of any policy or any practice of closing
off the gates of the tunnel with regard if it was thought
the centre of the pens were full? - A. No, sir, not at
that time.

I know you know you now.   Everybody knows loads of
figures now, but what I want to know is at that time.
We have heard from one Officer and, indeed, from several
other people, that those gates were closed off both at
league matches, and certainly at one semi-final and
possibly at others.   Are you saying you did not know
that that was in fact happening? - A. Yes, sir.

That is what you are saying? - A. Yes, sir.

If you had been told that that was happening at the time,
would it have surprised you? - A. I think we would have
to look at the context in which it happened, sir.

In other words, you can't answer that question.   If you
had a small - I will call it a small match with a small
body of away supporters attending, was it the practice to
                                           G. H. MACKRELL

allow the whole of the terrace to be used or only a part?
- A. They would normally fill it pen by pen.

From where would that be done? - A. Usually from the pen
starting in  front of the Police Control Box.

Do you know  in which way the fans would get into that
pen? - A. Round the east corner.

The right? - A. Yes.

How would they know that was the way they should get
there? - A.  Normally because if there was only a small
number of supporters there, they would come in through
turnstiles A to G and have access into that area of the
ground only so there would be no other area to go round.

I couldn't hear you. - A. They would have only access
through those turnstiles and would go round the outside
of the stand on to the terrace.

Yes, but if you have got a tunnel in front of you which
says, "Standing", what would have prevented them going
down there?   Can you see what I am saying? - A. Yes, I
hear what you say, but normally it was a situation
whereby they gravitated on the outside to do that.

Are you saying they did that under their own volition or
that they would be guided either by Police, stewards or
somebody else? - A. They would be guided.

I am going back to my question, then, from a slightly
different angle.   We are just talking about a small
crowd.   What method of guidance would have been employed
in order to steer them, if that is the right word,
towards that corner? - A. Well, if you are talking about
only a small number, sir, there would only be a small
number coming through one at a time so I don't really see
it as a problem, sir.

You would expect the Police, and would you have expected
the stewards who were standing around to say, "That way"?
- A. That's right, sir.

And no difficulty because there were only small numbers?
- A. Yes, sir.

We know the terrace is divided by radial fences and we
also know that there are gates at the back of those
radial fences.   If you were filling pen by pen, as you
have described it, what would be the position with regard
to the gates at the back of the radial fences? - A. They
would be left open, sir.
                                           G. H. MACKRELL

So how would you prevent people who had entered the pens
1 and 2, which are the ones at this end, from in fact
walking along to the north-west terrace, for instance? -
A. Normally at that stage if you are filling pen by pen -
I am sorry, sir, I was under the impression you were
talking about...

No, I am still on the pen by pen filling. - A. Yes, the
pen by pen filling, then either the gate would be shut to
stop people moving through, or would have somebody at the
back, normally a Police Officer.

Would you, in those circumstances, have put stewards at
the back there to stop people going any further? - A. No,
sir, there weren't stewards on that area.

Whatever the size of the crowd? - A. That's right, sir.

Would I be right in thinking that as a matter of practice
- never mind how it was achieved - you didn't have
particular problems with people spreading across the
terrace when there were only small numbers? - A. No, sir.

I think you said the gate would locked and you assumed
there would be Police or somebody saying...   You may be
right.    What I want to know is whether this is an
assumption or whether this is something that you... - A.
It is an assumption.

You don't actually know that that was what happened? - A.
No, sir.

We have also heard that on the whole fans like to be
behind the goal.   Would you agree with that?   Obviously
not all fans, but the younger age range? - A. To a
degree, yes, sir.

In the 1987 and 1988 semi-finals - this is a very
difficult question because it is three or four years ago
now - but do you recollect what the distribution was like
across that terrace? - A. It wasn't noticeable in any
particular way, sir.

It wasn't? - A. No.




        Q. Do you remember people
                                            G. H. MACKRELL

Do you remember people climbing up into the Stand at
any point m 1988? - A. No, sir.

You don't remember that?- A. No, sir.

I think as you have already told me that 1988 was a
very good match asfar as the Club was concerned?  - A.
It appeared to go well, sir, yes.

As far as you know, as far as the supporters were
concerned, that is   right? - A. Yes,sir.

I think you had at   least one letter from somebody who
said he was very pleased? - A. We had letters from
supporters, we had letters from interested parties,
yes.

Did you have complaints about overcrowding on the
Leppings Lane Terrace? - A. No, sir.

Definitely not? - A. Definitely not, sir.

Prior to 1989 had you received any complaints from
anyone that the system which was being used and the
allocation of turnstiles was creating any problems? -
A. No, sir.

None at all? - A. No, sir.

That includes the Police, yes? - A. It includes
everybody, sir.

Including the FA? - A. Yes, sir.

Did the FA inspect the Ground at any point? - A. No.
The FA relied upon the fact that there was a Safety
Certificate issued to the relevant clubs.  They did not
actually inspect the Ground.  One filled in a form but
it was not a formal inspection.

While we are on the Safety Certificate, and this is
just one more point I want to raise with you, you had
obviously noticed that the Safety Certificate dated
back a number of years, and you realised that certainly
as far as the Kop was concerned there had been changes?
- A. Yes.                                           &

But you did not, I think you told me, actually realise
that there had been any changes with regard to the
Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes, sir.

Did anybody point out to you at any time prior to 1989
         cfPacity for the Leppings Lane terrace was a
global one? - A. Yes, I was aware it was a global one.
                                                   G. H. MACKRELL

Q * t h a t ^ i ^ h ^ L 31763 °f« he terrace w as segmented and that
    that might have an effect on the distribution of fans
     tnt  !J"ybody draw that to your attention? - A. It was ’
    not drawn to my attention, no, sir.

Q*              ?°Ve °5 to a biSSer match n °w. You have
     already indicated, I think, that in bigger matches or
          fJnaJ-s the gates at the back of the radial fences
     would be left open? - A. Yes, sir.                  °es

Q. That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. What was the purpo se of that? - A. One would need to,
    sir, for the spectators to use toilet and refreshment
    facilities.

Q. Is that because these facilities were common to the
   whole of the terracing? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. And to get to them you might have to pass along the
   back there? - A. Yes.

Q. There were no gangways as such at the back there, I
   think that is right.  Did you know why that was? - A.
   No, sir.

Q. It was just how it was? - A. Yes, indeed.

Q. Did you expect those gates to be manned when they were
   open? ~_A. If there was movement between the supporters
   from going from one, I would not have seen a point for
   it to be.

Q. I could not hear you. - A. I would not have seen a
   necessity for it to be manned if there was movement
   from supporters from pen to pen.

Q. I am postulating that the gates are open and in a
   locked open position. What you are saying is that you
   would not have expected there to be much point in
   having them manned? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. Not only were the terraces divided by radial fences
   but, of course, they had a fence right at the front, is
   that right, a perimeter fence? - A. A perimeter fence,
   yes, sir.

Q. Was that perimeter fence initially put up - you may not
have known it at the time but perhaps you could tell me
whether this is right - in order to comply with
international requirements? - A. I don't believe it was
international requirements, sir.  I think it was a request
basically for crowd control.
                                           G. H. MACKRELL

I think there were little gates? - A. That is correct.

Which were relatively small - we know that and we d o n ’t
need to go into that. - A. Yes, sir.

From your understanding of the situation, how would you
have expected, if an emergency had occurred on the
terrace, that people would be evacuated, frontways or
backwards? - A. Backways.

Backwards.  Why is that? What is the advantage of
evacuating, or disadvantage of evacuating people
backwards? - A. On the basis that ....

Rather than towards the pitch? - A. I understood that
was the method it was done.  If you were contemplating
evacuating forward I would not have seen that you would
have had fences there in the first place.

Were tests done? Did you from time to time test
procedure to see whether people would or could get out?
- A. There weren’t tests done, sir. There were
theoretical tests in relation to evacuation which are
dealt with by the Fire Service and the Local Advisory
Group.

L e t ’s just turn to 1989 now for a few minutes. The
arrangements for 1989 had been organised in a similar
way as you have already described to me? - A. Yes.

In fact, you only get very little notice that the match
will take place, that is right, isn’t it? - A. That is
right.

Relatively speaking - a few days, 17, 18 days,
something like that? - A. Yes.  It is about three
weeks, I think, sir.

In that time you had to print tickets, distribute them
and so on.  I take it you contacted the Police and told
them, ”We are going to have the match, is that okay?” ,
or words to that effect? - A. Yes, sir.  In the morning
of the draw I had been contacted by the Competition
Secretary of the Football Association who asked me to
speak to the Police, to confirm that if Hillsborough
was allocated the tie for Liverpool against Nottingham
Forest, would the same arrangements apply, because
there was a slight disparity in tickets, which roughly
meant that Forest were getting some three or four
thousand tickets more than Liverpool.

That was not a terribly popular decision, was it,
amongst the Clubs, and indeed the FA, that split? - A.
It is always a situation where there is a balance
                                                                22
                                                   G. H. MACKRELL

         between the two because you very rarely get grounds
         where you can equally divide the standing accommodation
         and the seating accommodation.
B
    Q. You were stuck really with that allocation because of
       the segregation problems, weren’t you? - A. That is
       right.

    Q. You proceeded on that basis and match day arrived? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. On the day itself did you initially have any cause for
       concern about the situation? - A. No, sir.

    Q. You were in your office and you also went out and had a
       look around, to see what was going on? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you get to Leppings Lane at any point? - A. Yes,
       sir.

    Q. When was the last time you got to Leppings Lane? - A.
       The last time I got to Leppings Lane - this is prior to
       the ...?

    Q.   Yes - not after you went when youheard that     there had
         been a problem. - A.I c a n ’trecall, sir.    I was
         constantly wandering around.

    Q. Let me put it this way, what you saw there, did it
       alarm you? - A. No, sir.

    Q.   It didn’t? - A. No.

    Q. You also, of course, walked around within the Ground? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. Did you see anything that caused you alarm within the
       Ground? - A. No, sir.

    Q. Did you notice any disparity in the filling of the
       respective parties? - A. Only in relation I happened to
       comment to somebody that the Forest fans seemed to be
       coming in earlier than the Liverpool supporters.

    Q. Did that at that time worry you? - A. No, sir.

    Q. It didn’t? - A. No.

    Q. I am not saying it should have done, I just want to
       know what impact it had on your mind at the time. The
       office you were in, is that the office, the Club room
       where you have got your TV monitors? - A. I was n’t
       normally based there because that is at one end of the
       stands.  There is another monitor, two further monitors




H
                                                              23
                                                 G. H. MACKRELL

       which are just "slave" monitors, one in my office and
       one in Mrs. Lane ’s office, which actually give the
       breakdowns ....
B
    Q. Of the numbers of people coming in? - A. Of the numbers
       of people coming into the relevant areas.

    Q. Can^you recollect the last time you looked at it before
       3 o ’clock? - A. I can't, sir. I was looking at it
       every couple of moments.

    Q. That is a running total telling you how many people are
       coming in through the various turnstiles? - A. Yes,
       sir.

    Q. It gives you an indicator of the filling, in numbers? -
       A. In global numbers within each area, yes, sir.

    Q. Not how they are distributed within the area because it
       is just figures? - A. That is right.

    Q. Were you concerned about those numbers at any point? -
       A. No, not really, sir.

    Q. What happened then that first alerted you that
       something was not quite as it ought to be? - A. I was
       advised by Mr. Lock that there had been a problem at
        C gate, and either the gate had been broken down or
       opened.   Nobody was aware at that stage of what the
       situation was.   I asked him how many people he thought
       had got in and he said in the region of 300, so I said
       I would go and have a look and see what the situation
       was.  I then left - I was on the pitch at that time.    I
       then went out of the Ground* on the riverside exterior
       of the South Stand, through an access through into "C"
       gate.   At that time I went up the stairs into the
       Police Control Room, and when I got up there I realised
       obviously there were people on the pitch and there was
       a serious problem.

    Q. You say you were on the pitch when you met Mr. Lock.
       Was that because this was just before kick-off? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. And you were anticipating the teams coming out and the
       managers and what have you? - A. That is right.   There
       had been a situation regarding the press required
       access, television access for the Nottingham Forest
       Manager, because there had been publicity regarding the
       situation.

    Q. That is why you had come out and you were, in fact,
       around? - A. Yes.




H
                                          G. H. MACKRELL

When Mr. Lock told you something had happened at
Leppings Lane and you asked how many people had got
through and he told you 300, did that alarm you, apart
from the fact that nobody likes the gate opening? - A.
Normally capacities do have a tolerance level so 300 or
400 should not have presented too much of a problem,
bearing in mind what I said previously, you always get
an element of people who do not turn up anyway.

Were the players already on the pitch at this point,
can you remember? - A. I believe that Liverpool were on
the pitch and as I was talking to him the Forest team
came out.  I think that was the case.

So what you are saying is that your first awareness
that something was not quite right occurred certainly
when one of the teams was already on the pitch, pre
kick-off? - A. Yes, about five-to.

You were near the players’ tunnel, I take it? - A. Yes.

Did you by chance look around the Ground at that point?
- A. I didn’t at that time.

So you cannot say what   the Leppings Lane Terraces
looked like at that point? - A. No.

As I understand it, you walked towards Leppings Lane? -
A. No.  I walked up the players’ tunnel and out through
the reception/Directors’ entrance, and then along the
exterior to the Ground.

So you would have arrived at Leppings Lane along the
roadway? - A. Yes.

If you could just look   at the model - I am   pretty sure
I know what you mean -   you came out of the   back from
there somewhere? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Then you walked along the roadway, up towards Leppings
Lane, is that right, on the outside of the wall, in
fact? - A. That is right, then in through Gate C.

Did you go past Gate C at all? - A. No, I went through
Gate C, because it was open and there was an Officer on
a Police horse there.

Can you recollect how wide the gate was open at that
point? - A. I recall it being enough to allow single
spectators through, because a Police Officer was
looking for spectators, they were holding up their
tickets and he was letting them funnel along the side
of his horse and into the Ground.
                                         G. H. MACKRELL

So it was not wide open? - A. No, not at all.

Whilst you were there did you look up towards Leppings
Lane? Did you notice whether there were a lot of
people there, that is what I am trying to find out? -
A. I didn't notice, sir, because I was intent at that
time on just going through.

I think you had a word with one of your gatemen? - A.
Yes, Richard Beadsley, one of my Stewards.
                                                                 26
                                                     G. H. MACKRELL

     Q. You did not enquire as to what had happened? - A. No.
JJ   Q. You enquired how he was? - A. Yes. He looked a
        little shaken. I asked him if he was okay but I was
        really intent on getting to the Police Control.
     Q. Did you by chance notice at that point whether the
        inflow of spectators — you have already explained it
        was more or less single file — was substantial or
        not through there? Can you remember that? Can you
        remember if there were a lot of spectators still in
        the concourse area? - A. I cannot really recall, sir.
        There were spectators there but I cannot recall the
        volume of them.

     Q. You did not glance at the tunnel I do not suppose? -
        A. I did not, sir, no.

     Q. Having got in through Gate C you then in fact walked
        back underneath the corner there and up to the Police
        Control Box? - A. Yes, that is right, through the
        gates by turnstiles 19 to 22.

     Q. Did you go into the Police Control Box or only on to
        the stands? - A. No, I went into the Police Control
        Box.

     Q. You did actually go in? - A. Yes.

     Q. Do you know when you were in the Police Control Box
        whether the match was still in progress? - A. I
        believe the match had stopped then, yes.
     Q. The match had stopped, do you say? - A. Yes, sir.
     Q. Can I just ask you what you were wearing that day? -
        A. A light grey suit, sir.
     Q.   A grey suit? - A. Yes.

     Q.    You were not wearing an anorakor anything of that
          sort? - A. It was a warm day, sir.
     Q. Pardon? - A. It    wasa warm day.

     Q. I will put thisto you because we will hear from Mr.
        Lock but I think Mr. Lock remembers that he had more
        than one conversation with you. Do you recollect
        that? - A. I do not, sir, and that is something I
        just cannot recall.

     Q. So far as you are concerned the only conversation you
        remember is the onethat you have recounted? - A.
        Yes, that is right, that is where Mr. Lock___



H
                                                                27
                                                   G. H. MACKRELL


    Q. Where you understood about 300 people had come in? -
B      A. That is right, sir.

    Q. So what you are really telling me is that until you
       got to the Police Control Box you had never realised
       that not much large a number than that had obtained
       entry? - A. That is right.

    Q. When you got into the Police Control Box you say that
       the match was finished so far as you remember? - A.
       The match had stopped. I cannot recall whether the
       teams were on or off the pitch, sir.
    Q. There was a lot of activity going on in that Police
       room at that time? - A. Yes, sir.
    Q. I think I will just lead you through this. Having
       noticed that, you did not spend too much time there
       yourself because you thought you would be in the way?
       - A. It was obviously a serious situation as there
       were a lot of people in distress on the pitch and I
       did not really think it was the time for me to start
       asking questions, sir.
    Q. Obviously you were looking out? - A. Yes.

    Q. People had obviouslyspilt on to the pitch as we know
       from photographs. Can you recollect whether people
       were already in a position where they were being
       resuscitated when you first got there? - A. Yes.
    Q.   They were? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q.    At that time you saw people being   pulled upinto   the
         stands and all kinds of things? - A. Yes, sir.
    Q. One of the things that you do mention about the
       Control Box is tannoy announcements? - A. Yes.

    Q. Tell me what you remember about that at that time? -
       A. At that time I remember Mr. Duckenfield speaking
       to, I believe, a Police Constable who was on override
       on the tannoy telling him to keep talking to the
       crowd to try and keep them calm. "Keep talking to
       them", I remember that, sir.

    Q. I do not know how soundproofed that Police Box is but
       did you actually hear the message going out over the
       tannoy? - A. No, sir, I could not. I am not saying I
       could not hear the message. I just did not recall
       it.




H
                                                                 28
                                                     G. H. MACKRELL

     Q. You are quite clear in your mind that that was being
        said within the Police Control Box? - A. Within the
|J      Police Box. Mr. Duckenfield was telling the Police
        Officer to keep talking to the crowd, yes.

     Q. I think you also heard some comments about some bolt
        cutters and the deployment of people at the perimeter
        fence? - A. Yes.

     Q. After that really you became involved with FA
        officials, club managers and people like in the
        decision taking as what should happen to the match? -
        A. That was it because obviously it was pretty
        apparent straight away that the game would have to be
        cancelled. The Police were anxious that that should
        be done at the right time so that people then would
        not attempt to leave the ground which would block the
        entry route for emergency vehicles and ambulances.
     Q. What you are saying is that the Police wanted people
        to stay within the ground? - A. At that stage, yes.
     Q. At that stage so that the roads would remain clear? -
        A. Obviously it would be logical or else you would
        get may be tens of thousands of people trying to
        leave the ground, go back to their cars, things like
        this and would block the local neighbourhood.
     Q. I am   going to leave it there. We will break for the
        time   being. We will break for coffee and then we
        will   turn the ladies and gentlemen over there and
        give   them an opportunity to ask you questions. Is
        that   all right? - A. Yes, thank you.

     Q. We are breaking for coffee but you are on Oath. So
        technically you are still in the witness box. Have
        coffee and talk about anything you like other than
        the evidence, is that all right? - A. Yes, sir.

                            Short Adjournment
                       Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE
     Q. Mr. Mackrell, I wonder if you could help me please to
        do this exercise? I want you to put yourself if you
        can — I know it is artificial — into the state of
        mind that you were before the disaster occurred and I
        am going to ask you a series of questions about your
        state of mind before the disaster happened. Do you
        follow? - A. I understand, yes.

     Q. First of all, did you believe that the ground was
        safe to be used to its full capacity? - A. Yes, sir.
                                               G. H. MACKRELL

Did you know that the Fire Service and the Officer
Working Party had worked out a system for evacuation
of the ground in the event of an emergency? - A. I
was aware that a system had been drawn up. I was not
party to the drawingup of that system, sir.
But you knew there was a system     for the      evacuationof
the ground in an emergency? - A. Yes, sir.
Did you know that a time had been worked out for the
safe evacuation of the Leppings Lane terrace? - A.
Yes, sir.

Did you know what it      was? - A. No, sir.

We have been told byMr. Seamen from the Fire Service
that the time was eight minutes. Leaving aside the
particular period, did you believe before the
disaster that if an emergency occurred the Leppings
Lane terrace could safely be evacuated? - A. Yes,
sir.

Before the disaster I want to just run round the
number of people who were interested in the safe
operation of the ground. Under the Safety
Certificate had Dr. Eastwood been appointed as
consulting engineer to provide for, among other
things, an annual certificate as to the safety of the
ground? - A. Yes, sir.

Had he provided that annual Safety Certificate? - A.
Yes, sir.

You have already mentioned that there was an Officer
Working Party which made twice yearly inspections of
the ground? - A. Mainly annual inspectors but there
were obviously individual parties made agl hoc further
inspections as and when required.

Represented on the Officer Working Party there were
representatives of the South Yorkshire Police? - A.
Yes.

The Fire Service? - A. Yes, sir.
The Local Authority? - A. Yes.

And from time to time Dr. Eastwood? - A. Yes, sir.

You knew there was a Safety Certificate as you have
mentioned. Had anyone from any of those official
bodies before the disaster ever said anything to you
to suggest that he could foresee that there was a
                                             G. H. MACKRELL

risk of death by overcrowding on the Leppings Lane
terrace? - A. No, sir.

I am asking you this question as the Secretary so
that it is not only from your own knowledge but also
from your knowledge of the records of the Club and
your own enquiries. So far as you know in the
history of the ground has there ever been an occasion
prior to 15th April 1989 when the exit gates have had
to be opened in order to relieve the risk of death by
crushing outside the turnstiles? - A. I was not aware
of it, sir.

Since the disaster have you ever heard that has ever
happened in the history of the Club before? - A. No,
sir.

What? - A. No, sir.

     THE CORONER:     Did you say no? - A. No.
     MR. PAYNE: Before the disaster had anything
ever happened in your job as Secretary or in your
meetings with these various official bodies which
caused you to expect that a disaster of this sort
could possibly occur? - A. No, sir.
Before the disaster in your own mind drawing on your
meetings with these other official bodies in your job
as Secretary did you ever imagine any circumstances
in which there would be an obvious risk of death to
spectators on the Leppings Lane terrace from
overcrowding? - A. No, sir.

That deals with one topic to try to illuminate your
state of mind and the state of mind of the other
people you spoke to before the disaster and I wonder
if you would just now please run through one or two
provisions of the Green Guide and give your comments
to the Jury. I think there is a copy of the Green
Guide available for you, and it is C.382. - A. Yes.
The Jury have looked through this guide in some
detail and they know it is not law. The words are
not to be interpreted literally or exactly and it is
only to be used for guidance? - A. That is right.
Can you look at paragraph 1 which says that the
booklet provides guidance to ground management, local
authorities and technical specialists such as
engineers on measures for improving spectator safety
at existing sports grounds and it is a voluntary code
and has no legal force. Were you aware of the
existence of this Green Guide? - A. I was.
                                                           31


                                           G.H. MACKRELL


Q. Did you use it to provide guidance to yourself in the
   management of the ground? - A. As a guide sir, yes.

Q. Now can you go straight to 28, which says:
          "There should be an appointed safety officer
          who should be of sufficient status and
          authority effectively to take responsibility
          for safety at the ground and to be able to
          authorise and supervise safety measures.
          He or an appointed deputy should be in attendance
          at a central control point when an event takes
          place. All staff should know the location
          of this control point and who is in charge
          of safety on the day in question."
     And I wonder if you would just be kind enough, Mr. Mackrell,
     to look at a letter which I know you will recognise
     straightaway written not long after your appointment
     which is dated the 23rd October 1987 addressed to the
     Head of Department, City of Sheffield, Administration
     and Legal Department.
           MR. PAYNE: Mr. Griffiths, just be kind enough to
     give one copy to Mr. Mackrell at first just so that he
     can identify it.
           THE WITNESS:    Yes, I confirm that.
q.         MR. PAYNE: This is a letter written by you, is
     it? - A. Yes indeed.
           MR. PAYNE:     I wonder if copies can be distributed
     please?
           MR. BEECHEY:    The 'C' number will be C482.
q.         MR. PAYNE: Mr. Mackrell do you see this letter
     confirms that you have been appointed the Safety Officer
     and you are asking the City Council to amend their
     records to note that you are responsible for all matters
     of safety within the ground? - A. That is correct.
Q. Now in that context I am going to ask you just to look
   at a number of paragraphs in the Green Guide for your
   comments about the application of these paragraphs to
   the functions of the Club. Can you look please at
   paragraph 23 in the Green Guide. Just follow this
   through. Does it say:
           "The safety of the public inside the ground
           is the responsibility of those who stage the
           event and administer the ground in which
                                    G.H. MACKRELL




     it is held, ie the "management". This
     responsibility applies in both normal and
     emergency situations. Local authority
     safety officers, fire and police officers
     will help management to discharge this
     responsibility and in certain circumstances
     may require measures to be taken in order to
     achieve reasonable safety standards, but
     the management is not thereby absolved of
     its responsibility for the safety of its
     customers."
You were obviously aware of that provision? - A. Yes.

And you took that as a guide in the performance of your
duties, did you? - A. Correct.
Can you go to 29, it is just on the opposite page,
      "A summary of management responsibilities
      is contained below."
Then below over the page at "v".
      "To draw up in consultation with the
      emergency services contingency plans,
      including arrangements with police for
      stopping an event, for:
      a. various emergency situations including
         fire;
      b. possible crowd trouble;
      c. coping with exceptionally large numbers
         of spectators arriving at the ground;
         and
      d. the failure of any detection ....
         systems."
Did you treat that as a guide to your duties? - A. Yes sir.

Do you know if there was in fact a contingency plan drawn
up in consultation with the Police for coping with
exceptionally large numbers of spectators arriving at the
ground? - A. My interpretation of that, sir, was that
the all ticket facility incorporated that.

What, because it was all ticket there would not be likely
to be any problem? - A. Well in relation to as far as the
Club, obviously the capacity of the ground had been fully
utilised.
                                                        33


                                       G.H. MACKRELL


Q. Oh quite. Let me just understand that. You mean that
   from the Club's point of view because there was a known
   capacity of the ground and because only that number of
   tickets had been sold, it was thought that there would
   be no problem ___ A. In relation to accessing a number
   of persons when they arrive at the ground, yes sir.

Q. Go down to xiv. at the bottom of page 14:
         "To ensure that all gangways and exit routes
         are unobstructed and capable of being used to
         their full capacity at all times when the public
         are in the ground."

   A. Yes sir.
Q. That is obviously a function of management except for
   which you accepted responsibility? - A. That is correct.

Q . And xv.
         "To provide directional flow, exit and
         emergency exit signs."

   A. Yes sir.
Q. That is a function of management for which you accepted
   responsibility? - A. Yes sir.
Q. Some comment has been made during the Inquest about the
   signs which were provided in the concourse area between
   the turnstiles and the back of the West Stand and I am
   sure you are familiar with this subject from previous
   inquiries into the case.
         Is it the case that in fact there was one quite
   small sign provided using the word "Stianding" over on the
   right-hand side as you went into the concourse which
   pointed round to the Pens 1 and 2? - A. Yes sir.
Q. And there wasn't any sign on the gap through the wall?
   - A. That is correct sir.
Q. How was it envisagedthat spectators coming through
   Turnstiles A-G would go round to Pens 6 and 7? - A. They
   would go through the gap in the wall and be assisted
   under normal conditions by the Stewards who were inside
   the relevant gates, which in that case would be Exit Gate C.

Q. was it expected in the light of previous experience
   particularly at the 1987 and 1988 matches, that this
   would be a sufficient guide for spectators to find their
   way to those pens? - A. Yes sir, there was no apparent
   problem at the 1987 or 1988 semi-finals that I have been
   made aware of.
                                                       34


                                       G.H. MACKRELL


Q. Just confirm this point. I think you did touch on it
   when you were being asked questions by the Coroner.
   The ticketing arrangements were the same at each of
   these three semi-finals that we are talking about? - A.
   Yes sir. There were minor alterations because there had
   been a disabled enclosure installed in between the semi­
   finals but it was only minor alterations.

Q. Certainly as far as the standing people on the Leppings
   Lane terrace they were just the same? - A. The same, yes.

Q. Now there are just a few more paragraphs. Can you go
   back in the book to number 12. I am going to start
   this one halfway through, so over the page on page 8
   starting four lines downs
         "To accommodate safely a maximum crowd at
         such a ground might entail substantial
         remedial work; alternatively, consideration
         might be given to accepting a much smaller
         number of spectators who, properly dispersed,
         could be accommodated safely without having
         to incur costly repairs or alterations. The
         first step, therefore, is to assess, using the
         Guide's criteria, how many people can be
         safely accommodated in the different sections
         of the ground given the existing condition
         of the ground (ie determine a safe spectator
         capacity). This should be done with a proper,
         detailed plan, preferably drawn to scale ..."
   Now just with that in mind can you turn to Chapter 16 at
   page 64 and I am not going to take you through these
   paragraphs because the jury have seen them in some
   detail at an earlier stage in the Inquest, but are you
   aware, Mr. Mackrell, that in this chapter there are some
   detailed formulae set out showing how you can calculate
   the safe capacity of various sections of the ground? -
   A. Yes sir.

Q. Now before the disaster the Court knows that there had
   been in existence since 1979 the Safety Certificate which
   gave an overall number for the whole width of the terrace?
   - A. Yes sir.

Q. And that it had not been divided up into separate sections
   and separate capacities had not been worked out for those
   sections? - A. That is correct.
Q. Is it your evidence that your attention was not drawn to
   that at all before the disaster? - A. No, only I asked
   for confirmation of the capacities from Eastwood & Partners
   I believe it was in 1977 when I was actually completing
   a form for the Football Association.
                                        G.H. MACKRELL



Would that enquiry be made by telephone by Mrs. Lane? -
A. I believe it was sir, yes.
Perhaps it might be helpful to look at a memorandum of
that telephone call now. I ask you to look at a memorandum
which I think you will already have seen just to identify
it. This is dated 26.2.87. There should be two pages
of it.
      THE CORONER: While we are distributing this can I
just say something?
      I look to Mr. Catchpole. This is a witness where
Rule 42 I think it is about the possibility of incriminating
questions may arise. It may not be Rule 42.

      MR. MANNING:    22 sir.
      THE CORONER: Thank you. I have not got it in front
of me but I remember the substance of the Rule. I don't
want to jump in every time I think we may be getting near,
but Mr. Catchpole you of course will be aware of this Rule.
If I miss it, if you feel I ought to be warning the witness
would you be good enough to draw my attention to it? I am
not saying that you have asked any questions of that nature
but there is a potential for that type of question.
      MR. PAYNE:     I certainly had not intended to ask any
such question.
      THE CORONER: As I say I didn't think you had but it
occurred to me while I was listening that there was a
potential for that to arise.
      MR. PAYNE:     Well it won't be my intention to ask any
such question.
Can you just spend a moment before this is distributed,
Mr. Mackrell, to   identify the document, because in fact
it does not come   from the Club but comes     from the files
of Eastwood and Partners but records what is probably the
inquiry that you were referring to.
       Do you see: first of all it is a document headed
 "Eastwood & Partners, Consulting Engineers, Memorandum,
 from Sharon" to I think it is Mr. Strange's initials.
 Right? - A. Yes.
 And also to "WE", that is      Mr. Eastwood's initials?   -
 A. Yes.
 "JOB: S.W.F.C." and it is dated "26.2.87" headed
^Ground Capacity for possible semi-final". Do you see
 at the top? - A. Yes.
                                      G.H. MACKRELL



And the subject I think you have   got in mind is paragraph 3
where the question is recorded:    "Has any account been
taken for alterations". Is this    what you had in mind
when you mentioned this a moment   ago? - A. Yes sir.
And the next page then, just identify it before it is
distributed, does this appear to be the answer to Sharon
from Mr. Strange, item 3: "Dr. Eastwood says --- "
A. Yes.
      MR. PAYNE: Very well. Now can these two papers
now be distributed then please?
      MR BEECHEY:   The 'C' number for this document
is C483.




                    Q. Now just follow
                                                              37
                                                 G. H. MACKRELL

Q.        MR. PAYNE:    Just follow this through.   My question
     to you at the end is whether this correctly records what
     you were mentioning a few moments ago as to the enquiry
     you made of Dr. Eastwood in 1987.    The jury hasn't seen
     this before and the photocopying is not terribly easy to
     read so I am going to take you through carefully.    First
     of all the memorandum, headed at the top with the words,
     "Eastwood and Partners, Consulting Engineers.
     Memorandum."    "From:  Sharon.   To: E-something-S" - Mr.
     Strange and then "WE" with a tick across it.    That is
     Dr. Eastwood.     The job, the job number and the date.
     We can see it headed, "Ground Capacity for Possible Semi-
     Final."    Paragraph 3, can you read that out please? -
     A. Yes:

          "Has any account been taken for alterations done on
          Leppings Lane over past few seasons?    Is the 10,200
          or so figure still correct?    I said that in my
          opinion it needs to be adjusted, better do it now
          than later.    It could also affect ticket sales for
          Coventry game.    She will speak to Graham."

Q. "Graham" is you? - A. Correct.

Q. Is this a correct account of the question which you asked
   Sharon to put to Eastwoods? - A. I asked her a general
   question to check the capacities in relations to the form
   to be filled in...

Q. I'm sorry, I can't hear what you are saying. - A. I asked
   her the general question to check the various capacities
   of the ground to make sure that the numbers we were
   stating in all areas of the ground were the same.

Q.   The 10,200 or so figure is the figure which applied in
     the Safety Certificate from 1979 to the whole width of
     the Leppings Lane terrace, including the north-west
     corner? - A. That's right.

Q. In reply to that did you receive a telephone message from
   Dr. Eastwood's office from Mr. Strange on the next page?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Just a few days later, this is the 2nd of March, 1987. -
   A. I didn't receive it.  Sharon Lane received it.

Q.   Did she pass it on to you? - A. Yes, sir.

Q.    He has numbered the points helpfully to correspond with
     your questions.    Did you receive the answer to question
                                                             38
                                                  G. H. MACKRELL

          "Dr. Eastwood says leave the capacity at Leppings
          Lane end as it is providing police have gates under
          West stand open so that people can distribute
          throughout the terrace evenly."

     Is this the message you received, Mr. Mackrell? - A. Yes,
     it is.

Q. Did you act upon that accordingly, leaving the capacity
   at Leppings Lane end as it was? - A. Yes.

Q. And not taking any further action to allocate any
   particular numbers, capacity numbers, to the different
   pens? - A. No, because the pens were open.   People could
   transfer from one pen to another pen.

Q. Right, this is a very important point, Mr. Mackrell, and
   I am grateful to you for saying that.   Is this the true
   position that having made this inquiry from this time
   onwards, the club's attitude was that provided the radial
   gates were open and locked open, then the spectators
   could move freely from one pen to another? - A. So I
   understood it.

Q. And so distribute themselves over the terrace as they
   wished? - A. Well, they could distribute themselves over
   the terrace.   I don't say as they wished because there
   might have been a constraint put upon them, but they
   could distribute themselves over the terrace.

Q. What do you mean, a "constraint"? - A. Well, if the
   Police filled one particular area.

Q.   Oh, I see, unless they were stopped?   - A. Yes.

Q.   If they were not stopped and if the gates were just
     locked open and left open at the back of each radial
     fence, so far as the club were concerned was the idea
     then that the fans could distribute themselves evenly as
     they wished across the terrace? - A. They would have to
     because they would have to be moving from one area to
     another to take advantage of toilet and refreshment
     facilities.

Q. Yes, that is what was intended to happen? - A. Yes.

Q. Is that the system which was in effect for the three
   semi-finals you have been talking about? - A. Yes.

Q. Did the club believe that that system was perfectly safe?
   - A. I had no reason to doubt otherwise.
                                                            39
                                                G. H. MACKRELL

Q. Now the expression has been used during the case of what
   is called 'find your own level", have you heard that
   expression? - A. I have heard it, yes.

Q. As we understand it, it means that the crowd can even
   itself out, if it wants to, or people want to, by the
   means you have just described.   Do you accept that? - A.
   I think that happens to a degree, yes, sir.

Q. Now that being the system, it follows, and everybody
   knows, there was no particular safe capacity number ever
   worked out for the individual pens? - A. That is correct.

Q. Is the reason for that because in the mind of the club it
   was not necessary because the people were free to
   distribute themselves as you have just explained? - A.
   That's right, because there would not be, as I understood
   it, any reason to actually define each individual pen
   because people were constantly moving from one pen to
   another to the toilet or for refreshment or whatever.

Q. After the time of this memorandum, and after the two
   semi-finals that led up to this disaster, did anyone to
   your knowledge ever say anything to you - that is to say,
   anyone from the Officer Working Party, Dr. Eastwood, the
   clubs who attended and played in the matches, the local
   authority, the Fire Service, did anyone ever criticise
   this system? - A. No, sir.

Q. Can we go on to the next topic under the Green Guide,
   which I would like you to look at and can you turn to 62.

          THE CORONER:   Members of the Jury, one of your
     colleagues has a query.   Did you want a C number?   Yes,
     it is C.483 for both of them together.

Q.         MR. PAYNE:  Now page 25, number 62.   Now I am just
     going to touch on this, Mr. Mackrell, because it is a
     subject which keeps coming up in these Inquests.   These
     says:

          "All doors on an exit route should always be capable
          of opening outwards so that crowds can escape in an
          emergency.   This is particularly important for
          doors within covered stands and at the foot of
          stairways."

     Now the doors in question are the big blue doors at the
     concourse end of the tunnel.   Can you bring them to
     mind? - A. The big blue doors at the concourse end of the
     tunnel?

Q. Yes. - A. Yes, sir.
                                                             40
                                              G. H. MACKRELL

Q. Do you want to see a photograph? - A. No, I am aware of
   the ones.

Q. We know those open inward to the ground and not outwards?
   - A. Yes.

Q. So these are doors on an exit route, aren't they? - A.
   Yes, sir, but they would never be actually in situ closed
   whilst there were spectators in there.

Q. Just explain that.   They would never be closed while...
   - A. That's right.   All exit doors have to be ready to
   be opened, but obviously they can be locked during the
   week when the ground is not open to the members of the
   general public, and so that becomes the facility there.

Q. They are intended to be kept locked when the ground is
   not in use to prevent trespassers? - A. Exactly.

Q. However, when the ground is in use and there are people
   on the terraces, what is intended to happen to those
   doors then? - A. Then the doors are unlocked.

Q. And what? - A. Those particular doors are folded back.
   The rest of the emergency doors, the doors, for example,
   of A, B, C, are unlocked and there is a simple trigger
   mechanism which opens the door.

Q. Your belief is that during matches the big blue doors at
   the end of the tunnel are opened.   Is there a way in
   which they can be padlocked back? - A. I don't believe it
   is padlocked, sir.   I believe it is drop bolted into
   the...

Q. Bolted back? - A. Yes.

Q. So they are fixed in an open position by some means? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. Now looking at 62, Mr. Mackrell, and I appreciate you may
   not have any direct knowledge of this, but if in fact
   these doors were shut while the central pens or while the
   terrace was populated with spectators, what would your
   comment be about that in terms of safety? - A. I have no
   comment, sir.   It would be something that the club were
   not a party to.

Q. You would not approve of it, would you? - A. No, sir.

Q. Are you saying you were quite unaware that those doors
   ever were in fact shut when the terrace was populated? -
   A. That's correct, sir.
                                                              41
                                                 G. H. MACKRELL

Q. Can you go on in the Green Guide to 96?   I just wanted
   to ask a question about the allocation of responsibility
   for the implementation of this paragraph.   Paragraph 96,
   page 32.   This sayss

          "The aim should be to ensure that every spectator on
          the terraces is within 12 metres of a gangway or
          exit, so that spectators can move quickly on to exit
          routes at the end of an event or in the event of
          emergency.   This may be achieved by a pattern of
          gangways (not less than 1.1 metres wide) linked to
          the exit system."

     One knows there are no gangways provided on the Leppings
     Lane terrace? - A. That is correct.

Q. What this is saying is the aim should be to ensure that
   every spectator is within 12 metres of an exit? - A. Yes.

Q.   Now whose responsibility was it to consider the
     application of this paragraph to the layout of the
     Leppings Lane terrace? - A. It was a general
     responsibility, I believe, that fell upon all parties,
     particularly in relation to the Officer Working Group
     because the situation that was in situ at the Leppings
     Lane end had been accepted by all the parties.

Q.    So the responsibility was the Officer Working Group? - A.
     Well, the Officer Working Group, obviously they were
     happy with the configuration of the terraces.

Q. Would Dr. Eastwood have any responsibility for the
   application of this rule? - A. Dr. Eastwood was not a
   member of the Officer Working Group as such.   He was
   invited to attend on certain occasions.

Q. Would he have any responsibility in his capacity as the
   engineer providing the annual Certificate of Safety? - A.
   I don't believe so if the local authority - when I say
   the local authority, meaning the Officer Working Group -
   were happy with the configuration.   Obviously it is
   there as a guide.   There are certain other things.    You
   just raised the point about the exit gates there.    As an
   opinion there is an argument against always having
   opening out gates as opposed to concertina gates and
   obviously the concertina gates were acceptable to the
   Officer Working Party.




                        Q. Yes.   If necessary we can
                                                            42
                                                G. H. MACKRELL

Q. If necessary we can look at the Certificates which Dr.
   Eastwood provided each year, but I am sure you have got
   them in mind. The Jury will see them in due course,
   when he gives evidence.  I had not proposed to produce
   them to you because they are not your documents, but
   they say that he is satisfied that the Ground can
   safely be used for its full certified capacity? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. So in your view did he have any responsibility to
   consider the 12 metre guidance? - A. I am sure Dr.
   Eastwood considered the whole relevance of the Green
   Guide, but I think it has to be taken as an over-view,
   and in his opinion obviously the Club had confidence in
   the advice given to us.

Q. Did the Club have any responsibility for the
   application of this guidance? - A. I think basically
   once again, in relation to technical aspects, flow
   rates for example, that is obviously why we employed
   Dr. Eastwood as our consultant, for the technical
   information he was able to give us. The information
   that he then imparted to the Local Authority Working
   Party obviously met the criteria that they require.

Q.   I am only just trying to see who had the
     responsibility, that is all? - A. I think everybody has
     a responsibility in relation to this.
Q.   I just want to run round the field:  theOfficer
     Working Party, which includes the various members we
     have discussed, that is to say, the South Yorkshire
     Police, the Fire Service and representatives of the
     Local Authority. - A. Yes.

Q. Dr.    Eastwood? - A. No, not Dr. Eastwood ....

Q. No,    not in the Officer Working Party, Dr. Eastwood in
   his    capacity as Safety Engineer? - A. Yes.

Q. The Club? - A. Yes.

Q. As the occupier of the Ground.    Now, in fact, whendid
   you   first become aware that the people at the    front of
   pens 3 and 4 were significantly more than 12 metres
   away from an exit? - A. In relation to when, sir?

Q. Before or after the disaster? - A. It was after the
   disaster.

Q. Had anybody ever raised that subject before the
   disaster, as far as you know? - A. No.

Q. Can you go on now, please, to 101, page 33:
                                         G. H. MACKRELL

     "A ground should be divided into sections to
     prevent potentially hazardous migrations by
     spectators.  Each section of the ground has its
     own limit of safe capacity and a major migration
     can cause dangerous overcrowding.  Each section of
     the ground, for example, each end or side, should
     be self contained with its own entrances, exits
     and toilet/refreshment facilities.  For soccer
     grounds in particular there should be no access
     from one such major section to another except in
     an emergency."

Then it goes on about greyhound racing.  Mr. Mackrell,
I think you have already given me the answer to the
question which I ask about this paragraph 101, but let
me just ask it in the context of this paragraph.  Is it
the case as far as the Club were concerned that they
treated the whole of the Leppings Lane Terrace, that is
to say pens 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6, as constituting one
section of the ground? - A. That is correct.

There is another paragraph which deals with the same
subject, so I just draw your attention to it in this
context, and that is 206 at page 59.  Does this say:

     "Crowd movement on terraces should be strictly
     controlled in order to give the police the fullest
     opportunity for crowd control. Less problems
     occur when terraces are subdivided as far as
     possible into sections by use of both radial and
     lateral barriers or railings which should comply
     with the strength requirements set out in Chapter
     9. Each section should ideally be self contained
     and should be serviced by its own entrance/exits,
     refreshment facilities and toilets (in keeping
     with the principles of general ground division
     described in Chapter 8, paragraph 101).  Special
     care is needed to ensure that sections and
     subdivisions are provided with sufficient exits
     for us in an emergency".

Was that a paragraph for which the Club accepted
responsibility? - A. I think the Club obviously noted
the paragraph, but obviously noted that the
configuration of the Leppings Lane Terrace had been
accepted by all the other relevant parties.

So your answer is the same, that the terrace was
treated by not only the Club but all parties as one
terrace? - A. Yes.

Within which people could move freely by use of the
radial gates? - A. Yes.
                                                             44
                                                G. H. MACKRELL

    Q. Everyone, to your knowledge, before the disaster,
       thought that that was perfectly safe? - A. Yes, indeed.

B Q.   There are just two more which I would be grateful for
       your comments on. At 178, please:

           '"Means of escape' is the structural means whereby
           a safe route is provided for people to travel from
           any point in a structure to a place of safety
           without outside assistance.   In a sports ground,
           the means of escape in the event of an emergency
           will usually be the same as the normal egress
           routes plus any additional 'route' of forward
           escape on to the playing area. The kind of
           emergency most likely to occur at a sports ground
           is fire but other types of emergency, such as bomb
           threat, my arise which might necessitate the
           evacuation of spectators from all or part of the
           spectator accommodat-*-011* ^ is the management's
           responsibility to ensure that all exit routes for
           use in an emergency are capable of being safely
           and effectively used at all times when the ground
           is occupied."

       Mr. Mackrell, prior to the disaster did you believe
       that the Ground complied with that paragraph? - A. Yes,
       sir.

     . Of course, the very nature of an emergency is that it
       is something which does not happen in the ordinary
       course of events? - A. That is correct.

    Q. And to that extent it cannot be foreseen exactly what
       the emergency will be, is that right? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you believe that there were sufficient means of
       escape for the crowd, for whatever emergency might
       occur? - A. Yes, sir.

     . As far as you are aware, did all the people, the
       official bodies who we have been discussing, did they
       all share the same belief? - A. Yes, sir.

     , 195, please, and this is the last one in the Green
       Guide.  I just ask you to look at the heading of this
       paragraph:

           "Effective stewarding should prevent overcrowding
           in sections of the ground, reduce the likelihood
           and incidence of disorder, help disperse
           spectators in such a way as to reduce crowd
           pressure and provide the means to investigate,
           report and take early action in an emergency.




H
A                                                             45
                                                G. H. MACKRELL

       So in general terms did the Club take responsibility
       for that as well? - A. Yes, sir.

    Q. That finishes my examination of the Green Guide with
       you and there are just two other topics I need to ask
       you about.

            THE CORONER:   I think if this is a convenient
       break, it would be wise if we stop for lunch at this
       point, and we will carry on with Mr. Payne's topics
       after lunch.

    Q. The same comment I made during the coffee break, and we
       will come back at two o'clock, Mr. Mackrell.

                      (Luncheon Adjournment)




D




E




F




G




H
                                                                46
                                                   G. H. MACKRELL


    Q.        MR. PAYNE: Mr. Mackrell, just these remaining
         topics please and, first of all, the question of the
B        stewards on the terrace. - A. Yes.
    Q. You explained this morning about the difference
       between the stewarding arrangements at the Kop end of
       the ground as compared with the arrangements at the
       Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes.

    Q. You explained at the Kop end the function of the
       stewards, among other things, was to keep the
       gangways clear? - A. Yes, that is right.

    Q. But there were not any gangways at the Leppings Lane
       end? - A. That is correct.
    Q. In fact, there is another I reason I ask you, is
       there not? The Kop end generally is the home
       supporters' end, is that right? - A. Yes, indeed.
    Q. The Leppings Lane end is for visiting supporters? -
       A. That is correct, yes.

    Q. Was there any anxiety or difficulty about placing
       stewards among visiting fans? - A. It is not an ideal
       situation in that often possibly they are not given
       the respect that a Police Officer is given.
    Q. Does this mean there was a reluctance of stewards in
       fact to go on to the terraces at the visitors' end? -
       A. I think there would have been a reluctance but it
       never actually arose because they were not put on to
       the visitors' end.

    Q. They were not, no. As a matter of practise, in fact,
       I do not know whether you know the answer to this or
       not, Police Officers were not stationed among the
       fans on the visiting terrace either, were they? - A.
       So it appears, no.

    Q. You mean so it appears to you now but you did not
       realise that before? - A. I was conscious of the
       situation as it happened, yes.
    Q. You were conscious? - A. Yes.

    Q. So you did know it was the practise not to station
       Police Officers among visiting fans? - A. My
       understanding of the matter was that it depended on
       the conduct of the supporters.

    Q. Oh I see. It depended on the conduct of the
       supporters? - A. Yes.




H
                                                                     ;
                                                                   47
                                                     G. H. MACKRELL


    Q. Did it also depend upon where the supporters came
       from? - A. No, I do not believe so, no.
B
    Q. When you say conduct what do     you mean? - A. The
       behaviour of the supporters when they were within the
       ground.

    Q. Do you mean the hostility ofsome supporters directed
       towards the Police? - A. No, not necessarily
       hostility but the general behaviour.
    Q. What do you mean? - A. Whether they were unruly. It
       is not a matter of being anti-police or anti anything
       but just general conduct.

    Q. As I understand it the evidence will be that as a
       matter of policy it was decided that it was not a
       good idea to station Police Officers actually on the
       terrace among visiting supporters in the interests
       really of their own safety. Is that what you
       understood the position was before the disaster? - A.
       I was not aware of that, no.

    Q. I would be grateful now, Mr. Mackrell, if in the same
       way you looked through the Green Guide you would be
       just kind enough to look through a few documents, the
       main object being that I am asking you in your
       capacity as an official representative of the Club,
       just to look at these documents so that the Jury have
       the opportunity to see the way in which certain
       matters developed. Some of them are not immediately
       directed to your own knowledge, do you follow? - A. I
       understand.

    Q. The first document is addressed to your predecessor,
       Mr. Chester, and it is a letter of 4th February 1985
       from the South Yorkshire Police, if Mr. Griffiths
       would be kind enough just to give you a copy of that.
       Before it is distributed, can you just identify this
       document, Mr. Mackrell? It is dated 14th February
       1985. It is on the notepaper of South Yorkshire
       Police addressed to your predecessor, Mr. Chester? -
       A. Yes, it is.

    Q. It is signed by Chief Superintendent Moseley? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. I expect you have seen this letter before, have
       you? - A. I have seen it subsequent to the events of
       15th April, yes.

              MR. BEECHEY:   Sir, the C number for this document
    is
         C.484.



H
                                           G. H. MACKRELL


     MR. PAYNE: The Jury will remember, Mr. Mackrell
— I expect you can bring it to mind as well without
looking at all the documents — that this letter
which was written in February 1985 is at the
beginning of the exercise which was carried out
during the spring and summer of 1985 when various
schemes were drawn up by Dr. Eastwood in consultation
with the Club for a proposed layout of new runs of
fencing across the concourse area at the back of the
stand, right? - A. Yes.
And also the construction of new sets of
turnstiles? - A. Yes.

None of which in fact were implemented as we know
because funds had to be diverted to cope with the
aftermath of the Bradford fire disaster? - A. That is
correct.

I have just said that to put this letter in the
context in which it is written. It is at the
beginning of that exercise and I invite you please to
just follow this letter through to see what was being
proposed by the Police at the commencement of this
exercise and what their view was as expressed to the
Club. It says:

     "Dear Mr. Chester, Suggested Improvements
     to Leppings Lane end of the Ground, With
     reference to our conversation of last
     week regarding improvements required to
     the West End of the ground, I forward
     herewith our thoughts.

     You will see that we favour the erection
     of a stone wall on the ground side of the
     current terraces, with such wall housing
     a bank of turnstiles. Our believe is
     that once a spectator goes through the
     turnstiles he should then be segregated
     from the other fans and this can be
     achieved by the erection of permanent
     high metal railings on that concrete area
     at present behind the Stand. Similarly,
     there should be a high metal railing down
     the centre of the West Stand. What is
     then created is total segregation of all
     three portions of the Terrace and the two
     areas of the West Stand, with each of
     these segregated areas having its own
     refreshment and toilet facilities.
                                           G. H. MACKRELL

      If you have any query on these
      recommendations, no doubt you will come
      back to me."

May I just say that that circle round "total
segregation" actually was put on by me on the
original and so it has got no significance. I did it
for my own reference. Just a couple of questions
about that, Mr. Mackrell. For reasons, which we can
quite understand, about the Bradford fire this
proposal, the same as Dr. Eastwood's proposals, was
not actually put into effect, was it? - A. That is
correct.

If it had been put into effect then it is very much
along the lines of the provisions of the Green Guide
that you were looking at this morning, is it not? -
A. It is. At this stage obviously it was a situation
whereby that end of the ground was used by both sets
of supporters, home and visiting supporters.




               /Q. The reason for the introduction.
                                                                 50
                                                         #   5


                                         G.H. MACKRELL


Q. And the reason for the introduction of these new facilities
   was in the interests of segregation of rival factions?
   - a . Yes.
Q. Can you go on now to another document which is dated
   in the same year but at the opposite end of the year now.
   This is a letter from the Football Association dated
   the 9th December 1985 to Secretaries of Football League
   Clubs. There should be a letter and then a bunch of
   pages behind it? - A. Yes.
Q. The letter is dated the 9th December and are you able to
   confirm, Mr. Mackrell, that this came from the files of
   the Club having been received by your predecessor?
   - a . Yes, I can.
           MR. PAYNE: Thank you very much.    Can this be
     distributed please?
           MR. BEECHEYs   Sir, the 'C' number for these
     documents is C485.
Q.         MR. PAYNE: Now, Mr. Mackrell, everyone will be
     relieved to hear that I don't intend to go through the
     whole of this document but I want to just ask you to
     look at it for the purpose of just identifying the kind
     of thing that was being drawn to the attention of Football
     League Clubs by the Football Association as a description
     of their responsibilities. Would you be kind enough just
     to follow the covering letter:
           TO:   Secretaries of Football League Clubs

           Dear Sir,
           Following lengthy discussions between The
           Football Association and The Football
           League, we are now able to send you, over
           our joint signatures, a revised Memorandum
           on Crowd Management.
           This document sets out to amplify and clarify
           the responsibilities of Clubsin relation
           to this most difficult problem. Both our
           bodies are fully aware of the enormous
           amount of time, money and energy expended
           by our Clubs in ensuring that the public
           can attend matches in safety. With the
           eyes of the world on us, however, we cannot
           afford to relax for one moment.
           We ask you to study the Memorandum in great
           detail. Failure to act on any of the
           recommendations may be taken into account
           should a Club subsequently be charged with
           misconduct under Football Association
           Rules 23 and 24."
                                                             51

                                      G.H. MACKRELL


  Then over the page the memorandum starts off, it is
  headed: "THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION. MEMORANDUM TO
  FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUBS ON CROWD MANAGEMENT. SEASON
  1985/1986 AND UNTIL FURTHER NOTICE. A. ADMISSION OF
  SPECTATORS". Now I merely want to just draw your
  attention to the subject matter of these various topics
  and then, in fact there is only one particular thing I
  would like you to look at.
        Under the heading A. under ADMISSION OF SPECTATORS
  is advice given about consideration of whether a match
  should be made all ticket and the procedure to be followed
  in those circumstances. That is what that deals with,
  isn't it, Mr. Mackrell? - A. That is correct.
Q. Then B. is "PRIOR PLANNING" which gives a number of
   detailed rules and suggestions.
         Then over the page "SEGREGATION". This is the
   paragraph that I ask you to look at in more detail.
   Does this paragraph say:
         "1. Clubs must make adequate arrangements
         for the segregation of rival supporters.
         2. To ensure segregation, it will be necessary
         to reserve a section or sections in the stadium
         for visiting supporters. It is essential
         in this process that adequate information on
         the likely movements of visiting supporters
         is obtained by the Home Club in consultation
         with the visiting Club and the bodies listed
         in Bl."
   Then I think we just miss over a few until we come down to
   6.
         "Wherever possible, segregation should be
         effected by permanent structures such as
         wall, barriers or fences. Only in
         exceptional circumstances should Police be
         called upon to form a "human" barrier."
   Now I would like to ask a question or two about that,
   Mr. Mackrell.
         Obviously apart from being advice from the Football
   Association that is perfect commonsense, isn't it, that
   if there are segregated areas then they should be divided
   by permanent structures rather than relying on Police or
   anyone else to divide people up manually? - A. Yes.

Q. And can you confirm that it was not part of the policy
   of the Club that the Police should be called on to form
                                                                 52


                                         G.H. MACKRELL



     any human barriers on the concourse area behind the West
     Terrace? - A. That is correct.
Q. The reason being, as we explored this morning, that from
   the point of view of the Club and everyone else that
   terrace was regarded as one open terrace? - A. It was, yes.

Q. Now I don't want to spend any more time on this document
   but it is now left with the jury to look at at their
   leisure when they retire to see the kind of guidance that
   was being given.
           I will pass over that and I would like to come now
     to another document which deals with another topic and
     this is a series of letters from a Mr. Kirby to the Club
     and then the Club to Dr. Eastwood and Dr. Eastwood back
     to the Club in April 1986.
           These again, I appreciate, also came into the hands
     of your predecessor. Just spend a moment to just identify
     the documents, Mr. Mackrell.
           Is the first one undated, signed by Mr. Kirby
     addressed to "Dear Sir" starting off "I write to draw
     your attention to a recent innovation ...." - A. It is.
Q. And then over the page is Mr. Chester's reply to Mr. Kirby
   dated the 21st of April 1986? - A. That is correct.
Q. And then on the next page is the letter from Mr. Chester
   sending a copy of Mr. Kirby's letter to Dr. Eastwood?
   - A. Indeed.
Q. And then over the page is Dr. Eastwood's reply? - A. That
   is correct.
           MR. PAYNE: Now may copies of this little batch
     of correspondence be distributed please?
           MR. BEECHEY:   The 'C' number for this set of
     documents is C486.
Q.         MR. PAYNE: I then want to go through this little
     sequence with you, Mr. Mackrell, in order just to identify
     whereabouts the responsibility for this sort of matter
     was dealt with.
           First of all the letter from Mr. Kirby to Mr. Chester.

           "Dear Sir,
           I write to draw your attention to a recent
           innovation in the field of crowd/ground safety.
                                                      53


                                   G.H. MACKRELL


     This entirely new item of equipment will
     shortly become commercially available and
     available for demonstration at chosen venues
     around the country.
     The item is described below but of course it
     must be seen to fully appreciate its
     potential.
     THE IDEA: to allow instant egress/access
     from a fenced in crowd area of a stadium in
     case of fire or disturbance onto the playing
     area for safety.
     THIS M^ANS: a set of fence posts which are hinged
     at ground level and held in the upright position
     by an explosive bolt rated at 5 - 10 tons.
     These posts fit into existing fence structures
     or may be erected as part of a new fencing
     system. The existing fencing is used when
     the new posts are installed. The posts are
     installed in two's (or more) thereby making a
     gate in the fence operated selectively, by
     crowd/ground section."
Then he goes on to extol the virtues of his explosive bolt
system which I am not going to read right through.
      Over the page, I have read enough to explain what he
is talking about. Over the page is where we get the date
of this correspondence because on the 21st April 1986
Mr. Chester is replying to Mr. Kirby:
       "Many thanks for your letter drawing our
      attention to a recent innovation in the field
      of crowd/ground safety. It certainly made
      interesting reading.
      I have passed this letter over to our
      Consultant Engineers for their consideration
      and will report back to you with their
      comments as soon as they are received."

A. Yes.




                     Q. Then over the page
                                                             54
                                              G. H. MACKRELL

Q. Then over the page, we get Dr. Eastwood's reply, the very
   next day, the 22nd of April, back to Mr. Chester:

        "Thank you for your letter of 21 April enclosing a
        copy of the communication from Peter J. Kirby.    You
        will probably know that there are several of these
        quick acting bolt devices on the market.   We have
        inspected some of them and have not yet been
        convinced that any of them are foolproof and good
        value for money.   The South Yorkshire Fire Service
        have also been keeping their ears to the ground and
        share our view.

        The one which is proposed by Mr. Kirby sounds to me
        to be possibly dangerous.   First, the gate is
        hinged about its bottom edge and falls forward on to
        the pitch surround when the explosive bolt is
        released.   It has to be kept in mind that police
        walk past the gates and clearly there could be a
        risk of injury.   It is also undesirable that the
        crowd should have to walk out over the top of the
        gate which would be lying on the ground.

        The arrangement is also likely to be very expensive
        as it would be necessary to buy completely new gates
        and fit them in the safety fence.   There will also
        be the cost of wiring all the gates back to the
        central control point.

        It seems the device is unlikely to be attractive but
        if you are sent further details in due course, we
        can look into it further."

   As a matter of fact I expect you are able to confirm that
   that idea was not followed up any further at all? - A. I
   have never seen this correspondence before today.

Q. So clearly nothing came of it? - A. That is correct.

Q. This may sound a very obvious question, but why do you
   think Mr. Chester, when he is given this idea about crowd
   safety in relation to the existence of the perimeter
   fence, why is it his instinctive reaction to send it to
   the consulting engineer rather than anybody else? - A. It
   happens still.   We get a great deal of circulars and
   information sent by people trying to sell us products
   that are safety or spectator orientated.   Obviously I
   send the copies through to Eastwoods for their opinions
   on them.   They have professional expertise in that area.

Q. So a matter like this relating to the design and
   structure and safety features of the perimeter fence is
   something which would be automatically sent to the
   consulting engineers? - A. Yes, because anything that
                                                               55
                                                G. H. MACKRELL

     related to the structural matters that would need to be
     raised with the Advisory Group would be channelled
     through Dr. Eastwood's company.

Q. One last letter.   This is a letter from you to the
   Football Association of the 27th February, 1989, just
   accepting the invitation to run the match but I would
   like you to be kind enough to look at the terms of the
   letter.   I suppose you recognise this letter, the 27th
   of February, 1989 over your name? - A. Yes.

Q. Can copies of this go round?

          MR. BEECHEY:   This is C.487.

Q.        MR. PAYNE:   Now Mr. Mackrell, this fits in with
     your evidence earlier about the invitation that you
     received from the Football Association early in the year,
     to be the host of the semi-final.   I would like you to
     look at the terms of this letter of the 27th February,
     1989, to Mr. Clark:

          "Thank you for your letter dated 24th February,
          1989.   I would confirm that Sheffield Wednesday
          would be honoured to host an FA Challenge Cup Semi-
          Final tie on Saturday, 15th April, or a re-play
          during the following mid-week.

          The requirements of Challenge Cup Rule 26.B are
          noted and I confirm that our insurance cover extends
          to such matches.

          The capacity of Hillsborough is 54,101.   Safety
          fences are in front of the standing spectators only.
          A break down of this capacity is as follows:"

     Then you give it and the entry in respect of Leppings
     Lane you give as 10,000? - A. Yes, I think that looks
     like a typographical error.

Q. Yes, that should be 10,100? - A. That is what I
   understand it to mean.

Q. Then over the page, just to complete the letter:

          "In addition we have a disabled enclosure which
          holds 60 persons.   A diagram of the ground is
          enclosed for your reference.

          If I can be of any further assistance please don't
          hesitate to contact me."

     That is signed by you.
                                                            56
                                                 G. H. MACKRELL

     Now just going back to that Leppings Lane number.   Is
     the reason you gave the Leppings Lane number as the total
     number consistent with what you have been saying
     throughout your evidence that from your point of view you
     regarded it as one terrace on which the spectators could
     circulate freely? - A. Yes.

Q. That completes the examination of the letters and here is
   the last question for you.   It relates to the events of
   the day of the disaster.   Just one matter of observation
   from you, your own eye witness account.   You have told
   the court that at five minutes to three, or thereabouts,
   you were in the vicinity of the players  tunnel? - A.
   That's correct.

Q. About half way along the front of the South Stand? - A.
   That is where the players' tunnel comes out.

Q. For how long had you been in that area? - A. I can't say
   precisely.   No more than two or three minutes, perhaps.

Q.   Prior to that you had been keeping a general eye on the
     filling up of the ground? - A. I had been in a variety of
     places both inside and outside the ground.

Q.   Moving around, as you said in your  evidence.  Now at the
     time you were there in the vicinity of the players'
     tunnel did you have a general look around the ground at
     that time? - A. I had a general look, yes.

Q. I want your evidence.   At that time did you notice
   anything anywhere around the ground which caught your
   attention as being unusual at that time? - A. No, nothing
   specifically, no.

Q. Nothing which alarmed you? - A. No.

Q. We are talking about five minutes to three? - A. Yes.

                 Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

Q. Mr. Mackrell, just one matter.   You were aware, were you
   not, that someone within the Police Service had contacted
   the Liverpool Football Club and had made arrangements to
   have inserted within their programme for the home game
   prior to this semi-final, certain matters? - A. Yes.

Q. Those matters included a request for fans to come early?
   - A. Yes.

Q. Saying that the ground would be open, I think, from
   eleven o'clock in the morning? - A. That's correct.
                                                                57
                                                G. H. MACKRELL

Q. Even though the arrangement had been with you, twelve
   o'clock? - A. That's correct.

Q. As a result further arrangements were made with you for
   the club that turnstile operators would be available from
   the earlier time in order for fans to be admitted if they
   arrived? - A. That is correct.

Q. There was to your knowledge this request made to
   Liverpool fans to come as early as possible? - A. Yes, it
   was in the programme because in fact Sheffield Wednesday
   had played at Anfield the previous Saturday morning.

Q. And you saw that? - A. Yes.

                  Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q.   For what it is worth on that last point, there was
     nothing on the back of the ticket requesting people   to
     come early was there? - A. No.

Q. Just for the record you can confirm that actually on the
   ticket - I have got a copy in front of me if you want to
   look at one, and I have a copy for the standing area - it
   says:

          "You are requested to take up your position fifteen
          minutes before kick-off."

     - A. That is correct.




               Q. May I just rehearse your
                                                             58
                                              G. H. MACKRELL

Q. May I just rehearse your understanding of the
   responsibilities on the day of the semi-final in 1989.
   Let me deal first with outside the ground, as the fans
   are coming to the turnstiles. Was that a matter for
   policing by the Police? - A. Yes.

Q. Just dealing with that, you told us that through
   consultation with Chief Superintendent Mole, who was
   the Commander in charge of the 1988 semi-final, wasn't
   he? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. Had he been in charge of 1987 as well? - A. Yes. He
   was in command of FI, which is Hammerton Road, which
   covers Hillsborough.

Q. I think he was the senior Officer who Mr. Duckenfield
   took over from in 1989? - A. That is correct.

Q. In consultation with him and at his request, as far as
   the turnstiles go, it was decided that those attending
   the Leppings Lane end, that would be the Liverpool fans
   in 1989, and in 1988, they should all go through the
   Leppings Lane turnstiles? - A. That is right.

Q. As opposed to a system which had been operated perhaps
   for other games whereby one would also use the
   Penistone Road turnstiles to gain access to the North
   Stand? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. So that you had a situation with the semi-finals of a
   reduction of the number of turnstiles for the numbers
   of people coming to the Leppings Lane end and using the
   West Stand, the West Terraces and the North Stand? - A.
   That is right.

Q.   As a matter of fact, however, although there was a
     reduction in the number of turnstiles, the numbers to
     be anticipated attending at a semi-final, by which I
     mean the numbers who were going to go into the West
     Stand, the North Stand, and the Leppings Lane terrace
     would, in fact, be far larger than the normal sort of
     game you get at Sheffield Wednesday, that is right,
     isn't it? - A. Indeed, yes.

Q.    Indeed we know that in 1989 there were some 24,000
     Liverpool tickets for access to, taken together, the
     Leppings Lane Terrace, the West Stand and the North
     Stand? - A. Yes.

Q. Indeed, as a matter of experience, apart from the 1987
   semi-final, the 1988 semi-final and the 1989 semi­
   final, in recent years there has not been, has there, a
   large match at Sheffield Wednesday/Hillsborough, where
   that sort of numbers of people were going to be put
                                         G. H. MACKRELL

through simply the Leppings Lane turnstiles, that is
right? - A. It was only utilised for the fact of a
semi-final when there were two visiting teams.

In fact, when we are talking about past experiences, we
can only look back for these purposes, that is using
simply the Leppings Lane turnstiles for all this number
of people, we can only look back to 1989, the disaster
year, 1988 and 1987? - A. That is correct, because the
rest of the time Sheffield Wednesday supporters would
have had three sides to the ground.

Indeed, on all other occasions you would not get
anywhere near that sort of numbers attending, that is
right, isn't it? - A. We have had 48,000 spectators
there on games.

I don't think you have had 24,000 visiting supporters,
have you? - A. No, because the capacity was for 14,000
visiting supporters.

The upshot is that in 1989, and indeed 1987 and 1988,
you had 24,000-odd people for 23 turnstiles? - A. That
is correct.

Indeed, as far as experiences go we know that the 1987
game, you have already confirmed with us, was on a
Sunday? - A. Yes.

And because of delays for those coming to the Kop end
it in fact had been delayed, I think, hadn't it? - A.
Yes, indeed.

It isn't as simple as that when I say to you that you
were having 24,000 people going through 23 turnstiles,
because we know that the numbers were divided up
between those going to the North Stand, that is right?
- A. Yes.

Those going into the West Stand to sit? - A. Yes.

And those going to stand on the Leppings Lane Terrace?
- A. Yes.

They were so divided up that they were not divided
equally among the 23 turnstiles, were they? - A. No.

We know that for the 9,700-odd people going to the
North Stand, they were using ten turnstiles, that is 1-
10? - A. Yes.

And for the 4,456 who had tickets for the West Stand
seats, they were going to go through six turnstiles,
11-16? - A. Yes.
                                            G. H. MACKRELL

And as far as the 10,100 who were going to go onto the
standing area at the Leppings Lane end, they were going
through turnstiles A-G, some seven turnstiles? - A.
Yes.

You have told us that in discussion with Chief
Superintendent Mole it was decided, and the Police were
content - they had to police it, they were content -
that those numbers of turnstiles were sufficient, as
you put it, to "access" those numbers? - A. Yes.

Of course, it follows that you must have had some
discussion with Mr. Mole, I suspect, about the numbers
you could expect to get through a given turnstile in a
given period of time?   You must have had some sort of
discussions with him? - A. Yes.

Was the number of 800 mentioned to Mr. Mole? - A. 800
was the figure that we had discussed.

So it was common ground between you and the Police that
800 in an hour per turnstile was the number you should
be working on? - A. Yes.

It also follows from that, doesn't it, that - let me
just take the seven turnstiles for the 10,100 who are
going through to the Leppings Lane Terrace - that in an
hour you can only get 5,600 through those turnstiles? -
A. Yes.

It follows from that you cannot possibly get everybody
through, for example, in an hour, that is obvious? - A.
I think 800 when it is particularly an all ticket
match, there is no change being given, is a
conservative number.

Yes, I am not challenging the number, I am just working
through what you ....

     MR. ISAACS:   I am sorry, sir.  It is just that
the Witness was speaking at the same time as my learned
friend and I did not hear him very well.

        THE WITNESS:   I think it is easily obtainable,
800.

        THE CORONER:   In an all ticket match, I think he
said.

     MR. KING:   Yes, I am not challenging the number,
I am thinking it through with you.  It follows from
that in order to get everybody accommodated through the
turnstiles by kick-off, you have got to have a
                                         G. H. MACKRELL

reasonably steady flow of people arriving over the time
the turnstiles are open? - A. Yes.

Just the mathematics of it means, as far as A-G goes,
those seven turnstiles, that you can only get about
2.800 through in the last half hour at 800 per
turnstile? - A. Yes.

2.800 out of 10,100 is approximately a quarter, isn't
it? - A. Yes.

So again, just thinking it through, in order that you
are going to be able to get everybody through easily,
you are going to have to have a situation that about
three-quarters of the expected spectators for the
Leppings Lane Terrace have arrived already by half­
past-two? - A. Yes.

Clearly, and I think the learned Coroner put it to you
and you agreed, if in fact you get a lot of people
arriving, shall we say in the last half hour, you are
going to have problems? - A. True.

That is obvious, isn't it? - A. Well, it doesn't matter
what the rate was if they all come at the end.

But even if they don't all come, if for example you
don't have a good three-quarters there by half-past-
two, you are going to have problems, aren't you? - A.
You will have problems whatever the rate is, however
late they come.

If you have not got about three-quarters there by half­
past-two? - A. Yes.

This, of course, as far as outside goes, is a matter
for policing, and you have told us that is a matter for
the Police? - A. Yes.

But it would be obvious therefore in order to ensure
that you are not going to have problems outside, that
you have got to keep an eye on the rate of flow of the
numbers arriving at the Ground during the hours before
half-past-two, for example? - A. Yes.

As far as the Police go, who have the responsibility
outside the Ground, they of course have Officers inside
the Ground, don't they? - A. Yes.

They had Officers who were, we understand, in the
Police Control Box? - A. Yes.

Which is overlooking the pitch and the terraces? - A.
Yes.
                                         G. H. MACKRELL

There is also, I understand, a Club Control Box, is
there? - A. Club Control Room.

Where is that in relation to the Police Control Box? -
A. It does not have visual sight of the pitch; it is
within the middle of the South Stand.

Are there means of communication between the Police
Control Box, which does have sight of the terraces and
that Club Room? - A. Yes.

The Club Room has some record keeping, does it, of the
numbers entering the Ground? - A. It has the
computerised gate reading.

Is that an ongoing record in the sense one can look at
it at any given time, or do you have to wait until the
end of the game to see how many have come through? - A.
It updates every second.

That would tell you how many have come through each
individual turnstile, would it? - A. Yes.

You would also, given the need to anticipate a problem
if people are not arriving in a steady flow up to, say,
half-past-two, you would be able to base experience on
previous years, of what you have seen in previous
years, wouldn't you? - A. Yes.

You would be able to compare the rate of arrival of
fans, shall we say at the Leppings Lane end, in 1989
say at a given time, say quarter-past, half-past-two,
with what the situation had been in 1988, for example?
- A. Yes.

Those are all ways and means of keeping an eye on the
flow of people? - A. Yes.

Obviously visual observation would be important as a
matter of policing, by which I mean visual observation
of the way individual parts of the ground are filling
up? - A. Yes.

Just as an obvious example, if you have - and we know
that the Leppings Lane end is made up of pens, isn't
it? - A. Yes.

If you have a situation where one pen looks very empty
at a given time, shall we say at half-past-two, that
would be a telltale sign that people were not arriving
perhaps at the flow you had been expecting? - A. If it
were, yes.
                                          G. H. MACKRELL

Or if you had an area of the stands with a lot of empty
spaces compared with the situation the previous years
since, for example in 1988, that would also be a
telltale sign that people were not arriving as early or
as steadily as in previous years? - A. Yes.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, having regard to the way in
which this Witness again is being used as a sounding
board, but not questions which are related to his
expertise, we have now listened, and I have been
listening for the last two or three minutes, I just
wonder whether in the circumstances I could have a
ruling from you as to whether this should continue, or
whether you are going to exercise some degree of
restraint so far as my learned friend is concerned.

     MR. KING:   I will continue, sir:

Mr. Mackrell, that is the situation still dealing with
Policing outside the ground, and of course if the
Police ....

     MR. KING:   I am sorry, sir, I can hear mutterings
and grumblings which are very disconcerting.  I am
thinking the whole time on my feet, and it is very
difficult.

     MR. ISAACS:    Itmay well be that the mumbling is
disconcerting; it is intended to be because despite
what I have just said it appears that my learned friend
is continuing to ask about matters upon which this
Witness does not have expertise and has not been asked
to date.   If my learned friend wishes to deal with this
matter and have you make a ruling, I am quite happy to
make my submissions to you and if you feel that is
appropriate then perhaps the Jury can withdraw and we
can   dealwith this matter in a proper way.

     MR.  KING: I am quite happy to continue.   I say
this with the greatest courtesy to my learned friend, I
just find it difficult ....

     THE CORONER:   I know what Mr. Isaacs is getting
at. Obviously you have to be careful that you do not
stray outside thefield of what he knows.

     MR.  KING: Sir, as far as I know haven't, but I
am not objecting to that, I am just objecting ever so
gently, because we all do it, and it is very difficult
to question when you hear noises in your right ear,
sir:

As far as you, the Club, were concerned, given that you
had given responsibility to the Police for the policing
                                         G. H. MACKRELL

outside, if for example the Police had come to you and
requested that kick-off be postponed because of an
anticipation that the numbers still to come were such
that they would not get through the turnstiles, I don't
suppose you as the Club would have objected, you would
have bowed to the expertise of the Police in that
matter? - A. Yes, I would have had to have consulted
with the members of the FA who were present because
they technically host the match.
A
                                                               65
                                                  G. H. MACKRELL

    Q. You, as the Club, having given the job to the Police
       would have accepted their advice I suspect? - A. Yes.
B
    Q. Can I move on, if I may, to the position inside the
       ground? You, as the management of a Club, as I
       understand it accepted that in the terms of the Green
       Guide, were responsible for crowd control
       arrangements? - A. Yes.
    Q. As I understand it, as far as the Leppings Lane
       terrace went and those who were going to go on the
C      terrace in 1989, the arrangements for crowd control
       had been left to the Police, is that right? - A. That
       is correct, yes.
    Q. Was that, therefore, by arrangement between the Club
       and the Police in advance? - A. It was an arrangement
       I inherited when I joined the Club and had been in
       place for some period of time.

D   Q. Did you understand it, having inherited it, that it
       was not one which was just vague. It was an express
       arrangement which had been entered into between the
       Club and the Police that the Police should have the
       responsibility for crowd control on the Leppings Lane
       terraces? - A. I believe it was an agreement that was
       understood by both parties, yes.
    Q. Had you yourself ever had discussions with Chief
       Superintendent Mole as to those arrangements? - A.
E      Not specifically, no.
    Q. Had you ever had anything said to you to understand
       that they were not continuing? - A. No.
    Q. We know, do we not, in the 1989 Semi Final for
       example, there were no Club stewards on the terraces?
       - A. That is correct.
F   Q. We know that in 1989 there were no stewards in the
       concourse with the direct responsibility for
       directing fans to any particular part of the
       terraces, that is right, is it not? - A. Yes.
           THE CORONER: I thought he had said something a
      bit different to me.

           THE WITNESS: In relation to specific duties. I
G     made the point previously that the stewards who were
      present on C Gate, the gangways and the others there,
      it was part of their duties to direct people in that
      area but not specifically.

           THE CORONER:   That is what I thought he said.



H
                                                                  66
                                                     G. H. MACKRELL


               MR. KING: I was dealing with the terraces and I
JJ        may have misunderstood the witness.

               THE CORONER: What I understood the witness to
          say to me, because I asked him this, that although
          the primary function of the gateman, the stewards on
          the stairways and the chaps by the gate in the wall
          were there to deal with evacuation procedures, the
          chaps on the stairs with the ticketing, nevertheless
          as part of their function you would have expected
          them to direct fans in the appropriate direction.
               THE WITNESS: Yes, absolutely. Yes, it is. I
          was making the point that there was no one with that
          specific.

     Q.       THE CORONER:    What you are saying is that
          nobody was given the specific task of doing that job?
          -A. They were expected to take that on.

     Q-        MR. KING:  Can I investigate that slightlymore
          if I may? Coming to 1989 for the moment, if I was a
          spectator who had a Leppings Lane standing ticket I
          would come through, in normal circumstances, the
          turnstiles A to G, would I not? - A. That is correct.
     Q. I would find myself in the concourse with the tunnel
        entrance it! front of me? - A. Yes.

     Q. You would agree with me so far as any ticket I looked
        at was concerned, the ticket would have Entrance B on
        it? - A. It would have Entrance B on it.
     Q. It would have "Standing" on it? - A. Yes.
     Q. You agree with me that the tunnel itself — if
        necessary I can show you a photograph but I am sure
        we all know it by now — was very obviously marked
        "Standing" and apart from the letter A it had also a
        big letter B on it? - A. Yes.

     Q. So if no one looked any further than his ticket, or
        not even his ticket but just ahead of him, as he came
        through turnstiles A to G, the tunnel was the obvious
        way to gain access to the terrace? - A. If no one
        looks at anything else and saw the other people going
        to the other parts of the stadium, yes.

     Q. As far as the Pens 6 to 7 as we call them are
        concerned, that is, if one was looking at the back of
        the WEst Stand one would be talking about the pens
        which are to your far left? - A. Yes.




H
                                                               67
                                                  G. H. MACKRELL

    Q. On the north west corner terrace, to gain access to
       them from outside the West Stand you have to go
B      through the entrance gate in the wall, do you not? -
       A. Yes.

    Q. The dividing wall? - A. Yes.

    Q. Again it is common ground that there were no signs
       directing people that way if they wanted to go to
       side pens? - A. No.

    Q. As far as stewarding goes, as I understand it, the
       Club did not take it upon itself to put people in the
       concourse with the specific aim of directing people
       to the side pens as opposed to going down the tunnel,
       that is right, is it not? - A. That is correct.
    Q. The stewards which you have referred to, as I
       understand it, and I may be wrong and you put me
       right if I am wrong, was simply if somebody went up
       to them and asked them a question they might direct
       them one way or the other? - A. Yes, it was but as I
       made the point to Dr. Popper, it was an implied part
       of their job that they would start to direct. People
       do not come through turnstiles particularly fast.
       They are coming through in easily manageable numbers.
    Q. I understand that but I am really talking about
       directing them to that which the learned Coroner
       said, and he used the expression, to the right place
       on the terrace? - A. That is right. I take the point
       but you are talking also about people, the vast
       majority of which, might have visited the ground on
       previous occasions.

    Q. Can I say, Mr. Mackrell, that none of these are
       directed necessarily as a criticism of you as the
       Club. I am just trying to find the position on the
       day? - A. Sure.

    Q. You have told us, have you not, that as far as the
       Leppings Lane terrace goes and the crowd control on
       that terrace, that was a matter which was by
       arrangement with the Police? - A. Yes.

    Q. That would include the distribution of the crowd on
       the Leppings Lane terrace, would it not? - A. Yes.

    Q. The Green Guide which you have already looked at, and
       just have a little look if you will, at page 31 of
       the Green Guide? - A. Yes.




H
                                                                  68
                                                     G. H. MACKRELL


     Q. You see the section headed "Terraces and viewing
        slopes" and you see the very first paragraph above 89
JJ      where it says:
                "Arrangements should be made to encourage
                the even distribution of the crowd on the
                terraces to provide ease of access and
                egress, to control and facilitate
                movement particularly if a local
                emergency should arise during the event
                and to contain pressures before they
                reach dangerous proportions."

          Do you see that? - A. Yes.
     Q. Sofar as arrangements for encouraging the even
        distribution of the crowd in 1989 on the Leppings
        Lane terraces, who had the responsibility for that
        matter? - A. The responsibility in relation to the
        stewarding was as agreed previously with the Police.
     Q.         THE CORONER:   I cannot hear you? - A. I am
          sorry, it was as arranged previously with the Police,
          as agreed previously.
     Q.         MR. KING: You would say in 1989 the
          responsibility for complying with that particular
          piece of advice, that is to say, encouraging the even
          distribution of the crowd on the terrace and there
          are a number of reasons given but particularly I put
          to you to contain pressures before they reach
          dangerous proportions. That in the 1989 Semi Final
          was a matter for the Police arranging it? - A. As I
          understood it, yes.
     Q. I want to come back to what we understood the
        position was in 1989. The position in 1989 so far as
        anybody entering turnstiles A to G to go on the west
        Leppings Lane terrace is that they had an obvious
        means of entry on to the terrace down the tunnel? -
        A. It was the entrance in front of them down the
        tunnel, yes.

     Q. There was a very small sign which, if they were
        lucky, they might see to direct them to the right? -
        A. Yes.

     Q. But that was very small, was it not? - A. It was a
        small sign.

     Q. There was absolutely no signing at all to direct them
        through the little entrance in the dividing wall to
        go to the left, is that right? - A. That is correct.




H
                                                                 69
                                                    G. H. MACKRELL


    Q. You have agreed with me that there might be stewards
       who, if asked, might answer a question there was no
B      one directly from the Club point of view — you say
       it is a matter for the Police — there was no one on
       duty specifically to direct them in a particular way?
       - A. Not specifically.

    Q. The likelihood always was, was it not, given those
       arrangements that anybody entering turnstiles A to G
       for the Leppings Lane terrace would go down the
       tunnel, the likelihood? - A. With respect, you are
       saying that. I cannot necessarily agree with that
       because you are talking about people who may have
       visited the ground before. If you took a perfect
       person who had never come there once before I may
       agree with that.
    Q.    There aretwo sorts of people.   There are people who
         have not been before and there are people whohave.
         Let me deal with the people who have not been before.
U        That is the obvious entrance, is it not, down the
         tunnel? - A. It may be, is.
    Q.    It is not may be but it is? - A. There is an
         entrance. You have already made the point that there
         is one on the other side that says "Standing" as
         well.
    Q. But that is not obvious, is it? - A. It is not
       obvious.

    Q. As regards somebody who has been before you will know
       from experience — and there is a mass of evidence in
       this Inquest already on this — that the prime place
       people want to get to on the terrace apparently is
       behind the goal? - A. An element of support wishes to
       go behind the goal.

    Q. I understand that that is the prime place, is it not,
       behind the goal? - A. It is the prime place for a
       certain element of supporter who wishes to go behind
       the goal. It is not for all supporters, no.

    Q. Are you not going to agree with me that the
       likelihood is that people when they are going through
       turnstiles A to G go down the tunnel if they are
       simply left to their own devices? - A. And never been
       to the ground before perhaps, yes.
    Q. Even if they had been to the ground before if they
       want to get behind the goal? - A. If they want to get
       behind the goal, yes.




H
                                            G. H. MACKRELL

Not only that if they were particularly looking for a
B which had been on their ticket, that would also
take them down the tunnel? - A. If they were looking
for a B, yes.

     THE CORONER: Mr. King, I hesitate to interrupt
you but the B I think was on the stub. Is that
right?

     MR. CATCHPOLE: B is on the stub which would
have been handed in at the turnstiles in the normal
course of events.

     MR. KING: I agree. If they had been
intelligent enough to look at their ticket, memorise
where they had to go and know which entrance they
were going for, if they happened to look at B that is
where they would see a B? - A. You can see a B there,
yes.

     THE CORONER:   In fact the stub is the bit
retained by the Club? - A. Yes.
     MR. KING:   I agree entirely, sir.
I am not trying to be facetious but before you hand
the ticket in you have both parts, do you not? - A.
Yes.

A fan could easily look at his ticket before he gives
it in, could he not? - A. He could do, yes.

One would hope he would because he has got to see
which way to go in.

It is right, is it not, that the natural result of
what is ahead of you as a spectator when you go
through turnstiles A to G, that is thetunnel, the
absence of any specific person directing you one way
or the other, and if you looked on your ticket and
seen the bit on the stub but I accept not the biggest
part, is that people will not tend to go, for
example, to Pens 6 and 7 by that side route unless
they are positively encouraged so to do? That is
right, is it not, Mr. Mackrell? - A. May be, yes.
It is right, is it not? - A. Possibly so.   You
obviously think so.

You think that is true, do you not? - A. I think it
is true to a degree, yes. I do not think naturally
that everyone would walk down the tunnel.
                                            G. H. MACKRELL

Can I show you something you told Lord Justice Taylor
at page 79 of the transcript?

     THE CORONER:   Page 79, did you say?
     MR. KING:   Page 79, sir, starting at letter C.
     THE CORONER:   Do not read it out, Mr. Mackrell.
Just read it to yourself? - A. Yes.




                        /Q. MR. KING:   I just want.
                                   G.H. MACKRELL


      MR. KING: I just want you to look at the question
beginning: "The most important". Do you see those words,
just above letter 'C'? - A. Yes, I see those.
And do you see question and answer and if you read down
to just above letter 'D' where you gave your answer?
- A. Yes, indeed.
Do you accept that those were the questions and answers
you gave to Lord Justice Taylor? — A. Yes.
And do you stand by the answer you gave? - A. Yes.
I iust want to therefore bring out what you said exactly
on this matter. The first question which was put to you
was:
      "The most important lack of direction sign
      is the one from A-G through the wall to
      Pens 6 and 7."
And what answer did you give, just above letter 'C'?
A. "Yes sir".
Next question:
      "Because the natural result of that must
      be, must it not, that people will tend not
      to go to 6 and 7 unless they are positively
      encouraged so to do."
What answer did you give? - A. "I think that is t^e.
You normally find that the pens which are the south-west
pen and the central pen they fill and people move or ^
are moved by the Police along to the north-west pens.
 Therefore your answer to Lord Justice Taylor and Y°ur
 answer to us today is that you think that is true, that
 is to say the natural result of that must be that people
 will tend not to go to 6 and 7 unless they are positively
 encouraged so to do? - A. Yes sir.
 And the answer you also continued to give to Lord Justice
 Taylor was?
       "Normally you find that the pens which are
       the south-west pen and the central pen they
       fill and then people move and are moved by
       the Police along to the north-west pens."

 A. Yes.
 You were asked what you meant by that and you were asked
 "Through which gates did you mean?" and you indicated
 you meant the gate in the wall? - A. The radial gate, yes
A/
                                                                73


                                                G.H. MACKRELL


         Q. Not the radial gate, the gate in the wall? - A. Yes.

         Q. On the concourse? - A. Yes.
     B   Q. That is right. We are talking about the gate in the wall?
            - A. Indeed we are.
         Q. Do I take it from that evidence that you were anticipating,
            were you, in 1989, that for people to be encouraged to
            go to Pen 6 and 7 they would be encouraged by the Police
            to go through the gate in the concourse wall? - A. Yes.
         q . if as a fact there were nobody, be it Police or Stewards,
             positively encouraging people to 6 or 7, then it was
             purely a matter of chance whether they would get there
             via the gate in the wall? - A. If there was no one, yes.

         Q. As regards the radial gates which we know were at the
            back of the radial fences, they are at the back, aren't
            they, of the terrace? - A. Yes.
         Q. When you enter the terrace, and if necessary I can show
     D      you photographs but I am sure you are knowledgeable of
            this, when you enter the terrace as a spectator through
            the tunnel unless you look back to your left or right you
            don't immediately see the radial gate do you? - A. If you
            don't look back, no.
         Q. And if in fact the pen becomes filled with people, it is
            going to always be very difficult if you look back to
            see the radial gate, isn't it? - A. Yes.
         Q. So it is obvious and inevitable, isn't it, that once the
            central pens become full of people, those radial gates
            are not going to be an easy means of access into a
            side pen for anybody who is other than at the back of
            the pen. That is right, isn't it? - A. Yes.
         Q. So it would not surprise you, would it, if you had heard
            evidence which we have heard from spectators- who got on
            to the central pens, that they never realised there was
            a gate at the back which could have got them into a side
            pen. That does not surprise you? - A. Well I have not
            heard the evidence.
         Q. No, but it would not surprise you? - A. If you say so,
            no.
         Q. No, not if I "say so"? - A. If I understand what you say,
            yes.
         Q. It follows, doesn't it, that whoever had the responsibility,
            you say it was the Police, for the distribution of the fans
            on the Leppings Lane terraces, one of the factors you




     H
                                                              74



                                         G.H. MACKRELL


     have to take into account is that very fact I have just
     given you, that the radial fences at the back, the radial
     gate is at the back and that once those pens get full
     of people it is difficult for people who go downwards to
     either see or gain access to them. That is right? - A.
     Yes, there is also the tunnel of which they have come
     down.
Q. Oh I accept there is the tunnel, I am talking about the
   radial gates at the moment. So we have this situation,
   don't we as far as the 1989 semi-final goes, that anybody
   going through Turnstiles A-G when they enter it with a
   Leppings Lane standing ticket, has no body specifically
   there by which I mean either Steward or Police specifically
   there, to direct them in any particular way. That is
   right? - A. Not specifically.
Q. That the tunnel is directly in front of them to be seen
   very clearly and that once they get into the central pens
   and they are full of people, the means of access to the
   side pens by the radial gates is neither obvious nor
   easy to get to. That is right? - A. The radial gates,
   no.
Q. So those must be factors, mustn't it, that anybody who
   has responsibility for the crowd control and distribution
   of people on the West Terraces must take into account?
   - A. Yes.
Q. You have told us about a so-called system of people
   finding their own level, spectators. A spectator cannot
   find his own level, can he once he is in a central pen,
   if he neither knows nor cannot get to the radial gate
   at the back. That is right, isn't it? - A. No, because
   he has got the tunnel which he has travelled down.
Q.    You mean he hasto go backwards through   the people behind
     him through the tunnel? - A. Yes.
Q. If the people behind him are chock-a-block it is going
   to be difficult for him to do that, isn't it? - A. If
   the people behind him are chock-a-block, yes.
Q.    It is not going to be easy on any view, is it, for somebody
     once he is in the central pen and it has filled up to
     get out of it easily. That is right,isn't it? - A. If
     it has filled up it isokay to get out of it provided
     there are not other people coming into it.
Q. Yes, but if there are people still coming into it you
   are going to be in difficulty? - A. Yes, of course.
Q. So on itself a system of finding its own level carries
   a very obvious risk, doesn't it, that the people in the
   centre pens for example may find themselves in a position
   where they want to get out but can't. There is a risk
   of that? - A. There isa risk, yes.
                                                             75


                                             G.H. MACKRELL



              MR. PAYNE: I wonder if Mr. King could make it
        clear whether he is asking these questions with the
        benefit of hindsight in the light of everything that
        we know now, or whether he is asking them in the light
        of what was known and believed to be the case before
        the disaster?
              MR. KING: Sir, I am grateful for that little
        intervention. I have built up my questions very carefully ...

              MR. PAYNE: Yes, using the word - I don't mind
        interrupting and I don't apologise for it - using the
        word "is", speaking in the present tense all the time.
        That is why I interrupted.
              MR. KING: If my learned friend would wait, building
        up the factors which I indicated would have been known on
        the day. That is to say the factors as to layout; the
        factors as to directional signs or otherwise; the factors
        as to who had specific duties to do that one thing or
        the other sir. I have built it up very carefully sir.
              THE CORONER: Well you can ask the question whether
        that answer applies to the situation as it then was.
               MR. KING:   Can I do it in the following way sir?
              THE CORONER: Yes indeed, I am not trying to guide
        the specific wording.
q   .           MR. KING: I go through the factors which I have
        put   to you as giving rise to this risk. That is to say
        the   risk that anybody who gets on to the central pens
        may   find it very difficult to get out when he wants to
        and   he may want to get out because of the numbers in it.
              The factors I put to you were these. Factor no. 1
        was that anybody going through Turnstiles A-G with a
        Leppings Lane standing terrace ticket in 1989 as far as
        the means of access to the terrace goes, the obvious
        route in front of him was through the tunnel. That is
        a factor which is correct, isn't it? - A. It was one of
        the routes available to him.
Q. I said the "obvious route". That is correct, isn't it?
   - A. I am not competent to comment on that of that
   individual.
Q. I am going to press you on this Mr. Mackrell and this
   I repeat is not a criticism of you and therefore it is
   not a question of giving you warnings as to self­
   incrimination because it is not a criticism of you,
   but I want to know from your expertise as the Club
   Secretary as to what is obvious to somebody going through
   Turnstiles A-G?
                                                       76



                                       G.H. MACKRELL


      MR. CATCHPOLEs Mr. Mackrell is a person who knows
this ground extremely well. He is being asked a question
what would be in the mind of a supporter coming through.
I am sure the jury are quite able to make that assessment.
We know the tunnel is one route. To actually keep asking
Mr. Mackrell whether it is the obvious route is not a
fair question to put to him.
      MR. KING: With respect, sir, I was asked to go
over unfortunately my cross-examination to-date in order
to discover whether or not the risk I identified was one
which would be obvious on the day, not with the benefit
of hindsight, and if I have to go over those factors by
reference to them individually and the first factor was
the positioning of the tunnel and the obvious route on
to the terraces.
      THE CORONER: I think, Mr. King, we are getting
into some hot water here I think.
      What you have to establish is whether that was a
primary route down the tunnel. We know all about the
signs. You have established that.
      Secondly, I have forgotten the other point, it has
just escaped from my mind, but once you have established
the factors which are indisputable in the sense that they
are structural matters namely the tunnel, the signing,
the gates at the back, you can then I think, and this I
think is correct, you can then say to him, on the
15th April 1989 was the risk of whatever it is that you
want to ask, obvious to you?
      MR. ISAACS:    Obvious to him.
      THE CORONER: That is what I have just said,
obvious to you, and he can then, and normally I would
have allowed because he is the Club Secretary and after
all has the major responsibility in that sense, I think
it is right that he can answer that question.
      You can then if you wish, it is up to you entirely,
although I don't think it is terribly relevant, is to
ask him whether in the light of circumstances since that
day the obviousness or otherwise of that particular
situation has changed.
      MR. KING: Sir I, for obvious reasons, am not
concerning myself with what has changed since the day.
      THE CORONER:    Indeed.   I am sure that is right
actually.
                                                          77


                                        G.H. MACKRELL



           MR. KING: And sir I have tried very carefully to
     go and to work my questions up to, I did not go straight
     into the question, on the factors which were apparent
     on the day, but sir I take your point.
Q. Mr. Mackrell, having regard to the positioning of the
   tunnel to anybody going through on the day; having
   regard to the known fact on the day of the 15th of April
   that there was no obvious direction either by sign or
   human agency to direct fans through the gateway in the
   concourse wall to the side pens; having regard to the
   smallness of the sign which was available to direct
   people to the right, that is a known factor on the day,
   isn't it? - A. Yes.
Q. Having regard to the known factor on the day that the
   radial gates at the back of the central pens which was
   a means   of   access to the side pens were at the back,
   that is the factor I am putting to you now. Right? -
   A. Yes.
Q. Having regard to the further factor that anybody entering
   the tunnel would go through an entrance, that is the
   tunnel entrance which would bring them not at the back
   but some distance downwards on to the terrace, that is
   right if you look at the route through the tunnel? — A. Yes.

Q.    Having regard to thefact that once that pen becomes
     filled with people the back radial gate is neither easy to
     see nor easy to get to is a fact known on the day, isn't
     it? - A. Yes.
Q.    Having regard to thefact to get out of the pen back
     through the tunnel is not easy if there are people already
     still coming in. That is a fact known on the day. Yes?
     - A. I don't know that was a fact.




                            Q. You have told us
                                           G. H. MACKRELL

You have told us if people are still coining in it is
difficult to get out back through the tunnel? - A. It
depends on the numbers.

Yes, of course, but taking all those factors together on
the day, those known factors on the day, on the 15th of
April, wasn't it therefore a risk which would be obvious
from those factors - only the risk I am putting to you
for the moment - that anybody in the central pens who
wanted to get out because they thought it was too full
for their own comfort, would find it very difficult to do
so?   There was a risk of that? - A. If all those
possibilities are correct, yes.

Those factors I have put to you, apart from the factor of
people still coming in down the tunnel, aren't
possibilities, they were actual fact on the day? - A.
Well, I have no...

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I apologise to my learned friend.
It is annoying when people are on their feet.   There was
one factor in particular with which this witness has not
agreed.   He put it was a known fact there would be no-
one directing them.   The only factor Mr. Mackrell has
come out with was there was no-one from the club given
the specific need to direct.   My learned friend put to
this witness a passage from the Taylor Inquiry transcript
which was his understanding of what would happen.   That
is an important factor and it is not one with which this
witness has said there was no person directing and it is
crucial to what my learned friend has said.

     MR. KING:   I agree, sir.   I agree entirely:

I put to you all those factors taken together on the 15th
of April, and include in those factors for the moment
that there was nobody directing anybody to the side pens.
All right?   Put that in your considerations. - A. Yes.

If it weren't the case, if there was someone directing to
the side pens, the whole of this will collapse I accept.
Assuming there is no-one directing people to the side
pens as they enter A to G, there is that known risk on
the 15th of April from all those factors, that anybody
who is in the central pens, who wants to get out because
they are full, is going to find it very difficult so to
do. - A. If all those factors occurred, yes.

     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, I am very, very sorry to
interrupt my learned friend.   I didn't wish to do so,
but I understood him to be asking these questions with a
view to asking this witness whether this risk was known
to him on the day.   Not dealing with this matter in a
theoretical sense, going through eight or nine various
                                                               79
                                                G. H. MACKRELL

     factors that would have been going through Mr. Mackrell's
     mind at the time.   However, if he is intending, having
     put these eight or nine theoretical factors to
     Mr. Mackrell on the basis that Mr. Mackrell considered
     there to be this risk, and it was obvious to
     Mr. Mackrell, then I would like him to do so.
     Otherwise, the understanding which I had as to what you
     had been saying to my learned friend as to how he was to
     put these questions, has just been ignored.

          MR. KING:   I will try and help my learned friend:

Q. It follows from what you are saying, Mr. Mackrell,   that
   it would be crucial to your assessment of the risk   which
   I have put to you, that there should be somebody -   to
   take up my learned friend's point - directing fans   to the
   side pens on the concourse? - A. Yes.

Q. As I understand your evidence, that would be vital to
   ensuring that the risk which I have described to you
   didn't occur? - A. I'm sorry...?

Q. The risk that people who got on to the pens couldn't get
   out because of the difficulty of either seeing the radial
   gates, getting back down the tunnel... - A. That requires
   an even distribution, yes.

Q. Crucial to that even distribution, as Club Secretary,
   what you anticipated on the 15th of April was that there
   should be somebody on the concourse directing people to
   the side pens? - A. Yes.

Q.   As you understood it on the day, you expected that to be
     a Police matter? - A. The actually stewarding of the
     supporters on the terrace was a Police matter, yes.

Q. Also ensuring even distribution?     That is, getting to
   the side pens? - A. Yes.

Q.    A system    of self-levelling,  if Ican put it that way,
     requires in your experience very careful monitoring
     because of all those factors I have put to you? - A. Yes.

Q. Just some questions of fact.   Can I just turn your
   attention to page 14 of the Green Guide again?   You were
   asked about whether or not there had been a contingency
   plan under the little paragraph v at the top of the page?
   - A. Yes.
                                                           80
                                               G. H. MACKRELL

Q. Specifically a contingency for, dealing with letter "c":

        "coping with exceptionally large numbers of
        spectators arriving at the ground;"

   - A. Yes.

Q. You gave an answer by reference to the fact it was an
   all-ticket game? - A. That is correct.

Q. As a matter of fact, do I take it from that that there
   wasn't in fact such a contingency plan, as a contingency
   plan? - A. Other than it being an all-ticket match?

Q. Yes.   For the 15th of April, 1989, that is, the semi­
   final of this disaster, as a matter of fact is it correct
   there wasn't a contingency plan in existence for coping
   with... - A. Well, the contingency plan was that there
   was an all-ticket game and to estimate that 54,000
   spectators would arrive.

Q. I don't want to press you too much on it but that is not
   really a plan?   That is just a fact? - A. Well, I think
   one becomes the other.

Q. Apart from that there was no other contingency plan for
   coping with exceptionally large numbers of spectators? -
   A. Well, no, because otherwise the spectators would be
   turning up without tickets and we had no reason to accept
   that was the case.

Q. What about for coping...   You are entitled to refuse to
   answer questions where you think I am criticising you
   unfairly, or criticising you at all.    It is not meant to
   be a criticism of you, I just want to find facts.     Was
   there factually any contingency plan in existence for
   coping with exceptionally large numbers of spectators
   arriving at the ground at the same time? - A. No, because
   all the turnstiles that were there were in operation with
   the exception of the ones at the Penis tone Road end.

Q. I just want to know as a matter of fact. - A. That is
   correct.

Q. Can I then deal with the situation on the day?   You
   understood on the day that some 300 to 400 people had
   entered through Gate C?   That was the original
   information you understood from Mr. Lock? - A. That's
   correct.

Q. The learned Coroner put it to you that it was not until
   you reached the Control Box that you realised that much
   larger numbers had in fact obtained entry? - A. That's
   right.
                                                                  81
                                                   G. H. MACKRELL

Q. Was it only then that you discovered that Gate C had been
   opened for a period on one occasion for about five
   minutes for people to come through? - A. No, not at that
   time.

Q. You didn't even discover that then? - A. No.

Q. When did you first discover that Gate C had been opened
   and on at least one of the occasions it had been opened
   for about five minutes to let people in just before three
   o'clock? - A. The following morning.

Q. To be fair to you and so no-one accuses me of misleading
   you, would you just bear with me until I get my timings.
   It is now known in 1991 that Gate C had been opened at
   about 14.48, that is twelve minutes to three, for a short
   time - not more than about thirty seconds.    Then it had
   been opened again at about 14.52, that is eight minutes
   to, and stayed open until just after five to - some five
   minutes.   We now know, because we have seen the video,
   we can see the large numbers of people going through in
   that period.   However, that fact, that large number of
   people came through in that five minutes, was not known
   to you until the next morning? - A. That s correct.

Q.   It wasn't divulged to you in the Police Control Box when
     you got there? - A. No, it wasn't.    I think I have
     already given evidence as to that situation, as to what
     happened in the Police Control Box.

Q.   I also take it from your answers to my learned friend
     Mr. Payne that you didn't regard it as your job to
     monitor - and I mean you personally - to monitor the West
     Leppings Lane terraces as far as looking to see whether
     one pen was more full than the other?   That wasn't
     particularly your job? - A. No.

Q. Can I just show you C.326A photograph?

          MR. KING:   Sir, it has been put to me by
     Mr. Catchpole, and I accept, that the witness is looking
     a bit tired.   I am quite willing for a break, sir.

          THE WITNESS:      No, I am OK.

Q.        THE CORONER:      I am more than happy to break? - A.
     No, I am fine.

          MR. KING:      Sir, we have been going a long time.

          THE CORONER:   Yes, let's break for a good ten
     minutes and then we will carry on.   You are right.

                         (Short adjournment)
                                                           82
                                                G. H. MACKRELL

Q.        MR. KING:    I was asking you, Mr. Mackrell, to
     look at photograph C326A.   That is a photograph which
     shows the state of the West Terraces on 15th April 1989
     at 2.59 p.m.   You can see can't you, Mr. Mackrell, on
     that photograph the centre pens and near the foreground
     of the photograph pen 6? - A. Yes.

Q. On the photograph it can be seen that there are many
   wide spaces in pen 6 at that time? - A. Yes.

Q. Do I take it from your evidence that you yourself, from
   whatever position you were looking, did not yourself
   observe this factor that pen 6 had these  large spaces
   and the centre pens clearly didn't? - A.  No, I wasn't
   there at 2.59.

Q. Had you noticed it earlier? - A. No.

Q. Although this was at 2.59 I don't think there is any
   suggestion that pen 6 had emptied in any way? - A. No.

Q. Up to 2.59.  Looking at that photograph, from your
   experience as Club Secretary, that clearly demonstrates
   on the face of it, first that there is not an even
   distribution of fans at that time on the terraces, is
   there? - A. No.

Q.   That is correct, isn't it? - A. Correct.

Q.   If that is the picture one sees, I accept that it is an
     "if" because you didn't see it, but if one does see it
     like that, that is obvious, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. It is also obvious if one sees it like this, that the
   system of their fans finding their own level into
   particular pens certainly has not worked as far as even
   distribution goes? - A. I was not aware at that time
   how many fans were outside waiting to come in.

Q. No, but as far as their evenly distributing themselves
   up to 2.59, they clearly had not evenly distributed
   themselves up to 2.59, had they? - A. No.

Q. Given the factors which I need not go through again but
I have already been through with you before the break, it
is right, isn't it, that you would agree that if you have
radial fences as we do and did in 1989, on the Leppings
Lane Terrace, you do have to consider, even if you don't
know individual numbers, you do have to consider the
crowding in each individual pen, don't you? - A. You have
to consider the number of people in each individual pen,
yes.
                                         G. H. MACKRELL

Whoever is responsible for the distribution of the
crowd on that pen, you have to have some system for
looking at the individual pens and considering them
separately from the others, don't you? - A. But the
pens weren't individual pens, they were one large area.

Yes, but for the radial gates at the back which you
have agreed with me, we have been through all the
factors earlier on .... - A. Yes, but you have made the
point in relation to the other pen, pen 1, where again
which is crowded to that degree, that was not in
relation to a radial fence.

Yes, but the effect of those radial fences with the
gates at the back was that given the factors I have
been through with you - and if necessary, although I
don't want to go through them again, I will - that the
individual person who gets into the pen, once it has
filled up, the likelihood is he is going to have great
difficulty getting out, and you agreed with me? - A. I
agreed with that on the basis that there were more
people seeking to come in.

And on the basis that, of course, no one was outside on
the concourse directing people to the side pens? - A.
Yes.

That is why I put to you therefore that people who get
in there, the tendency being to stay there, I am not
saying you have to have specific numbers for the
moment, but you have got to look at each individual pen
as a separate pen, haven't you? - A. In relation to
that, yes.

You were asked questions as to the closing of the
tunnel gates and you had no knowledge of that? - A.
That is correct.

Were you at the 1988 semi-final? - A. I was.

There has been a body of evidence from spectators and,
indeed, a Police Officer, that at some stage in the
1988 semi-final, the tunnel gates facing those who
enter from A-G were shut, and fans were directed to the
sides.  There has been a body of evidence to that
effect.  Did you know that ...? - A. I am aware of that
evidence, yes.

Did you know of that happening in 1988? - A. No.

But in 1988, as I understand it, it was the same as
1989, it was the Police who were in charge of the crowd
distribution on the terraces? - A. Correct.
                                         G. H. MACKRELL

Evidence to the effect that the Police were directing
fans to the side pens, in the way I have described to
you, would be consistent with your evidence of what you
would have expected the Police to do to achieve
distribution of crowd control? - A. Yes.

          Cross-Examined by MISS SINCLAIR

Just two matters, Mr. Mackrell.  You said this morning
that since you came on line, as it were, as Club
Secretary at the end of 1986, nobody had raised with
you the matter of the gangways, that is to say the lack
of gangways on the Leppings Lane Terrace? - A. That is
correct, yes.

You may or may not be aware - and I am asking if you
are aware - that in 1979 there was a minuted decision
by the Working Party not to have gangways on that
terrace, and a 10 per cent reduction in the capacity of
the terrace was made to compensate.  Did you know about
that? - A. I have been made aware of that since the
events, yes.

You would have known if you had been in Court when Mr.
Seamen from the Fire Service was giving his evidence,
because he told us that.  Given that, are you surprised
that nobody during your time as Secretary mentioned
that matter to you? - A. Not really because there had
not really been a cause for it to be raised to me.

Given that the decision had been made? - A. Yes.

The second matter is this: Eastwood and Partners.  Now
Eastwood's would carry out annual inspections of the
Ground; they would carry out testing of crush barriers
each year; and they would report to the Club; they
would provide Certificates to the Club.  That is
correct, isn't it? - A. That is correct, yes.

That was because the Club had an obligation under the
Safety Certificate to provide Engineers' Certificates
on those matters? - A. Yes.

Then Eastwood, or a representative from Eastwood and
Partners, would normally be present at the annual
inspections by the Working Party of the Ground? - A.
Yes.

Shortly after you became Club Secretary those became
annual inspections, I should say - they had been
biannual.   Similarly, there had been a change in the
name of the Working Party; it was known as the Advisory
Group by the time you were involved with it? - A. That
is correct.
                                            G. H. MACKRELL

So Eastwood's would normally be present at the
inspections and that was by invitation only. Were you
aware of that? - A. Yes, I was.  Neither the Club or
Eastwood's are standing members of the Advisory Group.

Is that the reason why neither Eastwood's on their own
behalf, or as representatives of the Club, or any other
representative of the Club, attended meetings of the
Working Party, apart from the inspections? - A. The
Club and Eastwood's were specifically excluded from the
meetings of the Advisory Group.

Other than that involvement which you have outlined for
us, Eastwood's would advise and act as and when they
were asked to do so by the Club? - A. That is correct.

We have had this afternoon one example of their
function, the correspondence from Mr. Kirby on his new
form of exploding fence, as it were? - A. Yes.

You passed that on to Eastwood's in the expectation
that they in turn would pass it on to the Working
Party.  Does that summarise what you said correctly? -
A. It was my predecessor who received the
correspondence, and if it was necessary passed it on to
the Advisory Group.  Eastwood's would obviously
negotiate, particularly on technical matters, with the
Advisory Group, on our behalf.

Indeed, but Eastwood's were the conduit for any
proposals which were coming from you to the Working
Party? - A. Yes, that is correct.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, I have a lot of questions
written down.  I was wondering if you wanted me to
start today?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, start.  It depends how long
you are but we won't go on for very long.

           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Mr. Mackrell, you told us that Chief Superintendent
Mole was the Police Officer who was in overall command
at the 1987 semi-final, so presumably he would decide
there was to be a delay of the kick-off that year, is
that right? - A. Yes, in conjunction with the
representatives of the Football Association.

Yes, but it would be his decision? - A. The Police
Commander.

We have been told that it is possible to admit 1,000
spectators per minute per turnstile at an all ticket
                                         G. H. MACKRELL

match. Would you agree with those figures? - A. It can
be done, yes.

Would you say it is absolutely vital that only a
manageable number of fans are allowed immediately in
front of the turnstiles, that there should never be
excessive congestion in that area? - A. Obviously it is
advisable.  I have no technical knowledge as to the
optimum numbers.

Would you say that if there was congestion in that area
it would actually slow down the progress of the fans
through the turnstiles, rather than quicken up the
pace? - A. It may.  I am not really competent to answer
that question.

Would you mind turning to page 20 of the Green Guide,
paragraph 44, please? Would you read that out, please?
- A. Yes:

     "Where admission to a ground or parts of it is
     controlled by turnstiles, these, by their number
     and location, control not only the rate of
     admission but, to a large extent, the dispersal of
     spectators within a ground to their particular
     sections.  Turnstiles should be of such numbers as
     to admit spectators at a rate whereby no unduly
     large crowds are kept waiting for admission and
     yet at no faster rate than the arrangements for
     distributing spectators within the ground permit."

Thank you.  So when fans come in via the turnstiles it
not only gives the rate of flow of those fans, but it
also allows for dispersal, doesn't it? - A. Yes.

So using that method you would not find a large mass of
people heading in one direction, would you? - A. You
should not do, no.

Would you read paragraph 45 as well, please? - A. Yes:

     "Dangerous overcrowding can be caused if
     spectators are able to force their way into a
     ground already full to capacity by scaling or
     breaking through boundary walls or fences or the
     gates in them. To avoid this danger such walls,
     fences and gates should be of appropriate height
     and strength, and hand- or foot-holds which might
     assist climbing should be avoided.  They should be
     regularly inspected."

Thank you, so would you agree that paragraph is saying
that spectators should not be allowed in via a gate,
normally, that that is something to be avoided?
                                                         87
                                              G. H. MACKRELL

          THE CORONER:   No, the paragraph was saying you
     should not allow them to climb in.  I think what you
     can ask is, does this paragraph say that you should not
     allow unauthorised entry.

Q. Is that what it says? - A. Yes, and I understand it to
   be that.

Q. That is what you understand that paragraph to mean? -
   A. Yes.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Would you accept that turnstile
     entry at a large football stadium, such as
     Hillsborough, is the only safe means of entry for the
     reasons that were stated in paragraph 44? - A. I think
     it is the best method of entry.

Q. Particularly for a large football stadium? - A. I don't
   know of any other system that is in operation for that
   number of people.

Q. Do you know that the exit routes have to be taken into
   consideration when the safe capacity is worked out by
   the engineer? - A. Yes.

Q. And therefore if an exit route is lost in any way, for
   instance if the tunnel were blocked off by way of
   doors, you are losing an exit, and so naturally the
   capacity on the terrace at that area would have to be
   reduced accordingly, wouldn't it? - A. Yes, naturally.

Q. Are you aware that once the radial fences were
   installed, with the radial gates, that consideration
   was given to the control of those separate areas; the
   fences that were created needed some sort of control
   there? - A. I am sorry, can you clarify that point?

Q. If it was an open terrace as it was before 1981, there
   was not the same necessity for control along the
   terrace, because they had the whole area to spread out
   in, but with the pens if the gates were not easily
   visible there could be dangerous overcrowding in a
   particular pen, couldn't there? - A. Well, the radial
fences were put in to the satisfaction of the Officer
   Working Party, and that was prior to my time so when I
   arrived at the company, obviously seeing that the
   situation had been installed to the agreement of the
   Officer Working Party I think it was natural to assume
   that they were happy with the situation.



              /Q. Do you know why
                                                                    88
                                                        G. H. MACKRZLL


    Q.    Do you know why the radial fences were installed? -
         A. To preclude lateral movement on the terrace.
B
    Q. And to allow for greater control by the Police, was
       it not? - A. That is as I understand it from reading
       the file, yes.
               THE CORONER:   May I just ask one question?
    Q.    You did not know that at the time? - A. No.
    Q.    You learned it? - A. No, I made the point and Idid
         qualify it by saying that.
    Q.      MRS. McBRIEN: Were you aware that the Officer
         Working Party had met and had agreed that after
         installing the radial fences, that the radial gates
         were to be under the control of Police Officers?
              THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, you must rephrase
         that. I know what you are getting at but what you
         have got to say, if I may say so, because it is not
         agreed by everybody, does he know that Mr. Seamen for
         the Fire Service and, if you wish, Mr. Butler for the
         Building Surveyors' Department understood that the
         radial gates were to be under Police control or at
         least under Police manning.
              MR. CATCHPOLE: With respect to Mrs. McBrien the
         words she used are those which are actually minuted.
              THE CORONER: That is true. If she uses the
         word "control" then I cannot complain.
              MR. CATCHPOLE: Yes, she asked whether they were
         under the control of the Police and that is very
         different to the manning.

              MR. PAYNE: Actually this is very similar to
         many of the questions asked by Mr. King dealing with
         a hypothetical matter. I do not mind if Mrs. McBrien
         asks this particular question but it is very similar
         to a lot that have been already allowed.

              THE CORONER: Yes, carry on, Mrs. McBrien. I
         think I was unfair to you because you did use the
         word "control" and I was expecting you to say
         "manning".

    Q.        MRS. McBRIEN: Were you aware of any meeting
         taking place in connection with the radial gates? -
         A. I was not aware of meetings at that time.




H
                                                           89
                                              G. H. MACKRELL


Q. So you had not seen this in operation at all? - A. I
   had seen it in operation, yes.

Q. You had? - A. You asked the question about the actual
   meetings.
Q. So you have seen radial gates being under the control
   of Police Officers on a terrace, have you? - A. Yes.
Q. When was that? - A. This was the normal practise of
   stewarding the terracing at the Leppings Lane end.
Q. Can you be more specific please? - A. Every match
   that was operated at Hillsborough whilst Leppings
   Lane was in use from my time of joining the company
   from December 1986 to the events of 15th April 1989
   had been operated in that manner.

Q. Does this relate to the League matches and the Semi
   Finals that have taken place? - A. It relates to all
   matters at which Leppings Lane terrace was utilised.
Q. That is including the 1987 and 1988 Semi Final
   matches? - A. All matches, yes.
       MRS. McBRIEN: I am sorry for the pause but I
  have so much written down.
       THE CORONER: I think what we will do is that we
  are going to stop. That will give you all evening to
  get your questions sorted out and then you can start
  again in the morning.
       MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, thank you.

       THE CORONER: Ten o'clock tomorrow morning.
  Ladies and gentlemen, I will see you tomorrow. Do
  you want to leave us? Mr. Mackrell, you can leave us
  too and it is the same rule about not talking about
  the evidence.
       (The Jury and the Witness retired from Court)
       THE CORONER: Tomorrow, the witnesses are Mr.
  Mackrell followed by Mr. Lock, followed by Dr.
  Nicholson if we get to him.

       MR. KING: Sir, could I be reminded who is
  listed for Friday?

       THE CORONER: Nobody is listed for Friday
  because we do not know at what rate we are
  progressing. My recollection is that the order is
  Mr. Mackrell, Mr. Lock, Dr. Nicholson, Dr. Eastwood
                                             G. H. MACKRELL


and then   I can tell you who the other three are.
They are   Sergeant Goddard, PC Pritchard, and PC Ryan.
They are   not necessarily in that order but those are
the next   three. After that I cannot remember.
     MR. KING: They will not mean much to my clerk,
sir, but they mean something to me.
     THE CORONER:    Do you know who they are, these
people?
     MR. KING:    Yes, sir.
     THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, this gives you the
opportunity to sort the paperwork out and we will
press on tomorrow.
    (The Inquests were adjourned until ten o'clock
                the following morning)
