                                                                                            M I R . 15



     OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised                                     Number
                                                                                                                       })b-
     Title                       >     CX-         f O <CS ^      'bA rgO n       g>€A*Vg=H              ‘                >
      *hc)yde source and any document number if relevant)      r _f~~VgT] ^               \\S"

     Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                          Receiver
//


                                                                                                                             Indexer
     Document registered/indexed as indicated

     No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                      Statement Reader
     Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                          Jndexer
     Indexed as indicated

     No(s) of actions raised

     Examined - further action to be taken                                                                              'M         SIO




     Further action No(s)                                                                                                    Indexer


     When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
  HER M A J E S T Y ’S COR O NER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                      (WEST DISTRICT)



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                  STADIUM DISASTER

               ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



              INQUEST   INTO THE DEATH OF

               B A R R Y SIDNE Y BENNETT




                         Before

DR. S.L.    POPPER,   LL.B,    B.MED.Sci,   B M , B S , MRCGP

               (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                              At

              The Medico -Le ga l Centre,
                   Wate ry Street,
                     Sheffield.

                              On

                        4th M a y 1990




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Offi ci al Shorthand Writers,
      55, Quee n Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:




MR.    D. FRASER           Hillsborough Solicitors'   Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.      CALLAGHAN         Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.      GREGORY           Sheffield City Council

MISS      THORPE           Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR.    P. ISAACS           Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable,   South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                                  INDEX
                    A
                                                          Page


           OPENING BY THE CORONER                           1   .
           PROFE SSOR ALAN USHER Called
                    D
                        By THE CORONER                      2   .
           POLICE CONSTABLE GILLIAN PARKS Called

                        By THE CORONER                      4.
                        Cross-Examined by MR.   FRASER      7.

            DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                        By THE CORONER                      8   .


                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        Friday.   4th May,   1990


                                         THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                                               BARRY SIDNEY BENNETT
                    B
                                MR. FRASER:    Sir, the evidence you will hear now
                           relates to Barry Sidney Bennett.    Sir, Mr. Bennett's
                           father and brother are in court.    The practice which
                           represents them is a member of my group and I appear on
                           their behalf in the usual way as agent through the
                           steering committee.

                                THE CORONER:    Good afternoon.    I will outline
                           for you what we are going to do so you can follow the
                           sequence of the evidence because it is easier to know
                           what is coming next, so to speak.    First of all I am
                           going to read to you the evidence which was taken on
                           the 18th of April, 1989 in this court when I dealt with
                           the release of the body of Barry.    Then I will tell
                    D      you about the blood alcohol levels and following that
                           Professor Usher will give evidence regarding the
                           pathology.

                                When he has completed his evidence we will be
                           turning to the West Midlands Police Officers who will
                           present a summary of evidence.   It is done in two
                    E      parts.  The second part is to do with the visual
                           evidence which is done by Inspector Layton.   He first
                           of all describes it from over here and gives us all the
                           references and the numbers of the photographs and one
                           thing and another, which you may find a little bit
                           confusing.   He then comes round here and demonstrates
                           what he has been talking about and it then becomes very
                           much easier to understand.

                                So we are going to start with what happened on the
                           18th of April, 1989.   On that occasion Neil Anthony
                           Parkin, acting Coroner's Officer said:

                                  "The body which is the subject of this inquest has
                                  been identified to PC 1752 Thomas of the South
                                  Yorkshire Police as that of Barry Sidney Bennett
                    G             by Ian Johnson, his friend.

                                  He was 26 years of age having been born on the
                                  26th of April, 1962 at Anfield, Liverpool.

                                  He was a d i v o rced man and he lived at
                                                      Liverpool.

                H
                                                    -   1 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                               He was a seaman by occupation.

                               He died at Hillsborough football ground following
                               an incident there on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.
                               PC Thomas caused the body to be removed to the
                               Medico Legal Centre and there he identified it to
                               Detective Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently
                    B          identified the same body to Professor Usher.    It
                               is the family wish that the body should be
                               cre mate d."

                          I then signed the appropriate forms and adjourned it.
                          On that same day, the 18th, we re-opened it and added a
                          further sentence:

                               "Further information has come to light in that            the
                               deceased was found to be dead at the Northern
                               General Hospital on 15.4.89 and not at
                               Hillsbo ro ug h as stated above."

                               Then I adjourned it.

                               I then wrote and Phillip Bennett on the 27th of
                    D     April signed a form which I sent to check that we had
                          got names and sp ellings right.  In f a c t we had made a
                          mistake, we had put                  J     but it should
                          have been                               Dut the rest of
                          the information was correct on the form.

                               Dr. Forrest estimated the blood alcohol and he
                    g     gave the evidence regarding this two weeks ago.   In
                          the case of Barry the level which he measured was
                          78 mg/100 ml.

                                       PROFESSOR ALAN USHER Called

                                             By THE C O R O N E R :

                        Q. Professor Usher, you are Alan Usher, Professor of
                           Forensic Medicine and Home Office Pathologist here in
                           Sheffield? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. You did a post mortem on somebody          identified toyou   as
                           Barry Bennett? - A. Yes.

                        Q. He also had a number which was? -          A. 88.
                    G
                        Q. Professor Usher, would you be kind enough to tell us
                           what your post mortem findings are? - A. Yes, sir.
                           The body I examined was that of a middle aged man with
                           light brown hair, 169 cm in height and weighing 68 kg,
                           that is just under 11 stones.


                H
                                                -   2 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             The external and internal appearances were typical of
                             those from traumatic asphyxia.   There was no
                             significant mark of violence about the body.

                             I formed the impression that this man was in reasonable
                             health for his age and had an average expectation of
                             life.    There was a smell of drink when I opened the
                    B        stomach.   We already know that that was in the
                             seventies, I think, which represents perhaps three
                             pints of ordinary bitter.

                             It depends, Professor Usher, to a certain extent on
                             body weight and... - A. It does.   It is of that order.
                             In other words, not a great deal of drink at all.    I
                             give the cause of death as traumatic asphyxia.    That
                             means that this man died because his body was
                             compressed in such a way he was unable to expand his
                             chest.   He could not breathe and because of that he
                             was unable to supply oxygen to the tissues and he died.

                        5.   Would he have suffered for any length of time? - A.
                             Once the chest becomes fixed absolutely and they cannot
                             move it in or out at all then they lose consciousness
                    D        very quickly in a matter of seconds, certainly between
                             ten and twenty seconds and though he would not die for
                             four to six minutes after that he would be completely
                             unaware of what was happening.

                        Q. Professor Usher, there is one very small point I ought
                           to check with you.   You have described this 26 years
                    E      old as a middle aged man.   I think some 26 year olds
                           might... - A. It depends how old I get, sir, I keep
                           a l t e r i n g . ..

                        Q. May we reclassify him as a young man? -                 A. Yes.   I
                           think I must have misread that as 36.

                                  MR.   FRASER:   Sir, some 36 years           old men might not
                             be happy   to be called middle aged!

                                  THE CORONER:    Indeed!   That is why I thought we
                             ought to correct it and make sure we are talking about
                             a young man.

                                  MR. FRASER:        I have no questions,          sir.

                    G             MR. LIMB:     No questions,        sir.

                                  MR.   CATCHPOLE:    No questions,         sir.

                                  THE CORONER:        Professor Usher,         you did twenty
                             post mortems?

                                  PROFESSOR USHER:          Yes,   sir.
                H
                                                       -   3 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
     THE CORONER:    This is in fact the last case in
which you will be appearing before me in respect of the
Hillsborough cases?

     PROFESSOR USHER:     Yes.

     THE CORONER:    I want to take the opportunity of
saying to you firstly how very grateful I am on my own
behalf and also on behalf of all the families that you
undertook this task, that you did it so quickly and so
efficiently, as indeed did many of your colleagues.

     On a more personal note I would like to say that
you will remember, of course, that I contacted you on
the 15th.    I spoke to Doreen, your wife, and we met
here and you accompanied me to the temporary mortuary
and I very much appreciated then your support, indeed
as I have done on other occasions.    Thank you very
much indeed.

     MR. FRASER:   Sir, may I, on behalf of the
steering committee and my lay clients, offer our
combined thanks to Professor Usher for the sensitive
way he has dealt with the families that he has been
obliged to come into contact with over the last twelve
months, sir, the help and support he has given them
over what has been a very difficult period for them.
It has been very much appreciated.   Thank you, sir.

     PROFESSOR USHER:     Thank you.

       POLICE CONSTABLE GILLIAN PARKS Called

                   By THE C O R O N E R :

     THE WITNESS:   I am Gillian Parks,     a Police
Constable of the West Midlands Police.

Yes, Officer. - A. At about 0850 hours on Saturday,
15th April, 1989, Mr. Sidney Phillip Bennett saw his
son Barry Sidney Bennett leave the family home,
together with Kevin Carroll, Ian Johnston, Brian
Wil liam Hutton and Jackie Costello.   It was their
intention to attend the FA semi-final match at the
Hillsborough Stadium that day.    They travelled by
private car, arriving in Sheffield at approximately
1420 hours.    They parked the car in a side street and
walked to the stadium.

They joined the crowd of people waiting to gain
entrance to the stadium at the Leppings Lane turnstile
and Ian Johnston, Jackie Costello and Brian Hutton left
Barry and Kevin Carroll as they had tickets for
                        different parts of the stadium.   Barry and Kevin
                        Carroll had tickets for the West Stand terraces.

                        Kevin Carroll saw the outer perimeter gates open twice
                        and on the second occasion he was carried through these
                        gates with the force of the crowd towards the
                        turnstiles.   Due to the crowd Kevin Carroll became
                    B   separated from Barry and did not see him again.

                        At approximately 1455 hours Kevin Carroll heard a
                        police officer shout that the gates were open and saw a
                        gate to the right of the turnstiles open - Gate C - and
                        he entered the stadium by this gate.   Kevin Carroll
                        went into enclosure 3.

                    C   Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
                        terracing Dr. Peter James Marsh who had attended the
                        match as a spectator, left his seating position in the
                        north Stand to give assistance to the injured on the
                        pitch.  Dr. Marsh went to the Spion Kop end of the
                        pitch near to the North Stand where he saw a man being
                        carried on a hoarding.
                    D   Dr. Marsh examined the man and could not detect any
                        pulse or breathing.   The man's pupils were fixed and
                        dilated.  Dr. Marsh was joined by an unidentified
                        female nurse and shortly afterwards Dr. Marsh
                        accompanied the man in an ambulance to the Northern
                        General Hospital.   Dr. Marsh continued his treatment
                        during the journey to the hospital.
                    E   On arrival at the Northern General Hospital Dr. Marsh
                        states that the man was still not breathing and he had
                        no pulse.   Dr. Marsh states that the man was dead and
                        saw him transferred to a side room.   He did not
                        formally certify death.

                        Sir, it will be seen from Dr. Marsh's initial statement
                    F   that he details the description of the casualty and
                        recalls him wearing a red Liverpool "Candy" top and
                        blue jeans.  Extensive research has established that
                        Barry Sidney Bennett was the only deceased person at
                        the Northern General Hospital who was wearing a red
                        Liverpool "Candy" top and blue jeans and also fits the
                        description and age given by Dr. Marsh.   Dr. Marsh has
                        viewed facial and clothing photographs of Barry but he
                    G   is unable to identify him as a person he treated.

                        Mr. James Wardrope was the consultant in charge of the
                        Accident and Emergency Department at the Northern
                        General Hospital on Saturday, 15th April, 1989.   He
                        attempted to sort out patients arriving at the hospital
                        into various categories.   From hospital records there

                H
                                             -   5 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
was no evidence to show that Barry received
resuscitation at the hospital.

At about 1600 hours that day Dr. Janet Rosemary Doore
attended the orthopaedic plaster room at the Northern
General Hospital where she certified death on a number
of persons, one of whom was Barry.

Later the same day, Police Constable William Thomas
attended the hospital and escorted Barry by ambulance
to the gymnasium at the Hillsborough Stadium where a
temporary mortuary had been set up.

At 0035 hours on Sunday, 16th April, 1989, Mr. Ian
Johnson identified the body of his friend Barry Sidney
Bennett to Police Constable Thomas at the temporary
mortuary in the gymnasium.

Later the same morning Police Constable Thomas escorted
Barry here to the Medico Legal Centre where he
confirmed the identification to Detective Constable
Weigold.

On Sunday, 16th April, 1989, following the
identification by Detective Weigold, Professor Alan
Usher carried out an autopsy and submitted a report
giving cause of death.

Evidence has been included regard the analysis of the
blood sample taken from Barry where the presence of
ethanol was detected.  The witnesses proving continuity
of the sample are Dennis Chambers, Detective Sergeant
John Turner and Detective Sergeant James Fletcher.
Dr. Alexander Robert Forrest carried out this analysis.

Found in the personal effects of Barry was a full match
ticket, but under the circumstances it cannot be
established exactly how or when he entered the stadium.

Just so we can get this right, in paragraph 3 of your
summary and the page that deals with it, that is page
4, where Mr. Carroll is describing the outer gates, and
then he says he entered through these outer gates,
these are the outer perimeter gates? - A. That is
right.

Then having got beyond the outer perimeter gate he then
describes going through gate C? - A. Yes.

I am also right in saying that he says on page 4:

     "I was separated from Barry Bennett outside the
     turnstiles.   I could not see him anywhere."
                             - A. That is correct,       sir.

                        Q. In fact he did not see him again, as far as we can see,
                           on the inside of the turnstiles or anywhere towards the
                           terraces? - A. That is correct, sir.

                        Q. Perhaps I should not have put it to you like that.
                    B      What Kevin says is that he went through a gate on the
                           right hand side, on page 4, which we deduced may be
                           gate C.   However, in any case he was not with... - A.
                           Barry at the time.

                        Q. That is what he did.   He does not say anything as to
                           what happened to Barry because he did not know where he
                           was.   The other thing I want to ask you.    I cannot
                    C      remember whether Professor Usher said it, but if you
                           turn to his statement you can help me.    It is page 41,
                           on the bottom of that page, three lines up, can you see
                           it? - A. Yes.

                        Q. Does he say there that there were fresh injection
                           puncture marks? - A. That is correct.
                    D   Q. Those are marks in the right arm.   He says with
                           surrounding hematoma.   In other words there had been
                           some bleeding.

                                  THE CORONER:            Did he say that?

                                  MR. FRASER:    No,      sir, he did not.
                    E   Q.        THE CORONER:    The reason why I ask you is
                             because I think Dr. Marsh has no recollection of doing
                             that, has he? - A. I contacted him myself in relation
                             to that.

                        Q. I think it is right to say there is absolutely nothing
                           in the hospital records to show there was any
                    F      intervention? - A. That is correct, sir.

                        Q. We have not been able to find anybody else who says he
                           tried to put a needle into Barry? - A. that is correct.

                                        Cross-Examined by MR.       FRASER:

                        Q. Officer, the only point which causes the family some
                    G      slight concern relates to the ticket.   Mr. Bennett's
                           father got back from the police half a ticket.   We
                           have had the benefit of a short discussion before this
                           hearing began and I know that inquiries in relation to
                           that are in hand.



                H
                                                     -    7 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
     MR. FRASER:     In Perry Mason style we are about
to be handed a piece of paper and we may have an
answer, sir.

     THE CORONER:    The record seems to show that it
was a full ticket.   We have just been checking to see
what we have got.   I think all we can say as far as we
can tell it was a full ticket which was folded over, so
either it has not been noticed or it has been
separated, but it is borne out by the West Midlands
record and it is also in the original sheet which was
prepared here as to the gentleman's possessions.

     MR. FRASER:   It was just that the family was sure
they got half a   ticket back. I mean, nothing will
probably turn on it at the end of the day, sir, but you
can understand that it is important to the family and
perhaps inquiries will be made at a subsequent stage
which may clarify the misunderstandings.

     THE CORONER:     I am not disputing what the family
is saying.   It   may be worth having a look in the
envelope to see   if the other half is still in there or
to see whether it is folded over.     I just don't know.

     MR. FRASER: Thank         you,   sir.

     MR. LIMB:   No,     thank you,      sir.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:      No,   thank you,       sir.

     DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                      By THE C O R O N E R :

     THE WITNESS:   Sir, I am Michael Layton,          Detective
Inspector of the West Midlands Police.

Yes, Inspector. - A. Sir, an examination has been made
of video film and photographic evidence and Barry has
been identified in enclosure number 3 and apparently
dead on the pitch at the Spion Kop end of the ground.

Sir, on a photograph, D B.17/37, that refers to the
identification at the Spion Kop end of the ground.    If
you could bear with me a moment, sir, I could perhaps
give you a time for that.   Sir, that photograph is
timed at 1536.

Brian William Hutton has viewed photographic evidence
and he has identified Barry on the terracing in
enclosure number 3 on a photograph to which we have
given the reference number TH.2.   It is a newspaper
photograph, sir, and perhaps I should say at this stage
that it does not show a great deal of detail, although
I think the family is content that it does show Barry.
Because of the lack of detail I cannot say at what
stage of the medical process you have heard about Barry
is actually at.   It is not timed either, sir.

In other words it is just an identification of him? -
A. that is right, sir.   Mr. Pa trick Shannon and Ian
Meakin were spectators at the match and following the
crushing in the West Stand terracing went on to the
pitch and assisted in carrying three casualties from
the Leppings Lane end of the stadium to the Spion Kop
end.

Patrick Shannon has viewed video and photographic
evidence including a recent photograph of Barry and
perhaps, sir, if I can give you a reference number for
that photograph?   Sir, that ph ot ograph is referenced
RPOD/88.

Sir, he is certain that Barry is one of the persons he
carried across the pitch on a temporary stretcher.
Ian Meakin in his statement confirms the accounts given
by Mr. Shannon, but does not identify Barry.   He
initially identified another deceased as being a man he
carried, but it is in fact now known that he helped to
carry Barry.   It is one of those cases, sir, again
where there has been some confusion.

While you are on Mr. Shannon I think he has done his
very best to help.  He is quite certain he has helped
with Mr. Bennett but he has difficulty in knowing which
of the people it was? - A. That is absolutely right.
PC Lee of the Lancashire Police Force who was a
spectator at the match, attempted to resuscitate two
people on the pitch at the Spion Kop end of the ground.
Having viewed photographs he identifies Barry as one of
the persons he tried to revive.   The officer has
signed a plan of the pitch showing the approximate
location at which he treated Barry.   That plan is
referenced JL.l.

Andr ew William Turner who was an off-duty ambulance man
at the match and following the severe crushing in the
West Stand terracing, went on to the pitch at the Spion
Kop end of the ground at approximately 1520.      He
describes giving extensive resuscitation to a man in
this location and he recalls being assisted by a female
wearing a green and white sports shirt.      He states
that the casualty was wearing a red Liverpool football
shirt and on a photograph referenced P R . 7/21, timed at
1543, Mr. Turner identifies himself standing near this
man who in fact we know is Barry, actually on the pitch
                          at the Spion Kop end of the ground.   Mr. Turner did
                          not make a statement in respect of that identification.

                          Phillip Bennett, Barry's brother, has viewed
                          photographic evidence and identifies his brother
                          receiving resuscitation at the Spion Kop end of the
                          stadium and that is on two photographs, referenced
                    B     T T . 1/36 and TT.1/37.

                          Sir, it will be seen from those photographs that two
                          females are shown attempting to revive Barry but they
                          have not been identified up to the present time.

                          Sir, despite extensive research, it has not been
                          possible to identify exactly by whom or how Barry was
                          removed from the West Stand terracing or transported to
                          the Northern General Hospital.

                          There is an addendum, however, to refer to, sir.       Sir,
                          Dr. Glynn Michael Phillips was a spectator at the
                          match.

                        Q. I wonder if you would stop for a minute?   I wonder
                    D      whether that sentence is right because doesn't Dr.
                           Marsh say he took him to the Northern General, or have
                           I misread that? - A. I am just wondering, sir, was that
                           a reference to the ambulance?

                        Q. In other words what you are saying is we don't know
                           which ambulance he went in? - A. I think that is
                    E      perhaps the meaning of it, sir.

                          Yes, that is right.   We have not been able to identify
                          the crew? - A. I think that is the case, sir.       Sir,
                          Dr. Glynn Michael Phillips was a spectator at the match
                          and took up a match viewing position in the central
                          standing pens at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.
                          Following the severe crushing on the terraces he
                          managed to make his way on to the pitch and assisted to
                          treat the injured in the goal mouth area of the
                          Leppings Lane end of the pitch.    Having assisted in
                          this location he made his way to the Spion Kop end of
                          the ground where he came across a girl giving
                          resuscitation to a man lying on the pitch.    Dr.
                          Phillips assisted with resuscitation but formed the
                          opinion that the man was dead.    Another doctor also
                    G     assisted in attempting to revive this man.     To date
                          the girl has not been traced and it is believed that
                          the other doctor referred to by Dr. Phillips may in
                          fact be Dr. Marsh.

                           Dr. Phillips has viewed visual evidence and identified
                           himself on a photograph referenced D B . 17/37 treating
                           the man.   In fact he now believes that man to be
                H
                                                - 10 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
Barry.   Sir,    I am satisfied myself that it is in fact
Barry.

He has indicated on a plan of the pitch the area he
treated Barry and that plan is referenced GMP.l.

Sir, just a small point in respect of the ticket.
From photographs I can confirm that Barry was in
possession of a ticket, but it is not possible from the
photograph to ascertain whether it is half or full.

We cannot clench it one way or the other? - A. It does
not help us, no, but it certainly does confirm he was
in possession of a ticket.

Sir, can I refer you to a plan referenced MWJL.106,
which is a plan of the terraces?

That is C.247.    - A. MWJL.107,    which is a plan of the
pitch.

That will be C.248. - A. Sir, if we can refer to the
terrace plans first, to indicate the identification
made on the photograph which we have given the
reference number TH.2, which is a newspaper photograph.
The position we believe Barry is located is
approximately this point here, sir.   This is enclosure
number 3 and this is the dividing fence between 2 and 3
and it is approximately in this location h e r e .

In respect of the pitch plan, sir, MWJL.107, the
photograph that is referred to, D B . 17/37, which is
timed at 1536, the location for Barry is actually at
this point here, which is at the Spion Kop end of the
ground.

That is the opposite end,       in effect? - A. Yes.

     MR. FRASER:      No questions,     sir.

     MR. LIMB:      No,   thank you,   sir.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:       No,   thank you,    sir.

     THE CORONER:     Mr. Bennett - well, both Mr.
Bennetts - there is quite a lot of evidence as to what
happened at the Spion Kop end.    There is rather less
as to what happened at the other end.    I think at the
moment we just haven't found it.    There is also clear
evidence that somebody must have attempted to do some
resuscitation.    There is evidence that a lot of
resuscitation was done.    There is evidence on the body
that somebody must have attempted to put a needle in.
That is usually a doctor who attempts that.     Now we
                        know that Dr. Marsh was with him, at least we deduce it
                        from his description of the clothing because Dr. Marsh
                        cannot recollect the face.   I am not complaining about
                        that.   It is very, very difficult.    We have also
                        heard that Dr. Pickering, another doctor, appears to
                        have been with him.   Certainly Dr. Marsh has no
                        recollection of having put anything into Barry's arm
                    B   and Dr. Pickering does not mention it either, so one
                        has to assume that there is somebody else who also
                        tried but whom we have not been able to trace.    The
                        hospital notes, as you have already heard, don't help
                        us, I'm afraid.   There is nothing in the hospital
                        notes to show that anybody intervened.

                             However, you heard the evidence from Professor
                        Usher.    There is evidence that somebody did intervene,
                        but we just don't know who it is, but unfortunately all
                        their efforts proved to be abortive and they just
                        didn't work.    I am very, very sorry indeed that we are
                        here today talking about Barry.    We talk about all
                        these details, the names, the places, the ages and
                        plans and all this stuff and it is important because we
                        need to record it and these things have to be done, but
                    D   I like to think for a moment or two when we have
                        finished the evidence that we pause and we just
                        remember that we are talking about your brother and
                        your son.    Somebody who within your family circle and
                        also amongst his friends was somebody who was cared for
                        and loved and I have no doubt very greatly missed and I
                        am sorry.
                    E        Thank you very much indeed for being here.

                         (The inquest into the death of BARRY SIDNEY BENNETT
                                was adjourned to a date to be f ixe d)




                    G




                H
                                             - 12 -


J. L. Harpham Ltd
