HER MAJESTY *S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
              (WEST DISTRICT)



     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE
  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
            STADIUM DISASTER
         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before
. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRC6P
          (Her Majesty*s Coroner)




                   At
             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.
                   On
           18th January, 1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  Froa the Notes of J.L. Harpha*, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT
                                                        Page

PROCEDURAL MATTER                                         1

     P.J. McGUINNESS Sworn

         By The Coroner                                  2
         Cross-Examined    by   M r . King              11
         Cross-Examined    by   Mrs. McBrien            16
         Cross-Examined    by   Miss; Addleman          20
         Cross-Examined    by   M r. Russell            21
         Cross-Examined    by   Mr. Isaacs              24

     H.W. SWIFT Sworn

          By The Coroner                                25
     P.J. McGUINNESS Recalled

         Further by The Coroner                         33
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne                    34
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Isaacs                   34
         Cross-Examined by Mr. King                     37
         Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien                 <40
         Cross-Examined by Miss Addleman                -41
         Further by The Coroner                         <42
         Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King              <42
         Further Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien          43

     L. SOSNOWSKI Sworn

         By The Coroner                                 <43
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne                    <49
         Cross-Examined by Mr. King                     57
         Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien                 59
         Cross-Examined by Mr. Russell                  63A
         Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King             63B

     P. HOPSON Sworn

         By The Coroner                                 6<4
         Cross-Examined by Mr. King                     70
         Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien                 73
         Cross-Examined by Miss Addleman                73
         Further by The Coroner                         7<4
         Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King              76
         Further Cross-Examined by Miss Addleman         79
         Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King              79
     H.W. SWIFT Recalled

          Further by The Coroner                        81
          Further Cross-Examined      by Mrs. McBrien   81
          Further Cross-Examined      by Mr. Russell    83
                THIRTY THIRD DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                     FRIDAY. 18th JANUARY 1991

                    (In the absence of the Jurv\

      THE CORONER:     I believe Mrs. McBrien has got a point.
      MRS. McBRIEN:     Yes.

     THE CORONER:      Can you just tell me what it is verv
briefly?                                                  2

      MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, it refers to the transcript, No.
 30, and that was for the 15th January.

      THE CORONER:     Yes, I have got it.

     MRS- MCBRIEN:   It is page 26, 8 lines from the bottom
of the page. I have not got the transcript here but it is
the sentence that says, just lower down than F "But they
would not, you would expect, close the radial gates of the
tunnel?" Now I was not referring to the radial gates at
the time and I just said gates. I did not say radial
gates.

     THE CORONER:      You did say radial gates.
     MRS. McBRIEN:     No.

      THE CORONER:   I remember it distinctly but we will
get the shorthand writer to check it. He responds to you,
"The tunnel gates in actual fact...". He knew that you had
roade 3 mistake with the wording.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, but SuperintendentMarshall did
     them gates and I also was referring to them as gates
tjen but I would really like to give it a reference number
if that is at all possible, this correction.

     THE CORONER:      But it is not a correction, Mrs.
McBrien.

     MRS. McBRIEN:     Just an omission then.

     THE CORONER:   it is not an omission. We will get the
shorthand writer to verify this passage to see what was
actually said, if there is a typographical error, assume
for a minute that you are right, then that will be
corrected but we cannot alter in retrospect what was said
and we are certainly not calling Mr. Marshall back in order
   re-ask the question, under no circumstances.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  No, I would not expect that at all.       I
certainly would  not have called them radial gates myself.
I am absolutely positive about that because it is a very
important issue  with me, that one.
                                                         2


     THE CORONER s  Mjrs. McBrien, I have told you that we
will get the shorthand writer to double check her notes.
We actually have another recording system going as well, a
completely independent one, and to please you I will get
somebody to look at that as well in case the shorthand
writer made a mistake. If you said radial gates - which is
my clear and distinct recollection because I remember it -
then so be it. In any event you do not have to worry about
it because I think Superintendent Marshall understood you
perfectly. He knew exactly what he meant.

     MRS. McBRlEN:   He did.   His answer was the answer I
wanted.

      THE CORONER:   He replied correctly. We   have all done
it.I have called the    gates by the wrong name because
there are so many of them. Do not worry about it but we
will double check it for you.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   It is possible I made a mistake I do
agree but I would like it just noting.

     THE CORONER:    We will do that for you. Can I just
say one other very minor point and nothing to do with the
Inquests but you may notice there might be some enhancement
of security. Quite apart from that, of course, it was
common sense and pzrudence in the circumstances which
prevail outside this room that we all heighten our own
levels of awareness. I am not saying we are terribly
important but we are still within a major building in a big
city and so do not take offence if there seems to be some
tightening up . it is in our interests.

                 (The Jury came into Courts

      THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, Before we start
there is just one thing I have got to say. I understand
that somebody - I do not know who - was wondering whether
amongst the witnesses I was going to call would be one of
the linesmen, it does not matter who it was who was
asking, I am not interested in that, but I had not actually
intended to do that but in view of the fact you have raised
it we ^are going to have a look and see whether we can raise
him, if that is the right word. We will see whether we can
call him.

                PETER JOHN McGUINNESS Sworn

                      Bv THE CORONER;

Q. You are Peter John McGuinness, is that right? - A.
   That is correct, yes.

Q. Pc 1926? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. You too have been messed around by me, as have some
   other witnesses, because we just have not been able
   to get to you. I am sorry about that. - A. It is
   understandable, no problem.
                                           P. J. MCGUINNESS

Q. You too have been messed around by me, as have some
   other witnesses, because we just have not been able
   to get to you. I am sorry about that. - A. It is
   understandable, no problem.

Q. Your duties on that day were, in fact, in the lower
   South Stand, were they not? - A. That is correct,
   yes.

Q. I think you spent a good bit of your time at the back
   somewhere or in the front? - A. In the back of the
   South Stand, yes.

Q. I think we are not too interested   in those aspects
   because we are not thinking about   the South Stand but
   at a point you received a message   which indicated to
   you that you were required in the   West Stand, is that
   right? - A. That is correct, yes.

Q. How did you get that message, can you remember? - A.
   Yes, it was another colleague who basically said we
   were required to the West Stand. I didn't have a
   radio on the day.

Q. He had a radio? - A. He didn't, no.

Q. You did not either? - A. No. It was the Serial
   Sergeant who had been in radio communication.
Q.   So you were told by word of mouth? -A. Yes.

Q.    Were you given an indication   of what   it was likelyto
     be? - A. No idea at all.

Q. Did you think it was a public order situation, a
   safety situation or what? - A. A public order
   situation.

Q. Can you recollect by any chance about what time it
   was that you got this request? - A. I can't be
   specific on times. Perceptions on the day of times
   were distorted but the match had definitely started.
   I do recall that we had to walk around the perimeter
   of the pitch and I do recall seeing the game.

Q. So there is no doubt by the time you got on to the
   pitch the match was in play? - A. Yes.

Q. I take it you did not go for coffee first, you
   went? - A. We went straight away.

Q. In your view was there a long time interval between
   receiving the message and getting on to the field
   area? - A. Not at all really. From the South Stand
   where we were to get from the back to the pitch is a
   matter of seconds.
                                                 P. J. MCGUINNESS


Q. So far as you can tell the message came some time
   after kick-off but you do not know exactly what time?
   - A. That is right.

Q. Because the people were already on the field? - A.
   Yes.

Q. You made your way round the perimeter track towards
   the Leppings Lane terraces, is that correct? - A.
   Yes, that is right, in front of the South Stand.

Q. What met your eye as you were approaching it, first
   of all, apart from the players on the field? - A. The
   main thing was when I got to the middle of the South
   Stand which was in the region of Pen 3, which I now
   know, and I basically saw there were problems in that
   pen. I could see people crushed against the railings
   and that was obviously when I became aware it wasn't
   a public order situation and was a question of safety
   really.

     MR. RUSSELL:   I am sorry to interrupt but did he say
when he got to themiddle of the South Stand.

       THE WITNESS:   Sorry, correction, West Stand.
       THE CORONER:    Did he say South Stand?

     MR. KING:   He did say South Stand but he clearly
meant the West Stand because he said Pen 3.

Q.        THE CORONER:   The West Stand we are talking
     about? - A. That is right, yes.




                  /Q. It was at that point you realised.
                                          p.   j.   m c g u in n e s s



Yes, and it was at that point you realised this was a
safety situation? - A. That's right, more or less
immediately.
 As this impinged upon your mind, if I can use that word,
were you the first Officer there or were there other
 Officers already... - A. There were other Officers
 already there.
Can you recollect by any chance where they were?   I
don't mean that you tell me in detail, but were they on
the playing area, at the goal line or were they on the
perimeter track, were they on the fencing?   Where were
they? - A. Initially they were on the perimeter track and
then again the perception of time is slightly distorted
but more or less immediately, to my mind, it overspilled
behind the goal and then on to the pitch.
You are talking about the Officers or the supporters? -
A. The supporters.
I mean the Police Officers. - A. Well, and the Officers
as well.   Obviously they were backing off in reaction to
the people coming over the fence.
When you first exited on to the terrace, could you see
people coming over the fence by then? - A. I could, yes.

Are you saying at that point you couldn't distinguish
their condition? - A. At that point I thought it was a
public order situation, based only, and I mean only, on
previous experience.   From what I saw I had no idea of
what the situation was until I got closer.
You could see that people were being crushed at the
front.   I think you also looked up towards the rear of
the stand? - A. That's right.
What was happening there? - A. It seemed relatively...

Not the stand, the terrace. - A. The terrace, yes.   It
seemed relatively calm at the back.   I do recall
Officers stood on the ledge to try and raise themselves
above the main body of the crowd and were shouting to the
crowd at the back to get back.   They didn't seem to
understand what the situation was and what was happening
near the front.
What did you do then? - A. By that time the Officers
present there were attempting to drag people out, people
were coming over the top and it got fairly excited at
that moment.   I, together with other Officers, decided
to go to the back of the stand to attempt to alert the
crowd to what was happening and to try and get them to
                                                         6


                                            p. j.   mcguinness


   come out at the back of the tunnel and basically conduct
   the operation from behind.   There seemed plenty of
   Officers at the front.

Q. Did you discuss it with anybody?   Can you remember? I
   don't mean that you sat down round the table, but didyou
   have any words... - A. Not really.   I remember shouting
   to someone, let's go round to the back, it would be
   better if we went round to the back.

Q. Can you remember any contact you had with Inspector
   Sykes? - A. That was at the rear of the stand.   As I
   went round he was already there.
Q. So you shouted to others, went round the back and that is
   where you met Inspector Sykes? - A. That's right, yes.

Q. Then you presumably entered the tunnel? - A. That's
   right.
Q. Can you remember whether at the point in time when you
   left the field - you had come on, looked, decided you had
   to go to the back and was leaving, do you recollect
   whether the play at that point was still in being? - A. I
   do recall the match had been stopped by Superintendent
   Greenwood.
Q. Before you actually got round to the back? - A. That's^
   right, before.   I remember seeing that and the situation
   worsening and that is when I went to the back.

Q. You and Inspector Sykes and maybe others entered the
   tunnel? - A. Other Officers, yes.

Q. Tell me what happened?   Was it full or empty, that is
   the first question? - A. The tunnel was empty.   We ran
   down into the tunnel, into the crowd, and were asking
   people to exit through the tunnel, to get back.   Again
   they didn't really understand what was happening and were
   slightly obstructive.   If I can qualify that.   They
   were obstructive by possibly the fact they didn't know
   what was happening and we were trying to push them to the
   back and we were trying to push our way to the front of
   the crowd to assist in what way we could.

Q. Was it that they didn't want to leave.••   I take it that
   is what you are saying when they were being slightly
   obstructive? - A. Yes, they were loth to leave,
   definitely.
Q. Did they express any views about it?   Was it because
   they were reluctant about losing their place, or did they
   not say anything? - A. They were excitable.   I do
   vividly remember being anxious for my own safety.
                                                              7

                                            p.   j   .   mcguinness


   Obviously from past experience when uniformed Officers go
   into such crowds you are aware of what can happen if they
   do turn hostile and they were loth to leave and couldn't
   understand why we were trying to drag them out.
   Obviously, eventually that became apparent and they did
   spread out.   That took some seconds.

Q. Did you stay at the back and get people out, or what did
   you do? - A. Yes.   Eventually we got to the front, and
   with other Officers and supporters, dragged people to the
   back of the stand, to the back of the terrace, rendered
   first aid to people, and by that time everyone was fully
   aware of what was going on and were attempting to pull
   people out.
Q. By the time that happened the supporters had realised
   what was going on? - A. Yes.

Q. How long in time would you say...   You didn't get there
   until after the match had finished, because you told me
   that? - A. That's right.

Q. How long would you say it took you from the point you
   left the pitch, round the sides, down the tunnel, and
   through to the front to get to your first injured person?
   - A. It is very difficult  to be precise, but a minute or
   so - no more.

Q. Wereyou able then to get through this crowd within a
   minute? - A. I would think so, yes.

Q. I think you carried a number of people out backward, is
   that right? - A. That's right, yes.
Q. Do you remember approximately how many people you
   assisted in carrying out backward?   I say "backward", I
   mean out through the tunnel. - A. Again I can't be
   precise on it.

Q. We know you took a girl out, because you remember that.
   Was that the only one or did you help with others? - A. I
   think I took one other.   Again it is very difficult to
   be exact, but I think I took one other, apart from the
   girl and then I assisted with people at the front and
   basically putting people over the side fence.

Q. That is what I am trying to get at because I think in the
   end eventually you helped with moving people in the
   opposite direction? - A. That's right.

Q. I wanted to try and see at what point you did that? - A.
   Eventually the tunnel and the back of the terrace was
   quite swamped with supporters, Police, rendering first
   aid, and obviously the people who were injured.   That is
                                         p. j.   mcguinness


when I directed my attention to try and assist the
Officers who were dragging people out of the front and
the side.

Are you saying that the tunnel got blocked, because that
is what it sounds like, by people doing these sorts, or
what have you, within the tunnel area? - A. Yes. People
were laid in the tunnel.
That, of course, then prevented others getting out? - A.
That s right.




        Q. You turned your attention
                                                        p.   j   .   mcguinness




         Q. You turned your attention to the front? - That's right.

         Q. I think in particular you helped one particular girl,
            can you remember? - A. That's right, yes.
     B   Q. Tell me a little bit about that? - A. I now know the
            girl to be Victoria Hicks. I found myself towards the
            right of pen 3, where I believe the barrier had gone
            down, and it was in front of that, towards the front,
            that I saw Victoria, who I now know to be Victoria - I
            obviously didn't know at the time - who looked in a bad
            way. I could just basically see the side of her face
            and there were people laid on top of her. I was just^
            basically trying to get them off to pull her out, again
            with other Officers and people assisting, which I
            eventually did and then assisted people to pass her
            over the right-hand fence.
         0. What I am interested in is the passing over the fence.
            Did you do that by yourself? - A. No.
         Q. Did you do it by you plus other Officers and no one
            else? - A. I can't be precise.
 D
         0. You assisted but you can't say whether other people
            might have helped as well? - A. I am sure other people
            did nelp.

         Q. Sorry, I didn't mean it like that. What I meant was
            you can't say whether the people who helped were all-
            fans, Policemen, or a mix, is that what you are saying?
            - A. It was definitely a mix, putting it in those
            terms. You can understand some people weren't in a
            position to help who were laid on top of her - they
            were obviously in great distress themselves - but there
            was a mixture.
         0. I don't know if you remember. Do you remember her
            being passed over the front of the fence, or over tne
            side fence? - A. This is Victoria?
         0   .   Yes. - A. The side fence, and I exitedthrougn          the
                 front.
         0.      Through the gate you mean? - A. Yes.
         Q.      Did you just pass her over to othersand     theytook her
                 from you? - A. That's right, yes.
         0. I think you viewed some videos where you could actually
            see yourself helping her? - A. That's right, yes.
                      MR. KING:   Sir, before the questions begin it
                 might be convenient, because it is not a contentious




HI
                                                          10
                                            p.   j.   mcguinness




     matter, I have the summary in relation to Victoria and
     a time is mentioned for the event we have just heard.
     I don't know where that came from but it is in the
     summary.
          THE CORONER:   Is it 15.21.55?
          MR. KING:   That is right, yes. I don't know
     whether that could be brought in conveniently at this
     point?                         ••
          THE CORONER:   Yes, I will do that.
0.        THE CORONER:   The video which you view, where you
     saw yourself helping Victoria as best as you could, did
     that have a database on the bottom as far as you
     remember? - A. It would have done, yes.
Q. I will show your statement, a print of it, and you can
   just look and see whether that is, in fact, the time
   that would nave been on that database. As it happens I
   have highlighted it. Can you tell me what it actually
   says, if you agree that it is correct, of course? - A.
   15.21.
Q. Read the whole sequence of numbers. - A. Tape reference
   number 15.21.55.18.
Q. The 18, you know what it is, it is the frame counter,
   and that was when you, were with Victoria? - A. Yes.

Q. Within the enclosure, so to speak? - A.Yes.

Q. But prior to that you had been round at the back, you
   had worked your way down, you had taken at least one
   person out? - A. Yes, that is correct.
0. Another girl as it happens, and possibly another
   person? - A. Yes.
0. Then you had to come back, then you had to move this
   man wno was lying on top of Victoria, or helped with
   his moving, before you could actually get at her? - A.
   That is correct, yes.
0. You are not a doctor, I realise that, but did she
   appear to you at that point to be alive? - A. I don't
   have a recollection of forming any opinion really on
   tnat.
Q. Okay, don't guess - that is very wise.
                                                                11
                                               p.   j   .   mcguinness




                 Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

0.   Mr. McGuinness, on the question of the speed of your
     own realisation that a disaster was taking place, you
     have told the Jury that as you made your way towards
     the terrace, the Leppings Lane terrace, you saw people
     coming over the fence - I am reading from my note - and
     you thought it was a public order situation, based on
     your previous experience? - A. Yes.

Q. I want you in your own words to explain what you mean
   by that and what was going through your mind? - A. If I
   can explain that, I only based that decision on not
   what I saw, but on what I had experienced previously.

0. Yes,explain about that please, why it was that that
   was what was in your mind? - A. Basically because I
   have been a Police Officer for eight years, worked at
   most if not all Hillsborough matches, and the only
   experiences I have had of situations similar to that
   have been ones which nave been public order orientated.
   Obviously I have never been there and had to deal with
   any disaster of that manner on any situation regarding
   safety.
0. What does public order orientated mean? What actually
   has happened in your experience on other occasions to
   make you think that? - A. Public order in the sense of
   crowd disruption, fighting, overspilling onto the
   pitch, pitch invasion. I don't really know how to put
   it more specifically.
0. No, very well, that's better, and is that the kind             of
   thing tnat in your experience you have had to look             out
   for? - A. Most definitely, yes.
                  Cross-Examined by MR. KING

0. On tnat last aspect, Officer, do I understand from
   that, and I can understand it if it is rignt, tnat trie
   whole basis of training and experience is such tnat
   when you see someone coming over the top of a fence,
   your reaction is, there's trouble here? - A. My
   personal, yes.
0. It follows from that there has been nothing in your
   training, your instructions, prior to that which
   occurred in your own eyes at this disaster, which would
   have led you to stop and think, well, there's another
   alternative, they might be in trouble, they might be in
   personal difficulties? - A. I react to situations in a
   number of ways. Obviously, if I am attending a road
   accident or a different situation my perception, my
   objectives, are different than on this occasion, yes.
                                                 .12
                                       P. J. McGUINKESS




It is simply that in the context of football matches -
I don't want to put words into your mouth - the sort of
training, instructions you have always received have
always been really to the effect that you should not
allow people to climb over fences at the front of a
pitch, is that right? - A. Yes.
That is a public order situation, that is really the
basis of what your learning and teaching and experience
has been? - A. Not so much the teaching. It tends to
be my experience of what matches and match situations
are, and how minor public order situations or
disruptions can build and obviously be a problem - it
is the expression they nave to be nipped in the bud.

It also follows from that - I don't mean this rudely -
as an ordinary Police Constable you have never actually
received, prior to the disaster anyway, any sort of
instruction or training to look for another reason for
people trying to get out of a crowded pen, such as
crushing or something like that? - A. Not specifically
as you put it in those terms, but you always hope that
Officers have the intelligence and presence of mind to
act on their own initiative, once they assess a
situation differently.
Of course, but part of training, rather like what is
happening around us in the world today, is designed to
see how you will react in a situation quickly, isn't
it? - A. Yes.
You train for a situation so that you react quickly
when it arises. As I understand your answers the sort
of training you had received as an ordinary Police
Officer was that if you saw somebody climbing over a
fence at the front of a pen at a football match, it^
would be a public order situation? - A. Invariably it^
would, but I would just like to add a rider on that, in
tnat obviously you base your decision on what you see
and your previous experiences. In a different
situation if someone came over a fence or ran from a
terrace, and it was apparent from their demeanour they
were in distress, then you might react differently. I
am not saying it is always the position.




               /0. All right
                              p.   J. Mc g u i n n e s s

 All right, I cannot take that any further with you.
 Let me go to your narrative at the stage when you went
 out from where you had been, I think you said in the
 aouth Stand, had you not? - A. Yes.

You went onto the perimeter track and when you got to
the middle of Pen 3 at that stage it was obvious to
you that people were crushed against the railings and
that they were in personal difficulty, that was
obvious to you? - A. Yes.

You said there were other Officers already there, who
had been already there when you came out of the South
Stand? - A. Yes.

I want to find out where those Officers were in
relation to that part of Pen 3 where you could see
people obviously in distress? - A. It is impossible
for me to say really where exactly they were. They
were in the same vicinity as myself, they were in
front of Pen 3. But by that stage it was apparent to
everyone there what we were dealing with. This is
really after the build-up when I get there. There is
no doubt about really what the situation is by the
time I arrive.

You then told us that it was after the game had been
stopped that you decided that you would go to the back
of the tunnel? - A. That is correct, yes.

You gave what I want to investigate slightly, this
evidence, that it was clear to you that saying "Push
back" to the people at the back was not having any
effect, that was clear to you? - A. It was a decision
I made on the day, yes.

But it was clear to you? - A. Yes.

It was clear to you from what you have told us that
the people at the back weren't realising what was
happening? - A. That is correct, yes.

This I assume would be because you have a crowded
terrace, a lot of noise and communication from the
front to the back is really going to be impossible, is
it not? - A. The crowd could hear the pleas to get
back. I am in no doubt about that at all. But the
question about whether they understood it or did not
quite know how to react — crowds react in strange ways
when they are together - is another matter. But I am
sure they heard the order to get back.
                             p. j.   mcguinness


Could you hear what the crowd at the back of the
terrace was saying? - A. I have no recollection of
what was being said at the back, no.
So you were not in a position at the front by the
perimeter fence of hearing exactly what was being said
at the back, that is obvious? - A. I was not listening
really. My attentions were directed initially to the
people crushed at the front, and then how best really
to effect that situation.
If that is right, why can you be certain and sure that
the people at the back of the terrace could even hear
the words of what was being said at the front of the
terrace? - A. I just based that on what I saw.
Officers were stood on the ledge next to the fence and
were looking over the crush at the front. By that
time I think everyone in the terrace understood
something was happening, but the perception of the
people at the back,I think, was one of confusion, but
I am sure that they, from the shouts of the Officers,
could hear the statements of "Get back". I was in no
doubt they could hear that. Whether or not they
understood it and their reaction is a different
matter.
I cannot pursue it any further, Officer. All you can
say is what you saw at the front. You were not in a
position to know what it was like at the back because
you were not there. That is right, is it not? - A. I
could see the crowd at the back and I could see that
no one was attempting to get people out through the
back of the tunnel and that is what I based my
decision on to go round to the back.
You could see the back of the terrace and you could
see that people at the back weren't leaving at the
back? - A. That is right.
What I am putting to you is it is clear from that that
whatever was being said at the front was being
ineffective? - A. Ineffective, yes.

What you cannot really help us on because you were not
at the back is why it was ineffective because you were
not at the back to be in the position of someone at
the back? - A. Absolutely correct. I can give no
opinion on what the thoughts were in the people at the
back.
But equally you are not really in a position to tell
us whether the people at the back could, in fact, hear
because you can speculate but you were not actually
there? - A. Yes, absolutely correct.
                                                       15



                                  p. j.   mcguinness


Q.   But what was obvious to you was that what was needed
     was for somebody, a serial of Officers no doubt you
     would say, to go round the back to enter the tunnel
      from the back to relieve the pressure from the back?
      That is what appeared obvious to you? - A. To me, yes.

Q.   That was obvious to you so you went and did it, and I
      commend you for that. When you did that the game had
      already been stopped, so we know the period of time
      which had elapsed before you did that. When you got
      round the back had anybody already gone onto the
      terrace, or were you the first Officer or Officers to
      go onto the terrace? - A. I was with the first group
      of Officers who went round the terrace.
Q.   Here you are able to make an observation of what it
     was like at the back because you tell us that when you
     got at the back it was clear to you that the people
     standing at the back just did not know what was
     happening at the front, and that was clear to you? -
     A. Yes.

Q. But despite that, once you had got there, no doubt
    with a number of other Officers, it only took a matter
    of seconds, I wrote, for you to get through that crowd
    to get to the front, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. So although you say there were difficulties because
    they did not appreciate what was happening at first,
    it did not take very long for you to take control of
    the situation and sort it out? It seems that did not
    take very long at all? - A. We had to force our way to
    the front. It was not as if the crowds parted with
    ease. I accept what you are saying, but I have vivid
    recollections of the crowd not assisting us in getting
    to the front.   They were loathe to move. Again I
    cannot comment on what was going through their minds.
    Again I was slightly anxious for my own safety. I did
    not want the situation to turn.

Q.   To be fair to yourself, you did in fact make a
      judgment of what was going through their minds because
     your impression was they had not realised what was
     happening at the front, that was your impression? - A.
      I based that on the fact that they weren't running
     down the tunnel to alleviate the pressure, yes.

Q.   Just on the very final evidence with regard to
     Victoria Hicks, I know the family whom I represent
     would want me to say to you thank you for the efforts
     you spent with her. I have to ask you this question,
      and it is a difficult one but I know they want me to
      ask it. The Coroner properly asked you whether you
      formed any view when you were assisting with Victoria
                             p. j.   mcguinness


at around 15.21 whether at that stage, and you are not
a medical man, she was alive or not. Is it that you
formed no view at all, or can you help us at all on
that issue? Any clue on that issue? Is itsomething
which you cannot help at all on? - A. No.

I have to put it a little further this way. Would it
be fair to say from that evidence that it was not 100
per cent certain to you that she was not alive? - A. I
am just trying to work that out.
You did not know whether she was alive or not alive,
that is right, is it not? - A. I made no decision.
Obviously I was pulling people out and saw Victoria
and thought it was necessary to assist her. I made no
decision at the time or after as to her condition.

I accept that. What I want to put to you very gently,
because none of this is, as you know, a criticism of
you, this is to help the family. - A. Yes.

But you were not able to say at that stage, whatever
judgment and experience you are able to bring on these
matters and of course you are not qualified, whether
or not she was dead at that time, you are not able to
say that? - A. I am not able to say. Obviously I
travelled in the ambulance with her to the hospital
and it was only when the doctor told me that obviously
she was dead that I even thought about that particular
aspect of it.
And that was some minutes later, was it not? - A. A
good few minutes, yes.
You have been very helpful on those matters.   I know
they can be very painful. I am grateful also for the
learned Coroner allowing me to ask those questions.

         Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:

Officer, what were your main duties that day?

     THE CORONER: No. His main duties were in the
South Stand and we are not going into the main duties
in the South Stand.

     MRS. McBRIEN: No, right.
Would you tell me the name of the Officer at the back
of the terraces where you went? - A. There were a
number of Officers. The Officer I basically liaised
with was Inspector Sykes.
     THE CORONER: Did you say terraces or concourse
area, at the back of the West Stand terrace?
                             p.   j   .   mcguinness


     MRS. McBRIEN: The Officer has given me the right
answer so he understood me.

     THE CORONER: He understood what you meant, okay.

     MR. PAYNE: I am afraid I did not. I am not sure
whether she is talking about the South Stand, or the
back of Leppings Lane.

     THE CORONER: That is what I did not know either.

     MRS. McBRIEN: I am sorry, I will make it clear.
When the Officer said he went to the back, you went to
the back of the West Stand, did you not? - A. The back
of the West Stand, yes, at the entrance to the tunnel.

Did you see any senior Officer in that area take
responsibility for a rescue operation in the tunnel
area where you were, that part? - A. Inspector Sykes
was basically co-ordinating things from the back and
Superintendent Greenwood was co-ordinating things from
the front.

When you first realised there was something wrong and
you went on the pitch, were you expecting to hear
instructions being given over the PA system at the
time? - A. No.

You were not? - A. No.

So you would not have thought that would have helped
you in any way if you would have been given a clear
message?

     THE CORONER: He said he was not expecting it.

     THE WITNESS: If I can elaborate it might assist
you. During the match you get sent to many locations
and have to deal with many situations. We do not have
the radios and so you can be sent by word of mouth, or
someone saying a radio message is sending you
somewhere else. So you automatically go and assess
the situation. I do not, or never have, listened for
any Tannoy message unless it was the safety aspect.

     MRS. McBRIEN: I may be getting this a bit wrong
myself, but I believe when there is an emergency there
is a message? - A. That is right.

Through the Tannoy system, is it, Mr. Meadows, that is
what I was thinking of? - A. That is right, yes, we
are all well aware of that.
                             p. j.   mcguinness


So what I was really asking you was would that kind of
message have helped you for you to know what to do? ~
A. The evacuation procedure would not really have
given me any more information than I immediately
assimilated as soon as I got to the West Stand.

No, but in your training are you not given
instructions what to do if there is an emergency as
far as exit routes go and things, like that? - A. I do
believe Officers have specific duties if such a
message comes over. I never have been given specific
duties in such a situation.
Would you just tell me what serial you were in? - A. I
couldn't say, to be honest now.
You do not know what serial you were in on the day? -
A. I don't, no. I was in a serial. I am in many
serials each Saturday, obviously.




                         /THE CORONER:    It is
                                           p.   j   .   mcguinness


     THE CORONER:   It is completely inconsequential, Mrs.
McBrien. it is almost two years on. Why should he
remember his serial number? He was not on the West Stand,
he was in the concourse, he was not in Leppings Lane. He
was in the South Stand. He does not remember and that is
it. I could tell him because I could look it up but I do
not intend to because I do not see any point.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Would your name be recorded in
     the Operational Order? - A. It most definitely was.
     I do recall at the time saying in statements that I
     was in Serial, whatever but 1 to 10 now, I couldn't
     say which one it was.

Q. So really I could look that up myself, couldn't I? -
   A. Yes.

Q. I just thought you would remember? - A. No.

Q. Serial 2.     You did say you got to the front of Pen 3?
   - A. Yes.

Q. In quite a short time? - A. Yes.

Q.    You did realise the tunnel was a main     exit route for
     the people who were in that pen? - A. Yes.

Q. So really one of the most important things to do that
   day was to remove those people at the back?

     THE CORONER:   No, no. You may ask a question. I am
going to get much tougher with you, Mrs. McBrien, because
we cannot afford the time to go all over     the sameground
again. Ask a question. He said that he knew it was the
main exit. Mr. King dealt with and I have dealt with it
already. What is the extra point that you want to deal
with which we have not already dealt with?

Q.        MRS.   McBRIEN: You managed to get a young lady,
     you said,   out and some other person   viathe tunnel? -
     A. Yes.

Q . You took those two people to the concourse area.
    There were other people obviously who were in the
    front who were needing attention? -     A. Yes.

Q.     Would you have been happy to have taken other people
     out to the concourse area who were injured? Would
     you have felt that was helping? - A. I am just trying
     to understand your specific point. Obviously taking
     anyone out would alleviate the situation, yes.
     Basically I was reacting on my own initiative at the
     time. Albeit I have said I have gone to the back I
     have then eventually thought I could benefit more by
     working to the front. Again my decisions were
     changing at the time, all the time.
                                          p.   j   .   mcguinness



Q. When you went to the front did you then go on to the
   pitch? - A. I did, yes. I went through the West
   Stand through the gate eventually on to the pitch,
   yes.

Q. Through Gate 3? - A. Yes.

Q.        THE CORONER:   Was it Gate 3 or Gate 2? - A. I
     don't even know the numbers of the gates and so I
     couldn't comment.

Q. Was it quite easy for you to go through the gate
   because it was blocked quite a lot, wasn't it?
   People were being dragged through that gate? - A.
   They were initially. Obviously by the time I went
   through I wasn't pushing through in front of anyone
   else. By that time I could easily jump through
   without hindering any rescue operation.

Q. Were lots of people getting out as you got out of the
   gate? You managed to come from the back through the
   people and out through the gate on to the pitch and
   so when you made your way on to the pitch were lots
   of the fans being able to go out the way you did? -
   A. A large number of them had already gone through.
   That is what I am saying. Many of the fans went
   through the front. I think there was just as many -
   this is speculation - through the front as the back.

     THE CORONER:   This gentleman has already told us at
15.21, 21 minutes after three o'clock, he was still with
Victoria Hicks and so he clearly went through the gate
after that time. So it is of no consequence.

Q.      MRS. McBRIEN:   What confused me is that you said
     you were amongst the first Officers to go in there? -
     A. Through the back, yes.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   That is what had thrown me a bit as
far as time went. I was thinking it was earlier but now it
has been pointed out to me that it was 15.21. Thank you
very much.

               Cross-Examined bv MISS ADDLEMAN:

Q. Officer, you have told us of an Officer standing on
   the ledge shouting to the crowd to get back? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Can you recall whether these Officers were also
   making hand movements? - A. They most definitely
   were, yes.

Q. Could you demonstrate that for us? - A. (Witness
   demonstrated) .
                                      P. J. MCGUINNESS



For the shorthand note, you are pushing your hands in
a forward motion? - A. Yes.

  MISS ADDLEMAN:   Thank you very much.

            Cross-Examined bv MR. RUSSELL:

Officer, you will perhaps agree with me that the
situation which confronted you when you got to the
front of Pen 3 was that you were beholding an
unprecedented and unusual situation? - A. Absolutely,
yes.

Did you regard it as an unprecedented and unusual
decision for yourself to take to act on your
initiative in seeking to do what you could do in a
place where you thought you could do it best? - A.
No, I act on my own initiative each and every day I
am on duty.

To be sure about this, did you feel you should stand
around in front of Pen 3 until a senior Officer told
you to go and do something else? - A. Absolutely not.
Superintendent Greenwood, who was at the front, had
matters in hand. It was obvious he was taking charge
of matters at the front of the pen. There were a
number of Officers there and I thought with the
numbers it was better for me to go round the back.

When you got around the back you have told us you
feel you were amongst the first Officers to go down
the tunnel? - A. When I ran round the back again
there were other Officers following me. There was
Inspector Sykes, who again was obviously aware of the
situation, and I was with his group who went down the
tunnel, yes.

Have you formed the view that you were one of the
first Officers down the tunnel because you did not
see any other Officers going down the tunnel ahead of
you? - A. That is right.

You did not see any other Officers already in the
pens, or in Pen 3 at any rate, when you got down
there? - A. That is right.

You, of course, do not know whether or not other
Officers could have gone down the tunnel and
disappeared into say Pen 4 before you reached the
tunnel? - A. That is correct.

You have told us that before you started seeking to
assist the girl who you discovered was Victoria
Hicks, you assisted two people from Pen 3 back out
through the tunnel? - A. At least two, yes.
                                                            22


                                          P. J. MCGUINNESS


Q. Are you able to remember now from approximately where
   in Pen 3 you brought those people? - A. The first lot
   of people were more to the middle of the pen and
   eventually I tended to work towards the right.

Q. To the right looking at the pen towards the stand or
   looking at the pen towards the pitch? - A. The pen
   looking towards the pitch.

Q. The first people that you took was from the middle? -
   A. From the middle, yes.

Q. The first person you took, you told us, was a girl? -
   A. That is right, yes.

Q. Can you remember how long the process took in getting
   from the tunnel entrance into the pen, down to the
   middle of the pen, and I think you said with the
   assistance of one or more supporters carrying a girl
   back up to the tunnel and out of the terrace? - A. I
   couldn't be exact on any times. I was in a similar
   position to Mr. Hicks in that when I viewed the video
   it took a second to realise what time had actually
   elapsed. It was very difficult for me to make any
   comment on time but definitely minutes.

Q. Then there was a second operation you have told us
   about, a second person who was male who you helped
   carry out? - A. Yes. It is so fairly hazy
   specifically what I did at the back of the terrace
   but the general idea was to get people out into the
   concourse area.

Q. You have described a further area of operation after
   the tunnel had become congested? - A. Yes.

Q. When you were working more in the bottom right hand
   c o m e r of Pen 3 looking out towards the pitch? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Working I believe in the vicinity I believe of a
   broken crash barrier or crowd restraining barrier? -
   A. Yes.

Q. You have been able to identify, by reference to a
   video, that you had managed to secure the release
   from the tangle, as we heard it described yesterday,
   of bodies at 15:21:18? - A. 15:21:18, at that time,
   yes. I viewed myself trying to get Victoria Hicks
   out.

Q. At that time were you still trying or had you
   achieved it? - A. If I can recall the video I was
   bending down and bending up and so I was still trying
   at that time.
                                           P. J. MCGUINNESS



Q. There is a still photograph, Officer, of a number of
   Police Officers working in the vicinity that you have
   described on a corrected time which I believe to be
   15:15. I appreciate that we have not got an acetate
   of it and perhaps I can ask you to have a look at it
   in a moment but first of all can I ask you this; do
   you remember other Officers being with you when you
   were trying to do that particular part of your rescue
   operation? - A. Definitely, yes.

Q. Do you think it is likely or unlikely that you were
   in that position as many as six minutes before you
   were seen on video doing what you have recalled
   doing? - A. Most likely, yes.

     MR. RUSSELL: Sir, I wonder whether it would assist if
he were to look at this particular still photograph? I am
sorry I did not look it up until I heard what the nature of
his evidence was. I have a copy of it, of course.

     THE CORONER:    Can you pass it over? What is the
point that you are hoping to make with it, Mr. Russell?

     MR. RUSSELL: Sir, whether this Officer can identify
himself among the Officers who are shown to be in this
vicinity of Pen 3 on what I understand to be a corrected
time of 15:15.

       THE CORONER:   Yes, let him have a look at it.

       MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, the reference is MWL.12, photograph
9A.

Q.        THE CORONER:    Just have a look and see if you
      can find yourself? - A. Yes.

Q.        MR. RUSSELL: Can you see the bar, the broken
      crash barrier bar? - A. Yes.

Q. That would appear to be the relevant position in
   those circumstances and can you see yourself as one
   of those few Officers that we can see in the vicinity
   of that evidently working away in the crowd or are
   there other Officers and not yourself? - A. I cannot
   identify myself. I do know that I had lost my hat
   more or less immediately and so I wasn't wearing a
   Police issue helmet. It looks like two Officers,
   three, bent down but I can't identify myself from
   this photograph.

Q. You do not know whether or not you are one of those
   three Officers in there at 15:15? - A. It is highly
   likely because at 15:21 I was still there and so I
   cannot see that I have come out because if they were
   there I would have probably gone somewhere else. If
*=<-

                                                                             24


                                                             P. J. McGUINNESS

                    you understand, Officers were all around and weren't
                    all gathering in one spot.

                 Q. I appreciate that. - A. I believe that one of those
           H j      is me because I am eventually viewed again standing
           a I      UP an<* down and pulling up and down but from this
                    photograph I can't say, no.

                 Q. Would you agree that that is the location in which
                    you were working by the broken crash barrier? - A.
                    Definitely, yes.

                      MR. RUSSELL: Sir, I do not know whether it would
                 assist if you yourself saw it to see if you want to take
                 the matter further or have an acetate done of it.
                      THE CORONER:      We will get an acetate done.
                      MR. RUSSELL:     Thank you, Officer.
                      MR. BEECHEY:     This will be C.366, sir.
                      THE CORONER:      Were you going to say something, Mr.
                 Isaacs?

                      MR. ISAACS:   I was, sir. It was only really to see
                 if I could understand what was being said because perhaps
                 it was an inaccuracy in my note.   Perhaps so that I could
                 just understand I could ask one or two questions, sir.
                      THE CORONER!      Yes.

                                    Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS:
                 Q. You made reference when you were answering the
                    Coroner's questions, Officer, to saying that you
                    recalled the Officers stood on the ledge at the back,
                    they were above the crowd, shouting for the crowd to
                    get back. I understood you meant they were on a
                    ledge ^above the terracing but then it appeared to me
                    you might have been referring to a ledge in front of
                    the terracing. It may be that my note was inaccurate
                    in the first instance? - A. I meant the front of the
                    terracing.

                      MR. ISAACS!      Thank you.   I just wanted to know for my
                 own purposes.




                                           /Q. There is a little ledge....


       H
                                            P. J. McGUINNESS


     THE CORONER:      There is a little ledge where the
fencing goes up.      That is how I had understood him.

     MR. ISAACS:   It was only when I checked my note and
found Mr. Manning had the same note, and it may be that
we copied one another's.

     THE CORONER:      It is just as well to get it right.

     MR. ISAACS:      I am grateful. .

     THE CORONER:     What "C" number are we giving that
photograph?

     MR.   BEECHEY:   C.366.

     THE   CORONER: We are getting the acetate made.      If
you don't mind hanging on a minute, just so we can put
the acetate up while you are sitting there, if we don't
have any accidents with our machine!       In the meantime I
will say thank you very much indeed.      I haven't asked
you any questionsabout what     happened after you leftthe
terrace.     I know there is alot we could ask but that   is
outside the Inquests.

     SERGEANT GRIFFITHS:   There is a slight problem with
the machine at the moment.

     THE CORONER:   In that case we will press on and we
will take the next witness.   It is only a matter of
formality, just so you are here when we put the acetate
up.

     Howard William Swift.

              HOWARD WILLIAM SWIFT Sworn

                      By THE CORONER:
You are Howard William Swift, is that right? - A. Yes,
sir.

You are Sergeant 2379? - A. That's right.

You were in charge of Serial 16? - A. Serial 16, from the
West Bar Order.

Your primary task was at the railway station, at the main
railway station? - A. Prior to the football match, yes.

The job was to get the supporters off the trains on to
the buses and coaches? - A. That's correct.
                                                                   26


                                                             H. W.' SWIFT


           Q. I want to move on from there because I think at about
              half past two/quarter to three you left the railway
              station and were going towards Leppings Lane to take up
              further duties? - A . That's right.  I think it was prior
              to half past two, we left the Midland Railway Station on
    jj j      a double decker bus to go to the football ground.

           Q. You were in a bus, or coach, or some vehicle anyway? - A.
              It was a South Yorkshire Transport double decker bus.

           Q.    At between ten to and five to three this bus drove into
                Leppings Lane and stopped opposite the turnstiles? - A.
                That is correct. We drove along Middlewood Road and down
                into Leppings Lane.
           Q. You could see at that point there were an awful lot of
              people at the turnstiles, is that right? - A. Yes, there
              were still a lot of people making their way towards the
              ground, some distance from the ground as well.

           Q. Now we have heard a lot about that already from a lot of
              people so I won't ask you any further questions on that,
              apart from finding out whether you got off the bus? - A.
              No, nobody got off the bus at all. We saw it was crowded
              in that area and we weren't going to be able to get into
              the ground there so we went round to the gymnasium at the
              other side of the ground.
           Q. So you drove round? - A. Drove round Leppings Lane down
              to Penistone Road.
           Q. It was then you got out and you entered the gymnasium, I
              believe? - A. Yes, we went into the gymnasium.

           Q. At that point I think you were expectingto have   a tea
              break or something if all had gone well?- A. We were
              going there to be a reserve serial.    I believe we were
              due to take a meal at half time.

           Q. Did you have a radio? - A. Yes.
           Q. I think you did hear some messages, did you? - A. As we
              were going into the gymnasium, I changed my radio on to
              the channel which was appropriate for the football game
              and I heard garbled messages about people wanting
              assistance, or some kind of assistance, in the Leppings
              Lane area.   I didn't really know what that was.   I just
              presumed it was outside because of the large crowd I had
              seen there.

           Q. Did you hear anything about gates? - A. I believe there
              were some messages about, "We need to open the gates" and
              this sort of thing, but exactly what it was I don't know.




H
                                                                 27


                                                         h   . w; SWIFT


      Q. From the gymnasium, of course, you can't see what is
         going on on the pitch? - A. No, you can't see anything at
         all.

      Q. You in fact stayed within the gymnasium initially? - A.
Q j      We were there for a very short time and then Inspector
         Sewell shouted up, "Are there any serials available?"   I
         stepped forward and he directed us straight on to the
         track.

      Q. Where did you get on to the track?   Where was the
         position where you came out? - A. We entered on to the
         track at the corner of the Kop and the North Stand.

      Q. If you would turn round and just look at the model.       It .
         is that right hand corner? - A. That's right, there.
         The top right hand side.
      Q. Where did you head for? - A.   We walked straight down in
         front of the North Stand.
      Q. When you first came out before you started walking down
         there, did you see what was going on on the pitch? - A.
         When we first came on to the track and on to the pitch
         the teams were warming up at that time.   They were on
         the pitch and they were warming up.

      Q. Not playing? - A. No.

      Q. You are sure of that? - A. Yes.

      Q. You then walked along the North Stand? - A. Yes, we were
         walking in front of the North Stand.

      Q. And were obviously approaching the Leppings Lane
         terracing? - A. That is correct.
      Q. If you had continued you would have got to them? - A.
         Yes.

      Q. In fact that is exactly what you did? - A. Yes, I walked
         to the front of my serial.

      Q. As you were walking along, could you see anything that
         was happening on the Leppings Lane terracing? - A. I was
         just aware as we were walking along of the crowd in the
         terracing.   It seemed to be quite crowded towards the
         centre and left hand side, but the right hand side was
         quite clear.
      Q. Did you notice whether anybody was climbing up to the
         stands from the terracing? - A. Yes. As I was walking
         along there in front of my serial I could see people
                                              H. W. SWIFT


climbing from the terracing along all the sections up
into the stand area.

Did you see anybody come across the front fencing as
well, or not, at that point?   You haven't got to the
terracing yet, you are still walking... - A. As I came to
the corner of Leppings Lane and the North Stand I just
told my serial to spread out along the front of the
terracing.
You have misunderstood my question.   What I am trying to
find out is: were you able to see people climbing over
the perimeter fencing before you did that? - A. No, I was
just aware of people going from the terracing and
climbing up into the stand area.

At that point can you recollect whether anybody was -
when I say "anybody", I mean any supporters who were on
the perimeter track as you were walking along? - A. No, I
was just aware that there seemed to be the normal number
of Police Officers you would expect on the track serial,
and they were spread out at intervals all around the
track.
You then gave the instruction to your serial, "Spread
out"? - A. That's right.   We went to that corner and as
my serial filed past me I just said, "Spread out along
the front of the terracing."
So you stopped on the corner and they passed you, in
effect? - A. That's right.
Of course you did have a radio but you heard no
significant messages at that point? - A. No.    I had been
told just to go on the track at Leppings Lane end.    I
had been given no other instructions, so I was stood at
that corner trying to listen to the radio and find out
the reason why we had been called out.

What did you see then? - A. I couldn't hear anything on
the radio and there was tremendous noise from the crowd.
My attention was then brought towards the back of the
goal.   Officers on my serial were shouting to me to go
to the back of the goal.   As I walked there they were
pointing to the fencing. As I walked along I could see
that people were being pushed and crushed against the
fencing there.

Were the players still warming up at this point or had
they already kicked-off, can you recollect? - A. I am not
really sure whether the game had started at that time, or
not.   I don't think it had.
                                              H. W.' SWIFT


You were called forward by your serial? - A. That’s
right.
You looked and you could see people were being crushed at
the front? - A. That's right.

Which pen are we talking about? - A. I went as far as the
back of the goal.   I didn't really go any further than
the goal itself.   That is the rear of pen 4.

You obviously looked in? - A. I looked and I saw that
people at the front were being pushed against the fencing
and they appeared distressed.
What else did you notice about the pen? - A. It was very
full of people.
How far back did it appear to you that people were in
that distressed condition?   All the way right up to the
top? - A. No, you could see that people not too far away
from the fencing were obviously watching what was going
off on the pitch.   They were obviously excited because
the game was either...   I don't know whether it had
started or it was just about to start at that time.
Did you know the Officer or Officers who were normally in
that position?   Because you were called out as an extra,
weren t you? - A. That's correct.
Did you know who would normally have been there? - A. No,
I didn't know.
Having seen what you saw, what happened then as far as
you are concerned? - A. Well, the Officers who had called
me over, they were obviously saying, "We have got to open
these gates.     My concern at that time was that if we
were going to open these gates, where were we going to
put all these people who obviously would come flooding
out.   I can recall stepping back towards the right hand
side of the terracing to see that that area was still
clear.   Then I stepped back and started to wave towards
the Control Box, because I couldn't use my radio.    There
were transmissions coming over the radio.   I didn't know
what they were.   I was waving to them just to try and
indicate that we were going to open these gates.   The
gates were opened and then I became involved in just
pulling people out through gate 4.

Did you open the gate or what it somebody else who opened
the gate? - A. It was somebody else who opened the gate.
                                              H. W.- SWIFT


Who exactly did open the gate, I don't know.   As I said,
I stepped back to my right and then looked over to my
left to the Control Box.   It was done at that time. I
don't know who opened the gate.

What I understand your evidence to be is that you
realised there was a problem? - A. Yes.




         Q. You stepped back to see
it Q1
                                                                         31
                                                                    H. W. SWIFT




                Q.     You stepped back to see where you were going to put the
                      people? - A. That's right.

                Q.     You tried tosignal to the   Control Box because you
                      didn't think you could use   your radio? - A. Yes.
            B
                Q. And did you authorise the gate to be opened, or did tne
                   Officer do it on his own initiative? - A. I can
                   remember shouting, "Open the gates”. Whether they were
                   opened because I had said that, or whether they had
                   been opened before, I don't know.

                Q. We are talking about gate 4, are we? - A. This is gate
                   4. I can remember shouting towards gate 5 as well, for
                   that to be opened for   people to go through that once
                   they had come out of gate 4, but it was gate 4 that was
                   opened.
                0. Can you remember whether either gate 4 or gate 5,
                   having been opened as you say, was shut again, as far
                   as you remember? - A. No, I can't remember.

                Q. The gate was opened, you have just told me. Did the
        D          people just pour out or what happened? - A. I was
                   expecting people just to flood out, and I was expecting
                   problems in getting them down to the right-nand side,
                   but tney just stood.    Nobody came out at all    and we
                   literally had to drag   people out.

                0. Were the people whom you dragged out escorted and then
                   put back into, say, pen 6 or 7, or were tney taken
                   across to the pitch or what happened to them - or were
                   they poorly to do anything other than to be carried? -
                   A. The people that we were pulling and dragging through
                   gate 4, once we had dragged them and pulled them
                   througn tne majority of them were able to walk away on
                   their own two feet. I don't really think anybody who
                   was seriously injured came through that gate in the
                   first instance.
                0   . Havingopened the gate, having started to set these
                      peopleout, did you look around again to the area
                     within the pen? - A. When we first started working at
                     the gate and pulling people through, I was aware tnat
                     people not too far away from the gate were still
                     involved and looking and getting excited about tne game
                     that was going on. The game had obviously started at
                     that time, and they were still watching the game,
                     unaware of what we were doing and what the problem was
                     at the front.

                0. Did you or anybody else that you saw attempt to
                   communicate with the people benind? - A. Not for some
                   minutes because the people I was with and myself were




        H
                                                        32
                                             II.   W.   SWIFT




that involved in just trying to drag these people
through the gate. It was not until later on that we
were trying to tell people to get back.

I think you had an altercation with a man, didn't you,
around this time as well? - A. We had been there for
quite some minutes and a man, who we had pulled through
the gate believe, he did come back at us two or three
times. He was obviously trying to get at a particular
person but he was just getting in- our way and hindering
us. I had pushed him and shoved him away two or three
times and eventually I had to hit him to get him away
from us. I still think he came back again even after
that.

Your impression was that he was coming back because he
had somebody inside that pen? - A. Yes, he was
obviously in a blind panic and he was after trying to
get at a particular individual. I think he kept
putting his hand out to just what was a hand there.
You couldn't really see who it belonged to,, but it was
just a hand that was there.

You perceived him as a hindrance at the time, but you
are saying that probably he wasn't positively
obstructing you deliberately, he wanted to get to
somebody? - A. That's right. He was obviously in a
panic and it was obviously somebody he knew or who ne
was with and he was just trying to get to this person.
We were so restricted around that gate that only two or
three could work there to pull people out at a time,
and he was just getting in the way.

It was around that time that people started shouting to
people to move back? - A. We had been there some
minutes pulling   people out and we got to the stage
where you could   see that there were gapsat the back,
not too far away, but people were in such a panic and
they were so desperate that they were just pushing
towards the gate. That was the thing tnat tney could
see, tneir way out, but if they had just turned round
and stepped back a little bit they probably would nave
released some of the pressure that was there.

So was it your impression that people from the back
were coming forward towards the little gate? - A.
Certainly for the first few minutes that we were
working there, yes, they were pushing towards that gate
because that is what they could see and that was their
way out, and they were in such a panic they were
oblivious to anything else. If they had stepped back
and just looked behind them they could have got away
quite safely.
                                                       33
                                             H.   W.    SWIFT




I think you have told us you pulled people out and you
assisted with rescue attempts afterwards as well,
didn't you? - A. That is correct, yes.

We will break at this point and we are going to have
coffee in our usual way, then when we have had our
coffee we will carry on. Would you mind remembering
that you are on oath so don't discuss the evidence
until we have finished. Before we break to coffee
could you step to one side, because I want to get P.C.
McGuinness back.

           PETER JOHN McGUINNESS Recalled

               Further by THE CORONER

This is Exhibit C366. This is the acetate, Mr.
McGuinness, of the picture which you looked at where
you were trying to identify yourself, and I think you
said although you think you probably were there, you
can't actually see yourself on this picture, is that
right? - A. Not from that picture, no.

Thank you very much indeed.
     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I am aware that witn so many
people in one photograph it is sometimes difficult to
discern details on the acetate. Would the Jury be
assisted to see at this stage some hard photographs
which could be passed round the Jury, which perhaps
give better definition.
     THE CORONER:    What is it that you want tnem to
see in particular?
     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I know what is in this
photograph, and it looks from here as though it is
easier to see the detail of that photograph, rather
than just a mass of people, by looking at the
photograph itself as opposed to the acetate.
     THE CORONER:   All right. Pass it round tne Jury,
and then you can have your coffee. We will be making
the usual hard copy for their folder, no doubt, or for
my folder anyway.
                (Short Adjournment)

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Swift, I have only got one more
question for you and then the others will no doubt ask
you one or two. You may or not be aware that an
Officer or Officers are posted to the perimeter trace -
you weren't, we know that. Did you see that Officer at
all, or any Officers who were posted to that perimeter
                                                                   34
                                                         H.   W.   SWIFT




             track during all this episode? - A. When we first
             walked onto the track I was aware that the normal
             Officers who I would have expected to be on the track
             were there, and that is all I can say.
    B   Q.    Did you see them do anything, prior to you saying,
             "Open the gate"? - A. Ho, I am just aware of other
             Officers, other than people on my serial, being there.
             I am not aware of any actions that they did.
        Q. You had not noticed anybody being walked up to pen 6, a
           group of supporters walking up towards the pen? - A.
           Not that I can remember.
                         Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

        Q. After gate 4 had been opened, did you ever see that it
           was closed again during the disaster? - A. No.
                         Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS

        Q. Sergeant Swift, just so you can help me with this, when
           you left the railway station you travelled with other
           Officers down towards the ground? - A. That is correct,
           yes.
        Q. You say you were in a public service vehicle but I
           assume that that was one under Police control? - A.
           Yes, it was one that had been provided to take the
           supporters up to the ground. It was one that was not
           being used by the supporters, there were no more
           supporters expected, so we used it.
        Q. Could you help us as to how long it took between being
           dropped off outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles - is
           that where you were dropped off? - A. No, we went round
           to the gymnasium.
        0. Being dropped off outside the gymnasium and actually
           getting in and hearing the garbled message about tne
           gates being opened? - A. Being dropped off at the
           gymnasium, and between getting into the gymnasium?

        0. You told us that you heard at some stage a garbled
           message over the radio? - A.  That is correct, yes.

        Q. Could you help us as to how  long it was? - A. It is a
           matter of less than a minute walking from Penistone
           Road into the gymnasium and I .think I switched my radio
           onto the channel at about that time.

        Q. Up to that time you had not had your radio on talk-
           through? - A. No, I had nothad it on the channel which




H
U -u                                                                    35
                                                              H.   W.   SWIFT




                  was monitoring the match, I had had it on the channel
                  which was relevant for West Bar operations.

               0. Do I understand you to be saying this, that on your way
                  to the ground you saw a large number of supporters
           B      still walking down? - A. That is correct. We travelled
                  along tliddlewood Road and turned right into Leppings
                  Lane and there were still large groups of people
                  walking along the top side of the park towards Leppings
                  Lane, which is quite some distance from the ground.

               Q. What sort of distance - half a mile? - A. It is half a
                  mile.
               Q. Did that surprise you, having regard to the time? - A.
                  It did, because of the time, you know, it was shortly
                  before the kick-off.
               0. You go onto the terrace with your serial, having been
                  given an instruction to do so, in front of the terrace?
                  - A. Went onto the track, yes.
               0. As I understand it you say this, that you gave an
                  instruction once you got there for your men to pan out?
                  - A. That is correct.
               Q. At that time you were not aware of any problem on the
                  terrace? - A. No, I was in the corner of the Leppings
                  Lane terrace and the North Stand. The terraces were
                  quite open there, there weren't many people in that
                  particular area.
               0. Then on further and closer looking you saw that there
                  was a problem? - A. That is right, yes.
               0. The problem to you seemed to be only towards the front,
                  close to the fence? - A. Correct, yes.
               0. Can you help us as to how far back that problem was, or
                  perhaps put another way, where did it appear to you -
                  two back, three back, four back, you tell us - that the
                  people were looking at the game and not in distress? -
                  A. It was not far away from the front at all. Perhaps
                  only three or four rows back people appeared to be
                  watching what was going on on the pitch.
               0. And not in the sort of distress that you could see? -
                  A. Certainly tne people really close to the fence were
                  being pushed up against the fence and were in distress.

               0. Yes, but from three or four back    . - A. Not far
                  away.




       H
                                                        36
                                              H.   W.   SWIFT




... and going up the terrace, things appeared to you to
be okay? - A. Yes, people were excited and they were
just looking at what was going on on the pitch.

You tell us that you heard no significant messages on
the radio. I understand you to be saying that it was
really very, very difficult to hear radio transmissions
at all from where you were? - A. That is correct. The
noise, certainly just prior to when the game was - when
they were warming up and just prior to the start of the
game, and when the game had started, the noise was
quite horrendous and I was aware of radio transmissions
but not of what they were.
In the same way you say that you could not use your
radio, when there came a time that you wanted to get a
message through to the Control Box. Was that partly
due to the noise? - A. Well, it was partly due to the
noise because I could hear there were transmissions on
the radio, and then when I didn't think that there were
transmissions I didn't want to commit myself to trying
to transmit in case I cut somebody off.
You said that you   started to wave to the Control Box.
Could you help us   as to what movement you made? - A . I
waved towards the   Control Room to try and get their
attention, then I   pointed towards the gate that we were
going to open the   gate.
You obviously had it in your mind as to what you
intended by that message but .... - A. Yes,, but whether
they got the message, I don't know.
And it was no doubt one man doing one   thing amidst a
crowd doing all sorts of things? - A»   Well I was stood
immediately at the back of the goal.    Whether they saw
me, the people in the Control Room, I   don't know.

The final point is this, you say that when the gate
opened, following your order, you expected people to
flood out, but they were stuck and had to be dragged ^
out. What was causing the problem so far as your men's
attempts to get them out were concerned? Was it
anything to do with tne shape of the gate? - A. Well,
the gate was quite narrow, it is perhaps only two to
three feet wide. The gate itself only opened to a
right angle ....
As opposed to what, being flat against the rest of the
fence? - A. Yes, so you couldn't approach the opening
from the right-hand side at all. You could only
approach either straight in front of the gate or from
the left-hand side, and then there were the advertising
Hoardings that were at an angle against the base of
                                                   37
                                              H. W. SWIFT




fencing, they also hindered you slightly because they
came right up to the edge of the opening as well.

             Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Officer, as soon   as you yourself got to in front of pen
3 it was obvious   to you the people at the front were in
distress, pushed   against the front? - A. Yes, it was
mainly pen 4. I    didn't really go past the rear of the
goal.
My fault entirely - it is a classic example which Mrs.
McBrien may understand - the pen you were in front of,
pen 4, it was obvious to you as soon as you got there
in front of pen 4 that the people at the front by the
perimeter fence were being pushed and were in distress
at the front? - A. Yes, as soon as it was brought to my
attention you could see that people were being pushed
up against that fence, and they were in distress.

They were being crushed up against it, weren't they? -
A. They were being pushed, yes, forcibly.

They were being crushed up against it? - A. Oh, yes,
they were being crushed.
I want to identify if I can what time that was when it
was obvious to you that the pen at the front was in
that condition. You told us that when you got there
there weren't any people on the perimeter track, by
which I mean members of the public? - A. As far as I
can remember there were no supporters on the track,
just Police Officers and the photographers.
The sort of Police Officers you saw, apart from your
own serial when they arrived, were just the normal
number of Police Officers which you would have expected
to be on duty at the perimeter fence? - A. Correct,
yes.
Can you help us on how many you would have seen? - A.
Well, the normal number of Police Officers at that end
of the ground would be one per gate at Leppings Lane.

Clearly the game had not already started? - A. When we
first got there the players were still warming up, yes.

Were any gates open already in your eyesight when you
got outside pen 4, before you yourself took part in the
opening of the gate to pen 4? - A. No, not that I can
recall.

So the picture when you first arrived outside pen 4,
and it was obvious to you that the conditions at the
                                                      38
                                            H.   W.   SWIFT




front were such that people were being crushed against
the perimeter fence, was that there were no gates
opened, there were just Police Officers on the
perimeter track, and the game had not started, that is
a fair summary? - A. That is right, yes.




                /Q. That may help us
                              H. W. SWIFT

That may help us to identify when that was in relation
to other events. Is it your evidence that from that
time onwards, once Gate A had been opened, you simply
assisted continuously in people being dragged out
through the gate? - A. Yes, I was totally involved for
perhaps up to 30 minutes involved in dragging people
through that gate.

We know, therefore, from that time when you were first
there, before the game started, before people had got
into the perimeter track, the game had to start, the
game had to play and the game was stopped? - A. That
is correct, yes.

We know that was at 6 minutes past 3.

So in all that time there was this continuous pulling
out of people from the pen which was clearly in such a
condition at the front that people were being crushed?
- A. Yes, that is correct.

I assume the picture is that the more you dragged
people out, the more obvious it was how worse it was
getting, or it was worse? - A. Yes. When we first
started working at the gate, you could still see
people only a short distance away who were watching
the game and watching what was going off on the pitch,
but then after some period of time you could see the
panic and desperation just took over and people were
just trying to get towards the gate where we were.
Of course, until you dragged the people out at the
front, you would not be able to see either what was
behind them or indeed underneath their feet? Until
you get them out you cannot see? - A. No. You could
see people from quite some distance back, they seemed
to be popping up and they would roll over the top of
the crowd towards the gate and we would drag them over
the top of people.

When were you conscious, if at all, of any more senior
Officer than yourself arriving at the scene where you
were outside Pen A? - A. I can recall being there for
some minutes and I can recall on perhaps two occasions
senior Officers coming up to us and saying, "We have
got to get these people out", and I just pointed out
that we were doing what we could do, and that is just
dragging the people out, and then that was it.
But during this time the crowd in the pen were in a
panic, as you have described it, yet the game was
still going on, is that right? - A. No, the game would
not be going on at that time, I don't think, no. It
was some time after.
                                                      40



                                  H. W. SWIFT

Q.   So when you were conscious of the senior Officers
     coining and saying, "We have got to get these people
     out", your impression was the game had been stopped bv
     then? - A. Yes, definitely.

               Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:
Q.   Sergeant, when you were told by. Inspector Sewell that
     all Officers were required on the pitch - well, they
     were required at Leppings Lane end - but you say when
     you went on the track you did not realise there was
     trouble, is that right? - A. Mr. Sewell shouted up in
     the gymnasium were there any serials available and I
     stepped forward and said yes and he just said, "Go to
     the track at Leppings Lane", and that was the only
     conversation I had with him.

Q.   He did not say anything else at all? - A. No.

Q.   When you got there you say that you did not realise
     there was a problem. You had seen people being pulled
     up into the stands at the back, but you did not see
     anybody coming over the perimeter fence and so you did
     not at first for a while think it was serious? - A.
     No, I was aware that serials would only be directed
     onto the track if there was some kind of problem. I
     was not aware of what that problem was when I was sent
     there.

Q.   No. You said after the perimeter gate had been
     opened, that is Gate A, the majority of fans were able
     to walk away ontheir own two feet, and that the
     others just carried on watching the match - were still
     watching the match you said? - A. We had to drag the
     people through the gates, but once we had done that
     and we had got them onto their feet, the majority of
     them were able to step to one side or walk away, but
     when we first started pulling people through that gate
     there were people not too far away, not too far back
     in the crowd, who were still involved in watching the
     game.

Q.   Did you pull anybody out through Gate Awho needed
     attention? - A. Yes.Towards the end of the   period
     there were two particular people who were lay down at
     the base of the gate who I was quite fearful that they
     were going to be seriously injured because they were
     there for some time and they were shouting for help
     and we could not pull them away because of the
     pressure on top of them. Eventually they were pulled
     to one side by myself and they were obviously in some
     distress and obviously injured because we just laid
     them to one side, although they were breathing and
     they were alive.
                              H. W. SWIFT

 Did you see the perimeter fence of Pen A being torn
 down? - A. At a later stage I did, yes.

 That was at a later stage? - A. Yes, certainly not in
 the beginning.

 Did lots of fans manage to make their escape onto the
 pitch at that time? - A. I would say when the
 perimeter fence in Pen A was being pulled down the
 majority of people and the pressure in Pen A had
 already gone and there was no reason for doing that at
 that time.

But the Police Officers on the track did not try to
stop the fans pulling the fence down, did they? - A.
No. I know that the fans and Police Officers were
pulling the fence down as a reaction, thinking that
they needed to do so to get people out, and I believe
that was necessary in Pen 3, but in Pen A I do not
think so.

         Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN:
Sergeant, you have already told the Court that when
you first walked onto the track you noticed that the
Officers who were supposed to be there were, in fact,
there? - A. That is correct, yes.

You then went on to say that you were not aware of any
of their actions? — A# That is correct* yes#

And when you were asked about the possibility of any
supporters being walked along to Pen 6, you said, "Not
that I can remember". I would like to ask you about
that piece of your evidence. Are you saying there
that it could have happened but you did not notice it,
or that it did not happen? - A. It did not happen as
far as I am aware.

     THE CORONER: There are three things the Jury have
asked me to ask. Mr. King, you go ahead and I will
come in at the end.

     MR. KING: I am obliged. Sir, this is a specific
question on behalf of Mr. Spearritt, sir, about his
son, and again it is not, if I can put it this way, a
contentious matter in the generic sense.

     THE CORONER: Go ahead and ask it, yes.

         KING: I am obliged, sir. It might be
helpful if you asked your questions because I want to
make sure I have fully understood the point.
                                                         42



                                     H. W. SWIFT

          , THE CORONER: Okay. Then you can come in at the
       ena. i have got a question as well.

                     Further by THE CORONER:

 Q*    5if8tJwe «i U deal with the Points the Jury have
       raised. One of them is on the perimeter track and the
       vmiramo6 l s t u L®PPinSs Lane. Do you remember when
       you came and the bus went past Leppings Lane and you
       said you could see there was a big crowd? Did you
       feel when you viewed the crowd that you ought perhaps
       to have got off, not in retrospect but at the time, in
       order to assist with its control? - A. Not really, no*
       Our main concern at that time was getting into the
       ground and being where we should be.   We should have
       been at the gymnasium for 3 o'clock.   We could see
       that we could not get into the ground at Leppings Lane
       end, so we told the coach      driver, or the bus driver,
       to go round to thegymnasium.

 Q*    SV ! ? e taught of, 'Oh, we had better get down here
      and help        A. That didn't really cross our minds,
      no.

Q.    The second question deals with the track. You
      mentioned that you signalled, do you remember, to say
      that you were going to open the gate? - A. I am sorry.
Q.    You said that you tried to attract Control's attention
      by waving, or something, and pointing to the gate.
      Did you send any messenger from your serial to Control
      to say what you were doing? - A. No.

Q.     Now the question I want to ask is this. You have
      mentioned the game kicking off, you told me when I
      examined you. What I want you to do is to relate that
      to any event. Was it when you opened the gate, or at
      least when the gate was open? Was it before that,
      fu       t? When was ifc that y°u had the impression
      that the match had kicked off? - A. Unfortunately I
      can t remember specifically. I believe it must have
      been after the people had been brought to my
      attention, and either just before or at the time the
      gate was being opened. I can't be sure.

             Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING:
Q.    You were in front of Pen A ? - A. Yes, that is correct.
Q.    You have told us the period of time you were there.
      Let me try and establish that. You were there from
      the point when you arrived, which I have asked you
      questions about and tried to identify that by
      reference to what was happening when you arrived. How
«                                                                      43



                                                   H. W. SWIFT

                   long did you stay in front of Pen A before you
                   actually moved away completely? - A. I was involved in
                           pe?ple through the gate for perhaps up to 30
        B                   i was then involved in other incidents
                   immediately behind the goal in front of Pen A, and
                   then 1 went away at the time the Nottingham fans
                   started to jeer about the events that were taking
                   place, and when the Police cordon was formed across
                   the centre of the pitch. That was when I went away
                   irom that area.                                   J

             Q.    That gives us some assistance as to how long you were
                   there. During the time you were there did you see
                   anybody, by which I mean somebody who had been in the
                   pen, a supporter, being passed from Pen A into Pen 3’
                   - A. Nothing specific at all.
             Q.    You did not see it? - A. I didn't see anything.

                          MRS. McBRIEN:   Just one more question, if I may.
                          THE CORONER: Yes.

                          Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:
             Q.   Sergeant, you said people were crushed up against the
                  perimeter fence before the game had started? - A. That
                  is correct, yes.

                       THE CORONER: Sergeant Swift, thank you very much
                  indeed. I am very much obliged to you.

                                  LILLIAN S0SN0WSKI Sworn
                                      By THE CORONER:
            Q.    You were Lillian Akred, that is right, is it not? - A.
                  XcS •

            Q.    Just tell us your new surname? - A. Sosnowski.
            Q.    You are PC.3198? - A. That is correct.

            Q-    You were, in fact, part of Sergeant Swift's serial, I
                  believe, is that right? - A. Yes, that is right.
            Q.    You presumably were on the same coach which we have
                  already heard about which was taking you back from the
                  Q?iiTayoSta?io5 towards the gymnasium, or towards the
                  stadium? - A. Yes, I was.
            Q.    I take it you also saw a crowd outside Leppings Lane
                  as you passed? - A. I did, yes.




    H
                                   L. SOSNOWSKI

And the coach went on and you went on with it, that
would be right? - A. Yes, that is right.
Having entered the gymnasium, how long would you
reckon you were in the gymnasium before something
happened? You did not have a radio, did you? - A. No.
So perhaps I ought to put it this way. Who alerted
you that you were going to be Heeded outside? - A.
Sergeant Swift.
Apart from saying you were wanted outside, did he tell
you anything else? - A. No, he just said we had to go
onto the track at the front of the West Stand.
And you set off and did that? - A. Yes.
And you exited between the Kop and the North Stand in
that corner, did you not? - A. Yes.
Can you   say what was happening on the pitch at that
time as   far as you remember? It does not matter what
anybody   else remembers. - A. I saw that the players
were on   the pitch.




                          /Q.   Not playing but ....
                                                        45


                                                  L. SOSNOWSKI

Q. Not playing but on the pitch? - A. They were like
   knocking the ball about.
Q. The match had not started, that is what I am trying
   to say? - A. Not that I am aware of, no.
Q. You started walking towards the West Stand? - A. I
   did, yes.
Q. As you were walking towards the West Stand did you
   observe it? Were you looking at it? - A. Yes.
Q. What did you see as you were walking towards it? I
   do not mean when you got there. When you were just
   walking down by the North Stand? - A. As I was
   walking down in front of the North Stand I just
   looked over and I saw the middle two sections, which
   was like behind the goal, was fairly full of people.
Q. Did you notice anything about the side sections or
   was that the thing that attracted your attention that
   the middle ones were full? - A. I think that is what
   attracted me first, yes.
Q. From that point, apart from that, did you see
   anything else that attracted your attention? - A. Not
   as far as I can recollect, no.
Q. You cannot recollect people climbing over the fence
   at that point or can you? - A. No.
Q. Can you remember them going up into the stands? - A.
   No.
Q. You then came, I take it, to the corner? - A. Yes.
Q. What happened? Where did you go or what did you
   do? - A. I was just told to space ourselves out in
   front of the stands and so I continued to walk down.
Q. How far down did you yourself get? - A. Just to where
   the goal posts started, to round about there.
Q. Then you turned and looked in towards the terracing,
   is that right? - A. Yes.
Q. Having done that, what did you see? - A. I saw that
   all the crowd was surging forward and I just that to
   be a normal thing that I had seen at other football
   matches that I have attended.
Q. Did you see anybody   at that point when you first
   turned who appeared   to you to be distressed? - A. No,
   not really. I just    saw the crowd surge forward and I
   expected them to go   back like they normally do.
                                                     46


                                                L. SOSNOWSKI

Q. When did you realise that something was not right? -
   A. I had taken a couple of steps and then I turned
   round again because, like I say, I expected the crowd
   to go back and it didn't. When I looked again I saw
   that there were people with their faces pushed up to
   the fencing and obviously in distress.
Q. What time interval would you say there was between
   when you first got there and turned and faced the
   crowd, saw them come forward apparently, and then
   realised that there was distress occurring? - A. It
   wouldn't be very long. It was just a matter of me
   looking, turning away and then looking again.
Q. Have I got this right? Are you saying that when you
   first took up your position the thing that you
   noticed was a surge but at that point the crowd right
   at the front did not seem to you to be distressed,
   and it was only when that surge had taken place that
   you then looked and saw there was distress? - A.
   Actually as the surge came I was still walking to go
   further down the track. So it was like seeing it out
   of my eye corner and seeing the crowd come and then I
   looked. They didn't go back and then obviously I
   turned fully and saw their faces were crushed up
   against the fencing.
Q. What has happening on the pitch at that point? I
   know you have not got eyes in the back of your head
   but can you help me? - A. The last time that I looked
   at the pitch the players were still messing around
   with the ball.
Q. Did you at that point observe the pitch at all? Do
   you know what was happening on the pitch when you
   first saw the distress and if you do not know you
   must say so? - A. I couldn't honestly say.
Q. So you realised that they looked distressed. What
   did you do then? Did you hear anything first of all?
   - A. Yes, I saw the people with their faces pushed up
   and some were going blue and I heard some people in
   the crowd shouting, "We are crushed. Open the
   gates".
Q. Was that cry that you heard either after or at the
   same time that you realised that people were being
   crushed and squashed against the fencing or had you
   heard cries prior to that? - A. I think it was more
   or less at the same time I realised.
Q. What did you do then? - A. I was walking with PC
   Hooson and so we went towards a gate and opened the
   gate.
Q. The pair of you, so to speak? - A. Yes.
                                                      47


                                                L. SOSNOWSKI


Q. Was Sergeant Swift with you at that time or had he
   not yet joined you? - A. I think he was a little bit
   behind us.
Q. Did you signal to him at all to communicate that
   there was a problem? - A. No, I didn't, no.
Q. Did you call out to the people in any way to try to
   communicate with them? You had obviously heard the
   message, "We are being crushed". Did you attempt to
   respond? - A. Not at first. We just opened the gate
   and then everybody just, you know, started to pull
   people out.
Q. Did the people come out on their own or did they have
   to be helped out? - A. We had to literally pull them
   out.
Q. Did you notice any panic? - A. As soon as the gates
   were opened people were obviously pushing to the
   front to try and get out, yes. I think the longer
   they were opened the more they seemed to rush.
Q. Where were these people coming from who were coming
   towards the gate? - A. They were coming from further
   back.
Q. Were those people able to get out on their own or did
   they also have to be pulled through? - A. What they
   were doing they were like crawling over the top of
   the people who were at the front of the gate because
   they had fallen down. We were trying to pull them
   out first to make a bigger gap but people further
   back were just like taking leaps and jumps and
   jumping literally over the top of the people that
   were stuck.
Q. You could see, of course, that they were panicking? -
   A. Yes.
Q. Did they appear to you to be in the same sort of
   condition as the ones right near the front? - A. No.
Q. In what way were they different? - A. The people at
   the front were being crushed and they did not seem to
   have the energy to even pull themselves out. We had
   to do that for them but the people at the back were
   obviously themselves jumping over.
Q. Did that mean that room was being created at the back
   or was the room being continuously filled up with
   other people? In other words, was space being
   created? - A. There was space at the back, yes,
   because I can remember at one point looking up after
   I had been pulling people out and seeing that there
                                                          48


                                                   L. SOSNOWSKI

     was a gap and shouting to people to turn round and
     look back.

Q.   Did they    do that? -A. No.

Q.    This was well into the rescue, of course? - A. A
     while after.

Q. Was the match still in play at that point or have you
   no idea? - A. I couldn't say.

Q.    I want to just take one point because I think you
     actually remembered going to help a lady, did you
     not? - A. I did, yes.

Q. Can you recollect out of which pen that lady came? -
   A. No, not really. I remember going through some
   t o m fencing to actually get to her.
Q. You were, in fact, identified. In other words, you
   are saying it does not necessarily have to be out of
   Pen 4 that this lady came so far as you know? - A.
   No.

Q. Because you identified her, did you not,
   eventually? - A. As Christine Jones.

Q. It was Christine Jones, was it not? - A. Yes.
Q. I think you tried to resuscitate her with others and
   somebody came along who said he was a doctor and said
   it was too late, did he not? - A. That is right, yes.
Q. You do not know where you got her from? - A. I just
   remember seeing that she was laid on the floor and I
   went through this torn fencing to pick her up but
   just exactly where...

Q. So you went through the fencing? - A. Yes.
Q. It was after the fencing had been broken down? - A.
   Yes, it was a while after we had been pulling people
   out.

Q. In that case I think we can leave that. In fact, as
   it happens her husband was with her at the time you
   were with her? - A. He came after we had pulled her
   out and laid her at the back of the goal mouth and
   her husband came at thattime.

Q. Did you see the Officerswho are the regulars on that
   part of the perimeter track? - A. I was aware when I
   was walking down towardsthe terracing end that there
   were Officers there. I am not from that Division and
   so I don't know who they were.
                                                         49


                                                L. SOSNOWSKI

Q. You do not know who they were? - A. No.
Q. Did you see anybody, before you got to where you
   were, walking along the perimeter track either
   towards the left or towards the right? - A. Not as
   far as I can recollect, no.

Q. The people you helped to pull out, where did they go?
   Did they go left or right or do ypu not know where
   they went? - A. I can't really say; I know as I was
   pulling them out they didn't seem to go so far away
   because I can remember that one chap trying to get
   back in.

Q. Was it the man whom Sergeant Swift had to deal with
   quite forcefully in the end? Did you see that or
   not? - A. I didn't see that but I know one chap kept
   trying to get back in.

Q. Once you and I think PC Hooson had opened this gate,
   have you any recollection of it being shut again? -
   A. No.

Q. Are you saying you have no recollection of it being
   shut again or are you saying that it was not shut
   again to you knowledge? - A. To my knowledge it was
   not shut again. I was there a long time.
Q. How long would you say you were there in round terms?
   - A. I don't know really but it was a long time.

                Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE:
Q. Will you try and help the Court please with the
   sequence of events and the timing as best you can and
   to do that, can you open the black folder that is in
   front of you and turn to the document at the
   beginning called C.277? - A. Yes.
Q. If you just run your eye down the column of times,
   the second column you can get down to 14:59:04, Gate
   4 open? - A. Yes.

Q. Just run your eye a little bit further down, the next
   time is 14:59:20, Gate 3 open and then 14:59:30,
   kick-off. Trusting these times, it looks as if Gate
   4 was opened just under half a minute before the
   kick-off, is that right? - A. Yes.
Q. 14:59:04 seconds and kick-off was at 30 seconds? - A.
   Yes.

Q. I want to work backwards from Gate 4 open to work you
   back into the gymnasium to try and work out as near
   as we can what time it was that Inspector Sewell
   first asked for help at that end of the pitch?
                                                        50


                                                  L. SOSNOWSKI


     MR. KING: I am sorry to interrupt but all I have is
that it says at 14:59 Gate 4 open which I assume is a
record that at that time it was seen to be open. I do not
know if that is right or wrong.

     THE CORONER:   I think that that is right.
     MR. KING: I do not know if it is right or wrong but
it was put to thewitness that because it is there that
that is the time it was opened. I do not know whether that
is right or wrong.

     THE CORONER:     The point you are making, Mr. King, let
us just take that   the witness has said that once it was
opened, and she had opened it, it did not shut again, then
if your point is right in fact what you are saying is that
it could have been opened earlier than that. That is
right, is it not?




                      /MR. KING.
                                                         51

                                                  L* SOSNOWSKI

          MR. KING:   I neither know, nor.otherwise, sir.  I
     am just trying to discover the significance of what is on
     this document.   That is all, sir.
           THE CORONER:  The significance of this document is
     that this is based on video and photographic evidence and
     that at whatever time it is it was seen to be open
     because you can actually see it.   That is all that this
     says.
           MR. KING:   Sir, I am not drawing any assumptions,
     conclusions or otherwise.    I am just anxious that we
     know this document merely tells us, as we often say, the
     snapshot of what is seen at a given time.    It may be my
     learned friend is right.    I am not criticising him for
     that.    I am just saying one should be accurate as to
     what a document that is being put actually says.
          THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, I am sure you accept this
     point.
Q.        MR. PAYNE:   Well, what we know is that it was you
     and Mr. Hooson who together opened the gate? - A. That's
     right.
Q. After that, you and other Officers were fully busy by
   that gate helping people to get out? - A. That is
   correct.
Q. So once it was opened by you and Mr. Hooson it stayed
   open? - A. Yes.
Q. We know that it is open at 14.59, apart from the fact it
   is on this schedule, because we have also seen a
   photograph with the timing on the clock at 14.59. - A.
   Yes.
Q. Mr. King's point is that it might have been opened
   earlier than 14.59, but as far as I know we can't do any
   better than the time we have got here.    If some other
   evidence comes out to show exactly when it was opened
   earlier we will hear that later.   However, at the moment
   all we have got is that we know it definitely was open,
   in fact, at 14.59? - A. Yes.

Q. So I want to work backwards from that.    Can you give an
   estimate as carefully as you can of how long you had been
   at the perimeter fence in front of that terrace before
   you opened the gate?   Do you understand the question? -
   A. Yes, I do.

Q. How long was it? - A. Not very long.    Not very long at
   all. I would not even say it was minutes.     It all
   happened as we were walking down.   We were still walking
                                                          52


                                                L. SOSNOWSKI


   when we saw the crowd surge and turned round and saw they
   hadn't gone back.
Q. So it sounds less than a minute? - A. Yes.  I never
   actually stood to look. We were still on the move and
   everything was happening.
Q. A matter of seconds? - A. I would say that rather than
   minutes, yes.
Q. To see where you had come from, can you look in that
   folder and find 274? - A. Yes.
Q. Can you find the gymnasium behind the North Stand?   As
   we look at it it is to the left hand side of the diagram?
   - A. Yes, I can see it.
Q. When you got the message you were there? - A. Yes.
Q. What is the route from the gymnasium you took?   Could
   you go to the screen and point it out on the screen? - A.
   We walked out of the gymnasium, round this way and then
   along the track in front of the North Stand and back
   round to the West Stand.
Q. Thank you.   So let's start that journey.    You are in
   the gymnasium with the rest of the serial.    Your
   Sergeant gets the message from Inspector Sewell? - A. I
   wasn't aware who he got the message from.    I just know
   he told us to go in front of the West Stand.
Q. Your Sergeant told you to go? - A. That's right.
Q. Can you remember what you were doing when he told you to
   go? - A. Yes, we were just trying to find some places to
   sit down at a table to take our meal.
Q. You and the rest of the serial had to get yourselves
   together, did you?   Just talk us through it. What have
   you to actually do? - A. We had just got into the gymand
   we were trying to find somewhere to sit down because it
   was our meal break.   I can remember just getting hold of
   a chair to sit down when Sergeant Swift shouted to us,
   "Come on, we have got to go in front of the West Stand."
   I never actually sat down.   We all just followed him out
   of the gym.
Q. Walking or what? - A. Yes, walking.
Q. Then you walked at what sort of a pace? - A. Just a
   normal walking pace I would say.
Q. The jury has been to the ground so they know the
   distances involved and can see it on the model and also
                                                       53


                                                L. SOSNOWSKI


   this drawing.   How long do you think it is going to take
   you to walk from the gymnasium along the route you have
   taken to get down to the front of the terrace? - A.
   Probably around a couple of minutes.
Q. If we go back to the schedule at 277.   On that estimate
   that means you are getting the message in the gymnasium
   at about 14.57, three minutes to three?   Do you think
   that is about right? - A. I didn't look at my watch or
   anything so I couldn't actually say.whether that was
   right or wrong. I only know as we have gone through
   it...
       MR. KING:    I am sorry to interrupt.   You cannot
  draw any conclusions of this sort from this document, one
  way or the other.    It is pre-supposing that 14.59 is the
  time when the gate was opened through the agency of this
  Officer.   All that document tells us is at that time it
  was open.
        THE CORONER:   I suppose the conclusion you can
   draw, assuming that estimate of two minutes let's assume
   that, that at 14.57 or earlier she received the message.
   That must follow logically.
        MR. KING:   If 14.59 is the time when she...   I
   accept that, sir, if 14.59 is the time of the final
   opening of gate 4, if there were more than one opening,
   and I agree with you, sir.   All I am saying, sir, is
   that it is very dangerous to draw conclusions from
   documents in this way.
        MR. MANNING:   I think with respect to my learned
   friend, is it not a conclusion that one can draw at
   14.50.04, we know that the gate was open.   It may have
   been opened prior to that, but Mr. Payne surely is right
   with his logic that it could not have been earlier than
   the time he was putting to the witness that she set off,
   because we know that the gate was open at that time,
   whatever time it had been opened - seconds or whatever -
   beforehand.   He is perfectly right then to deduct the
   two minutes.
        THE CORONER:   No, the point is this, surely.
   Supposing the gate had been opened at 14.58 - I pick
   simply a figure - by this Officer, and by chance the
   first video image of it happens to be 14.59. ^If you
   work backward...   Let us take the 14.58 as being the
   true, absolute, accurate time that this Officer had stood
   there with her stopwatch.   If Mr. Payne is right about
   the time it took to walk round, then she would have
   received the message at 14.56.   If the gate was opened
   at 14.59, the message would have been received at 14.57.
   In that sense, Mr. King is right, because it makes an
                                                        54

                                               L.   SOSNOWSKI


assumption.   That is why I said to you if you add the
words "or earlier", then you can draw that conclusion.
You cannot draw the conclusion that it is absolutely
fixed at 14.57.   I agree with that.
     Of course, it does make another assumption, that
this is the opening of this Officer.   I agree with that.
     MR. KING:   Sir, everybody seems to think I am
trying to make a point because I am.trying to create a
picture.   I have no idea what conclusion is going to.be
drawn, even from what I am saying on this.   I am simply
saying, sir, that at 14.59 the gate is open.   We don t
know on the video whether that gate was then shut.    Sir,
that could be later.   We just don't know.   All I am
saying is that it is dangerous to draw conclusions from
the document, to work backwards like this.   It is far
better to go on what this witness says about what was
happening, but that is a different point.
     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, with respect to my learned
friend Mr. King, we do know and if it were necessary no
doubt we could recall Sergeant Swift, because there is of
course a photograph on which there is a time - 14.59 -
appearing and Sergeant Swift is outside an open gate to
pen 4.
     MR. PAYNE:    Sir, I am quite happy to accept that.
I gave that as a an example simply because one used the
document as if the document identified the time when the
gate was opened.   That is the only point I have ever
made, sir.   One cannot say anything other than at 14.59
gate 4 was seen to be in a state of openness.   That is
the only point I have ever made on that.
     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, with respect, we can show that
at 14.59 the gate was open when Sergeant Swift was
already there.
     THE CORONER:   Yes, but Mr. Russell, I seem to be
able to understand Mr. King's point.   He is not
disputing that as far as I understand it.   He is not
saying the gate was shut, what he is saying is that you
cannot say that at that time that the opening was
occurring.   In fact if anything I would have thought it
was a point against you, insofar as one can have points
for or against in Inquests, because...
     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, that must be right.
     THE CORONER:   If it wasn't open at 14.59 and if
this is the opening of which this Officer is talking
about, then it sounds from the photograph...   Have we
had this as an exhibit yet?
                                                      55


                                               L. SOSNOWSKI

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, we haven't, but if necessary I
can introduce yet more photographs showing times and what
was happening.

     THE CORONER:   As you know I don't like having too
many photographs, but this might be an important one.
Perhaps you can find it and we will get an acetate made.
     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I shall speak quietly to
Sergeant Griffiths.
     THE CORONER:   As I say, my understanding is that
all you are saying is that yes it was open at that time
but we can't say exactly how many seconds, minutes or
hours prior to that time it had actually been opened.
     MR. KING:   Absolutely.    We are identifying or
seeking to identify when this Officer first arrived
because we know from her evidence the relationship
between her arrival and the opening of the gate, and what
she gives evidence of.    I will say no more because I
will get my turn to question her.    However it is
dangerous to start on the assumption it was opened at
14.59 from this document.
     THE CORONER:   I do understand Mr. King's point on
this. Given that the schedule is right then the gate was
open at that time.   All one can say is whether it was
opened at that time or whether it was opened seconds,
minutes or hours before that, I don't know - not from the
schedule, unless one can prove it some other way.
     MR. ISAACS:   Sir, I don't think anybody is arguing
with Mr. King.   He is making a point that I think nobody
was wanting to put in dispute.

     THE CORONER:   Do you accept Mr. King's point which
he is making?   Is that the basis of your...
     MR. PAYNE:   It certainly seems   to me that the
evidence is that it was in fact open   at 14.59.    It may
have been open before that.   If one   takes two minutes
off that, then that takes us back to   14.57.    So it was
either then or before 14.57 that the   serial set off from
the gymnasium.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, that is exactly my
understanding.    If that is what you were putting to the
Officer, I don't think you were actually complaining
about that?
                                                      56

                                                L. SOSNOWSKI


        MR. PAYNE:   That's right:
Q. It has taken rather a long time to get there, but what
   the jury can get from this is that the message sent by
   Inspector Sewell or given, as we know from Sergeant
   Swift, to him, must have been given at some time at least
   before three minutes to three? - A. I can't say exactly
   at what time it was given because obviously I didn t look
   at my watch or anything.




             Q. But on this arithmetic
                                                       57

                                              L.   SOSNOWSKI




Q. On this arithmetic that follows, doesn't it? - A.
   Roughly, yes.
Q. And the message was that some help was needed at the
   Leppings Lane terrace? - A. Well, we was just told to
   go down behind the goal at Leppings Lane, just exactly
   what Inspector Sewell said to Sergeant Swift I wasn't
   privy to that. I only know what Sergeant Swift said to
   us.
Q. So what emerges from this is that somebody was taking
   action at sometime before 14.57? - A. Yes.
                Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Q. I have been interested in timings because of what we
   can learn from your evidence, Officer, as to what you
   could see at the time you first arrived at the
   perimeter fence of pen 4, and as I understand your
   evidence it was really almost immediately upon your
   arrival at the perimeter fence of pen 4 that you
   realised that the crowd, there was something wrong with
   the crowd? - A. Yes, it was after they didn't move back
   after the initial surge.
Q. Which you have told the learned Coroner in effect is
   almost immediately upon your arrival because you
   noticed the surge from the corner of your eye as you
   were turning the corner, to get to the front of the
   pen, and you turned away, looked back again, and
   realised at that stage that that surge had not moved
   back? - A. That's right, yes, sir.
0. At that stage of your really first arrival outside pen
   4, before gate 4 was opened, you could see people
   crushed against the perimeter fence, blue, and people
   shouting for nelp, and it was obvious to you? - A. Yes.
0. We know after that time the game had to start, the game
   nad to be played and the game then had to be stopped
   again. All that nad to follow after your first
   observation which you have described? - A. Yes.
Q. It follows, doesn't it, that the surge you saw, it
   looks as if from your recollection of events, the surge
   you saw which gave you this obvious concern was before
   the game had started, because your recollection is that
   the players at that time were simply warming up? - A. I
   just know they were kicking the ball around. I am not
   really that much into football.
0. Your impression was it was still warming up? - A. Yes.
                                                      58

                                              L.   SOSNOWSKI




Q. Well, or put it another way, the surge which gave you
   that obvious concern that there was something wrong
   with the crowd was before the opening of gate 4 which
   you have told us about.
        THE CORONER:   Just a minute - don't answer that.
   Mr. King, I don't think that that is actually what she
   said. She didn't say that the surge gave her concern.
   What she said was, as I understood it, and by all means
   explore this, my understanding Was that she saw a
   surge, at that point she was not aware of any distress
   from the crowd, as she was walking down the surge did
   not go back, that was the thing that gave her concern,
   and when she next looked, which was seconds later, she
   could see people squashed against the fence becoming
   distressed. Now, that is not quite what you have put.
        HR. KING:   With respect, sir, I submit it is
   because I am viewing the surge as an entity. It was
   the characteristic of this particular surge that it
   didn't go back:
Q. That is right, isn't it? - A. When I first saw the
   surge I took that as normal because it is a normal
   thing at football. It was just when I turned back and
   I saw that the surge hadn't gone back that I realised.

Q. Exactly. I don't think we are at odds and I will
   investigate it perhaps to demonstrate that. You saw
   the surge in the sense you saw it come forward? - A.
   That's right.
Q. You expected it togo back? - A. That's right, yes.
0. That would be a normal surge? That is what I mean by a
   normal surge, the coming forward and the going back? -
   A. That's right, yes.
0. The coming forward is the first part of the surge, the
   going back is the second part of the surge? - A. That
   is right.
0. You saw tnis particular surge coming forward? - A. Yes.
Q. You turned away, looked back again, and you realised
   that surge had not gone back? - A. That's right.
0. So that surge, the second part of that surge, the
   normal second part of the surge, had not occurred? - A.
   That's right, yes.
Q. Hence that surge in the round, taking it in two parts,
   gave you concern? - A. Just the second part, not the
   first.
                                                       59

                                               L.   SOSNOWSKI




Q. Yes, of course, and that surge, the second      part of that
   surge if I can put it that   way, was only a  matterof
   moments from you seeing the first part? - A. That's
   right, yes.
0. And we know from your evidence that your recollection
   is that that was happening   at a time when,   as faras
   you are aware, the players   were still warming up,
   kicking about, that was your impression? - A. Yes.
Q. So as a matter of impression that part of the surge
   which gave you cause for concern, that is that it
   didn't go back, occurred before kick-off, that is your
   impression? - A. That was my impression, yes.
Q. It was then that you were able to see immediately,
   because you looked immediately, that people were
   crushed against the perimeter fence with blue faces
   shouting for help? - A. It wasn't the people with the
   blue faces who were shouting, it was the people behind
   them.
Q. Sorry, it is my giving it as a summary. As a total
   view of what was happening, there were people crushed
   against the front of the fence, blue, and people behind
   were shouting for help? - A. That's right, yes, sir.
0. And it must follow from that, that the impression you
   have, that that was obvious to you while the players
   were still warming up - that's right? - A. Yes.
              Cross-Examined by HRS. HcBRIEN
0. Officer, we have heard evidence in this Court that fans
   were being catapulted out of the tunnel, so do you
   think that the sheer weight of numbers ....

        THE CORONER:    Oh, no.
        HRS. McBRIEN:   That is an opinion, is it?
        THE CORONER:    I am sorry, this lady was nownere
   near the tunnel.
        MRS. McBRIEN:   No, what I was trying to get at,
   sir, was the point that the Officer made when she said
   sne saw people flying through the air - well, I don't
   know if you put it like that, but ....
        THE CORONER:   What she said was people were
   coming from within the terrace, over the heads of
   others, to try and escape because they were panicking.
                                                             60

                                                     L.   SOSNOKSKI




0. That is what you said, isn't it? - A. That is right,
   yes.
             MRS. McBRIEN:    She saw them leaping
Q. You said, through the air, but did you wonder why? Did
   you think this was normal behaviour that you saw? - A.
   I just that that they was trying to get out in panic.
   They were getting over people that was already stuck,
   just trying to get out.
0. Yes, but this was before the gamestarted, you          said,
   that you saw people just ....
          THE CORONER: She never did, I am        sorry. I think
     you misheard her or misunderstood her.       Let me just
     make sure:
Q. These people who were panicking and coming over - I
   used the word panicking, forgive me - the ones who were
   coming from the rear, was this after you opened the
   gate? - A. Yes.
          THE CORONER:   So it wasn't before it was after
     she had opened the gate?
Q. How long after you had opened the gate, if you are able
   to say? - A. I couldn't say.
          THE CORONER:        So it was after she had opened the
     gate, not before.       I think you have misunderstood what
     she was saying.
             HRS. McBRIEN:     It is a very difficult one, this
     one.
             THE CORONER:    I think it would be fair to ask
     her:
0   . You   mentioned a surge? - A. Yes.
0. Did you see where it originated from? - A. No, I just
   noticed the people coming forward.
            THE CORONER:     She can't help you with the tunnel.
0.        MRS. McBRIEN:   No, but you already knew that
     something was wrong when you saw these people coming to
     the front that way? You already realised? - A. No,
     because it is a normal thing at football matches for
     the crowd to go forward and sway back, so when they
     first came forward I just took it to be a normal surge
     of the crowd.
                                                        61

                                                L.   SOSNOWSKI




0. Yes, I know the part about the surge, I think you did
   observe that very well indeed, the fact that people
   didn't go back. No, I was talking about the people
   who, not   just the surge, the way they came in the
   surge, coming over the heads of people, that was the
   part .... - A. They didn't come over the heads of
   people in the surge, they came over the heads of people
   when the   gate was open.
0. When the   gate was open? - A. When the gate was opened,
   in an effort to try and get out of the crowd.
Q. So are you saying that people from the back were trying
   to make their escape through the gate? Is that why
   they were coming out to the front? - A. People at the
   front what were crushed, and there was people who had
   been further behind them trying to get through trie gate
   at the front, yes.
0. It is still not quite what I am looking for really,
   because my understanding is that many, many people at
   the back of the pen were not aware of the seriousness
   of the situation in the front of the pens, that they
   had not assessed that situation? - A. I wasn't looking
   that far back. I didn't say the back of the pen, I
   just meant people who were further behind the ones wno
   were initially crushed. My attention was mainly to the
   people at the front who were crushed.
Q. I won't take it any further anyway at that point. Just
   another two questions: did you have to climb up to
   enable you to get through the torn perimeter fence into
   pen 4, or was it right down? Had it been torn right
   down to the ground? - A. There was some boarding at
   first. We jumped over like a little ledge, and I nad
   to jump actually down into the terracing.
0. Do you know why a certain man you mentioned was trying
   to get back into pen 4? Were you told what tne reason
   was why he wanted to go back into tnat area? - A.
   Nobody actually told me. I just assumed myself tnat he
   wanted to go back in because there was just somebody
   there he knew, but that was my own assumption, nobody
   actually told me why he was doing it.
Q. All right.   Thank you very much, Officer.
        THE CORONER:  What about this photograph witn
   Sergeant Swift? Do you want to use it or not?
        HR. RUSSELL:   Sir, I am happy to use it. I can't
   see this Officer in it but it does appear to show the
   distinctive Sergeant Swift. If we put it up perhaps
   she will be able to identify herself.
                                                       62

                                               L.   SOSNOWSKI




        THE CORONER:    She may be able to identify him.
        MR. RUSSELL:    If she can identify him, so much
   the better.
        THE CORONER:  The trouble is that he isn't here,
   he has gone. We can always get him back.
0. Can you just turn round? Do you recognise Sergeant
   Swift at all? - A. From what I Can see it is the one
   with the numbers - he has got some numbers on his back
   which are on the photograph, yes.
Q. Can you see yourself by any change? - A. No. What I
   can recollect is with me only being small I was hidden
   by a lot of - and actually being bent down as well - I
   was hidden by a lot of the people.
       THE CORONER:   I am quite happy if necessary to
  get Sergeant Swift to come back and just identify
  himself, if you want to be pedantically accurate. Can
  you see him, Mr. King?
       MR. KING:   I am going to reveal something
  dreadful, my eyesight is awful.
        MR. RUSSELL:  It is easier to see on a real
  photograph rather than on the acetate, I appreciate
  that.
       THE CORONER:   Yes, the acetate is very convenient
  because we can all see it but I do accept entirely tnat
  a photograph is clearer.
       MR. GRIFFITHS:     Sir, I have got a larger version
  of tne photograph.
       THE CORONER:     Give it to Mr. King.
       MR. KING:   Sir, I tnink I would be driven to
  identify Mr. Swift as the villain of the piece if tnat
  was the scene of somebody doing something tney
  shouldn't be - I know they are not - as an
  identification but, sir, I don't need to agree or
  disagree, it is a matter for the Jury. One can look at
  it and if I were on the Jury I might be well tempted to
  agree with what everyone else was saying, sir!
       MR. PAYNE:   I was just wondering if Mr. Russell
  was going to draw attention to the timing which one can
  see on the back of Sergeant Swift's tunic?
       THE CORONER:  That is the point, of course,
  isn't. Let's give this photograph a "C" number.
                                                      63a

                                              L.   SOSNOWSKI




       MR. BEECHEY:   C367.
              Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL
Q. Officer, can I deal with this through you? On the back
   of what I think is accepted is Sergeant Swift can you
   see a figure written? - A. Yes.




                      /Q.     It is 14
                                                      63B



                                    L. SOSNOWSKI


Q. It is 14? - A. That is right, yes.

Q. And about an inch to the right can you see a 9?    It
    is, in fact, 59. - A. I can see the 9, yes.
Q. You can see 9? - A. Yes, that is right.
Q. I think on the photographs we can see it is 59.
    (Witness handed photograph). - A; I can make out that
    there is another number, but it is the 9 that is the
   more clear one.
Q. For those of us with the album, we can see the way it
    comes in sequence. It is adjacent to a photograph
    that is also 14.59.
Q.        THE CORONER: You cannot read the 5 is what you
     are saying? - A. I wouldn't dispute it, I can see that
     there is another number but on this photograph it is
     rather feint.
          THE CORONER: It is feint, you are quite right. I
     think what we will do, we will get Sergeant Swift back
     and see whether he can see it and also whether he can
     identify himself. If we cannot do it today, we will
     do it on Monday or Tuesday. It will only take a
     moment.
          MR. CATCHPOLE: Sir, can I just say that the
     corrected time on that photograph should be 3 o'clock.
     It is actually a series of photographs, according to
     the schedule I have, that is a minute slow, so that
     should be 3 o'clock.
          THE CORONER: Anything else of this young lady?
          MR. KING: Sir, there is one question which I
     asked the other Officer. I am going to ask this
     question, sir, of each of the Officers before Pen 4
     and if I forget I will have to put it later.
          THE CORONER: It is quite all right.   Please go
     ahead.

          MR. KING: It is on behalf of Mr. Spearritt, sir,
     and he has an obvious concern about his son.
          THE CORONER: Indeed, I quite understand that.

                Cross-Examined by MR. KING:
Q.   Officer, you were outside Pen 4 for a reasonable
     length of time by the sound of it? - A. That is right.
                                 L. SOSNOWSKI


In the round, I do not want you to identify events,
but just how long did it seem in the round from the
moment you got there to the moment you left, in terms
of minutes, what did it seem like? - A. I really could
not say. I know it was a long time.
Might it be something like 30 minutes, something like
that? - A. It could well have been, yes.
All   I want to ask you is during that period did you
see   anybody, by which I mean an obvious spectator who
was   in some distress, being passed from the Pen A into
Pen   3? - A. No.
     THE CORONER: Thank you very much indeed. We are
going to have Philip Hooson now. Where would Sergeant
Swift have gone?
     MR. KILLOCH:    We are trying to get hold of
Sergeant Swift.
    THE CORONER: If we can get him back, it will only
be amoment or two and then we will have disposed of
it.
                 PHILIP HOOSON Sworn
                    By THE CORONER:
You are   Philip Hooson, are you not? - A. I am, sir.
You are PC. 42 is it? - A. That is correct, sir.
You too belonged to the same serial as Sergeant Swift?
- A. That is right, sir.
You, together with him and the last witness, were on a
PSV coming back from Midland Station towards the
ground? - A. That is right, sir.
Did you enter the gymnasium? - A. I did, sir, yes.
I take it you did not have a radio either? - A. No
sir, I did not.
Before you entered the ground you also drove past
Leppings Lane, did you not? - A. I did, sir.
Everybody did, did they not? - A. Yes.
And you looked at the crowd? - A. Yes sir.
                                 P. HOOSON

Do you recollect what time you think you went past
Leppings Lane? - A. Approximately quarter-to 3
roughly, as best as I can recollect.

What did it look like to you at that point? - A. It
was full, a lot of people on both sides of the road.
There were still quite a number converging on Leppings
Lane end from Penistone Road. There were quite a lot
still approaching.

You said quarter-to and in your statement you had put
2.50, which is why I was checking. Did you look at
your watch? - A. No sir, I did not.

It would be minutes before 3 anyway? - A. Yes, round
that time. It would be before 3 o'clock, yes.
I do not know how much experience you have got of
Leppings Lane. Are you an experienced Leppings Lane
man? - A. I had worked at the Hillsborough Football
Ground on several matches before this particular one.
Not semi-finals, though? - A. I think I have worked
two semi-finals before that, or so.

At Leppings Lane? - A. Generally sometimes the serials
we have end up at Leppings Lane.

This crowd, what did it look like to you? -   A. Itwas
unusually large at this time of day.

You did not get out of the coach either? - A. No, I
didn't.

You went on to the gymnasium? - A. I did, sir, yes.
Having got in, you I think actually managed to get
hold of a drink, did you not? - A. Yes, I managed a
cup of tea, or something of that nature.

How long was it before you were disturbed, if that is
the right word? - A. Almost straight away.

Had you sat down? - A. I think I had managedto get     a
seat and sit down, and take a mouthful of tea, and
then we were off.

Again did you get a message from Sergeant Swift that
you were needed? - A. I did, sir, yes. He just came
along and said, "We're needed at the West Stand" and
we were off.
                                                      66


                                      P. HOOSON

Q.   You, like everybody else, came out of the gymnasium,
     exited and walked along the North Stand? - A. I did,
     sir, yes.

Q.   Did you see what was happening on the pitch at that
     time? - A. Both teams were on the pitch. I think they
     were warming up.

Q.   Did you glance towards the West IStand as you were
     walking along? - A. As I was walking towards West
     Stand I was looking towards it.

Q. What did you see, if anything? - A. I saw that it was
    fairly full, but the end two pens were not as full as
    the centre two pens.

Q. Did you see people climbing up? - A. Not that I
   recollect.

Q.   Or coming over the fence? - A. No sir.

Q.   Sergeant Swift, I think, was walking ahead, he was at
     the head of his serial and then he stopped on the
     corner, is that right? - A. That is right,sir, yes.
Q.   You passed him, in effect? - A. I did, yes.
Q.   And he said "Spread out"? - A. Yes.
Q.   So where did you spread out to? - A. I walked along
     the front of the Leppings Lane terraces.
Q.   How far along did you get? - A. As far as Gate A.
Q.   Was the game in play then or not yet? - A. I do not
     think so.

Q.   What did you hear or see when you got to that
     position? - A. For a match of that size it wasn't
     unusual for the crowd to be very noisy, which it was,
     and as such you do not particularly take any notice of
     noise. As I was walking down the front of the
     terraces on the track at times I was looking more or
     less straight forward. I looked at the crowd and as
     we neared Gate 4 it became apparent to me that there
     was something quite wrong with the people at the front
     and upon that I acted.

Q.   Did you see a surge? - A.Ican't recollect seeing a
     surge, but I wasn't looking at the crowd all the time.
     You see, a surge can come and go in a second or two.
Q.   That is okay. In fact, you are saying that as you
     were walking along the perimeter track you could see
                                                       67



                                        P. HOOSON

     that something was wrong? - A. That would be as I
     approached Gate 4. It certainly wouldn't have been
     further down.

Q.   Not further down? - A. No.    It would have been as I
     got to virtually Gate 4.

Q.   At that point the gate was shut, is that right? - A.
     It was, sir, yes.

Q.   Had younoticed as you were coming down the perimeter
     track any supporters being walked towards Pen 6, or
     Pen 1, that is the side pens? Had you noticed that? -
     A. I didn't notice any, no sir.

Q.   Socould you also  hear people calling at that time? -
     A. Virtually, as I say, on reaching Gate 4 I was
     looking in towards the pen and there were some people
     who were further back from the front - the people at
     the front quite obviously couldn't speak - and they
     were screaming for us to help them

Q.   What did you do? - A. The best recollection I have got
     is I shouted to Sergeant Swift, "I'm going to open the
     gate", and I was at this time with PC Akred and we
     went to the gate and opened it.
Q. Where was Sergeant Swift, in fact? - A. If I am stood
    facing Gate 4, he would have been to my right, perhaps
    5 yards or so away, I don't know, roughly.

Q.   Did you wait forhis instruction?   - A. No sir.
Q.   You just did it?   - A. Yes, I just did it.

Q.   I will call her PC Akred - forgive me, you do not
     mind, because that is the way I remember you. Was she
     with you? - A. She was, sir.

Q.   Are you saying it was you yourself who opened the
     gate? - A. Yes sir. I actually physically put my hand
     on the latch and pulled it open.

Q.   Nobody else other than you and PC Akred? - A. Myself
     and PC Akred, or Sosnowski, should I say.

Q*   Yes. It is very naughty of me not to use the proper
     surname. Did you see any other Officers apart from
     your own serial around at that time? - A. There were
     the usual track Officers, as we were walking along the
     track, along the front of the terraces.
Q. They were not at Gate 4 when you got there, is that
   right? - A. I don*t think so. It is very difficult
                                                      68




                                     P. HOOSON

     for me to remember whereabouts they were. I cannot
     particularly place them. I was aware that Officers
     were there but I can't particularly place the exact
     position.

Q. But wherever they were, the gate was shut until you
    opened it, as far as you know? - A. Yes.

Q. Then is it right that people did not fall out, or pour
    out, you had to help them out, is that correct? - A.
    Yes sir, we had to pull them out.

Q. After a few moments I think Sergeant Swift came and
    started helping you? - A. That is right, sir, yes.
Q. Your impression was that the people inside that part
    of the terrace were desperate for their lives? - A. At
    that point, yes sir they were.

Q.   What about the people a little bit further back? - A.
      Further back, it would not be that far back really,
      there seemed to be rising panic as they got further
     back. It must have been - I don't know - five rows
     back. They seemed to suddenly become aware that they
     couldn't move forward and they couldn't move back.
Q.   Did you see people come forward? - A. Yes sir. They
     climbed over the backs of other people who were
     standing five or six rows back.

Q.   We may well all have done this if we had been in that
     situation, but the people who were actually coming
     forward, when they eventually got to you and came
     through the gate, in what sort of condition were they
     as compared with the people who were up at the front?
     - A. They were able to move quite freely. Although
     they were quite frightened and panicked, they were
     still able to move quite freely.

Q.   Did you look up the pen to see whether there was an
     escape route backwards? - A. I looked back and I am
     aware that there is a tunnel at the back.
Q.   Did you see it being used in any way? - A. I can't
     recollect, sir, no.

Q.   Did you hear or did you yourself hear Officers either
     shout a signal to people to move back? - A. Yes sir, I
     am aware that they were doing that.

Q.   Did you do it yourself? - A. I can't remember whether
     I did it myself or not.
                                P. HOOSON


At one point I think you actually spoke to an
Inspector, did you not? - A. Yes, I did.
Do you know in relation to the match when that was?
Had the match started, had it finished, or what? - A.
I have no idea, sir, absolutely no idea.
You have got no idea? - A. None whatsoever.
Have you got any impression as to how long you had
been pulling people, or helping to pull people out,
before you spoke to him? - A. It might have been a
minute, a minute or two minutes. It is very difficult
to say. Seconds seem like hours; hours seem like
seconds.
It is difficult. What did you actually suggest to the
Inspector? - A. If I recall properly, I suggested that
we should have some Officers in the back to try and
pull the people out from the back.
You did not get much of a response, I think, did you?
- A. The opinion I formed was although I did not get a
reply, perhaps that was his consideration as well,
perhaps that is what his reason was for being there,
to assess the situation.




                           /Q. You continued
                                                           70


                                               P. HOOSON

Q. You continued helping people out, did you not? - A. I
   did, sir.

Q. One of the people who comes to your mind was the
   youngster who had a broken arm? - A. Yes, he had a
   broken arm, quite clearly broken.
Q. Pardon? - A. It was quite clearly broken.

Q. Did people eventually so far as you could see start
   moving out backwards to clear the terrace? - A. The
   recollection I have of that is that the terraces did
   become clear eventually by going backwards and by
   coming out through the gate.
Q. Do you remember the perimeter fencing being torn
   down? - A. Yes, I do.

Q. By Pen 4 we are talking about? - A. Pen 4, sir.
Q. By the time that happened, was the state of the
   terrace such that the people were crushed? - A. No,
   sir, it was after that. Basically the greatest
   danger had passed.

Q. It was a very difficult thing to assess? - A. It was
   very difficult at the time to assess things.

Q. You, in fact, helped with Christine Jones? - A. That
   is right, sir.

Q. Again you were with your colleague? - A. I was, sir.
Q. Is it right you cannot remember which pen you it was
   you got her out from? - A. I have no idea, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I will let you ask the question, Mr.
King, which you want right at the end. I could do it but I
think it is may be better if you ask it.
Q. I cannot remember if I have asked you this question
   and if I have please forgive me. Did you see people
   being escorted either left or right out from Pen 4
   towards the end pens at any point? - A. You have
   asked me that, sir, and the answer was no.

                Cross-Examined bv MR. KING:
Q. When you, Officer, arrived outside Pen 4 it was
   obvious to you that the people in the front were
   quite desperate and in great difficulty? - A. To
   explain it and to answer your question properly it
   would be better to say, as my colleague has said,
   this was done whilst we were walking. It wasn't an
   immediate recognition as such. It became apparent as
   we were walking in front of the pen itself and only
                                                         71


                                            P. HOOSON

   virtually on reaching the gate were we fully aware of
   what the situation was.

Q. Through walking passed the front of Pen 4 you were
   able to look in through the fencing and see the
   people in dire trouble crushed against the fencing? -
   A. Yes, when we started walking passed Pen 4 perhaps
   I didn't notice straight away, perhaps it was on a
   second glance or a second look as.I neared the gate
   that it became quite apparent.
Q. That there was something desperately wrong? - A. That
   is right, sir, yes.

Q. The Officers who are normally on the perimeter track,
   that is someone who has a duty to be there, you were
   able to see Officers already on the track before you
   arrived, were you not? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Were they walking up and down the front of Pens 3 and
   4? - A. It would be very difficult for me to remember
   that, sir.

Q. Would it be likely that the Officers you saw were on
   the far side outside a side pen? - A. I don't know,
   sir.

Q. The Officers who you were able to see, were they
   looking towards the pitch or towards the terraces? -
   A. Is this the Officer on the track outside.
Q. The Officers on the track, yes? - A. I think he was
   looking towards the crowd.

Q. You yourself realised immediately you saw the people
   and the condition they were in that some action had
   to be taken to open the gates? - A. Yes, sir.
Q. I think it is right, is it not, that you debated with
   yourself for a few moments, for a reason, before
   doing it? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. Could you explain to us and the Jury why it was you
   debated with yourself for a few moments before
   deciding that you would go ahead and open the
   gates? - A. Basically at football matches the
   integrity of the track is maintained in that people
   are not allowed on the track which may disrupt the
   game or allowed to travel from one part of the ground
   to the other without the supervision of the Police
   for obvious reasons and, therefore, it is an
   instruction that no one is allowed on to the track
   except in certain circumstances, these being to
   combat or to deal with a public order situation, if
   anyone is ill or they are in the wrong part of the
                                         P. HOOSON

ground, to be arrested or for whatever reasons of
that nature.

Is it right you actually went through the thought
process of saying, and can I just put this to you and
if I am wrong you can say so, and you remember
thinking to yourself, "If you are wrong, Phil lad,
you will get a right bollocking for this"? - A. Yes,
sir.

Is that because it had been drummed into you in
effect through training and instruction that those
perimeter gates ought to be kept shut unless you had
to get someone to be arrested or for some sort of law
and order situation? - A. That is right, sir.

You spoke to the Inspector and you said today that
you suggested, "We should have people at the back
pulling back people from the back"? - A. Yes, sir.
When you mean "people at the back" you mean Police
Officers going to the back of the terrace? - A. To
take people out from there.
To take people out? - A. That is right, sir.
To your mind that was obvious, was it not? - A. It
was quite apparent after a few moments, yes.
Quite apparent to you? - A. Yes.
That what was needed was for the pressure to be
released from the back? - A. So that we could deal
with people at the front.
It was obvious that the way to release the pressure
from the back was to get serials round to the back to
pull people back? - A. That is right, sir.
That was not happening so far as you could see when
you were there? - A. I wasn't aware it was happening.
Whether it was or not I couldn't see. That is just
how I perceived it at that time.
All that was happening, and there is a lot of
evidence of this, was that people at the front were
shouting into the crowd "push back"? - A. I am aware
that Officers were doing that.
That was clearly to your eyes not being effective? -
A. It was, like it has been explained earlier, I do
not think the people at the back were understanding
the problems those problems we had at the front.
The Inspector to whom you put this suggestion which
to your mind was obvious, you have given his reaction
                                                          73


                                              P. HOPSON

   to this Tribunal in the words you have given today
   but can you help us a little more? What did he
   appear to you to be like when you put this
   suggestion? How did he react to it? - A. I do not
   know if he was listening to me or not, put it like
   that way, whether he was preoccupied with whatever he
   had on his mind, I don't know. It is very difficult.
Q. Would it be fair that your view is - and I put this
   to you and you may be you say this'is wrong - it
   seemed to you that he seemed a little nonplussed and
   just walked away? - A. That was at the time, yes.
Q. That was your impression at the time? - A. There and
   then but I may have got it wrong, I don't know.
Q. You may have got it wrong? - A. Yes.

     MR. KING: You may have got it wrong but I am just
interested in your picture. I have no further questions
thank you.

     THE CORONER:   We will deal with Mr. Spearitt's point
right at the end. I think that is more convenient. Shall
we do that right at the end?

     MR. KING:    Yes, sir.

                 Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:
Q. Were Officers on the track generally being expected
   to use their own initiative? - A. In regard to what?
Q. The situation that you discovered when you arrived
   there? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. That no instructions at all were being transmitted
   via the Control Box? - A. I don't think the Control
   Box were aware of the situation at that time when I
   arrived at the front of the terrace.

             Cross-Examined bv MISS ADDLEMAN;
Q. Officer, when you arrived on the track, would it be
   fair to say that you had an awareness that there were
   track Officers present but you do not know what they
   were doing? - A. No, madam.

Q. It was simply an awareness of their presence? - A.
   They were on the track, yes.

Q. You have told us about the debate that you had with
   yourself prior to opening Gate 4. What I would like
   to know is this; can you say how long that debate
   actually delayed your action in going to open Gate 4?
                                                        74


                                            P. HOPSON

   - A. Well, it didn't. It is a thought process which
   takes - how long does it take to say it?
Q. It was something that went through your mind but at
   the same time you were already active? - A. The
   decision was made, yes.
Q. You told us about speaking to the Inspector with
   regard to sending a serial to the back of the
   terraces. Is it fair to say that you do not know if
   he heard you? - A. I can't say whether he heard me or
   not. I have no idea.
Q. His reaction was one which would suggest that perhaps
   he had not and am I going too far in that suggestion?
   - A. No, no, I would be perfectly happy to accept
   that.

Q. Going back to the events surrounding the opening of
   Gate 4 for one moment, you think you had opened Gate
   4 before kick-off? - A. That is right.
Q. Are you able to tell us how long before kick-off? -
   A. No idea, not very long at all.
Q. Would you agree with Constable Sosnowski's evidence
   that it took perhaps a couple of minutes to get from
   the gymnasium out to the West Stand? - A. That would
   be about right, yes.

Q. Do you know how long after your arrival that you
   actually opened Gate 4? - A. My arrival at the gate?
Q. Yes? - A. It would be more or less straight away.
Q. So perhaps a couple of minutes after leaving the
   gymnasium you opened Gate 4? - A. Yes.
Q. It follows from that, an obvious point I think,
   Pfficer, that two minutes - you can only speak of
   events or what was happening on the perimeter
   track? - A. That is right.

Q. Two minutes before you actually opened Gate 4 because
   that is how long it took you to get from the
   gymnasium? - A. Yes, that is right.

                  Further bv THE CPRPNER:
Q. I have a couple of things of things. Pne is from the
   Jury which has nothing to do with the perimeter track
   but to do with Leppings Lane when you went passed it.
   Do you by any chance recollect, the Jury have asked
   me to ask, whether you saw the Police Land Rover
   there? - A. I can't remember, sir.
                                                        75


                                            P. HOPSON

Q. You cannot tell us? - A. I can't remember, sir.
Q. I want to just clarify one point of the evidence with
   regard to when you realised action had to be taken.
   My understanding of the evidence is that you came
   down passed the North Stand, turned the corner and
   were walking? - A. Along the front of the terrace.
Q. Is it right that your appreciation of the situation,
   that things were not right, was not reached until you
   came opposite Gate 4? - A. Virtually at that time,
   virtually just before I got there.




                   /Q. What I am trying to find out is.
                                                              76

                                                          P. HOOSON


Q. What I am trying to find out is had you appreciated the
   condition in the pen which we know from your description
   was desperate and needed, certainly when you saw it...
   Had you appreciated that when you were walking past pen
   6? - A. No, sir.
Q. Or pen 5?- A. No, sir.
Q. Which is, of course, a very narrow         pen.   You know that,
   don't you? - A. I do, sir.
Q. What about when you had passed pen 5 and were actually
   walking past pen 4 but hadn't reached the gate?    That is
   what I am trying to find out. - A. They thing is I may
   have been looking into the pen on reach pen 5 and then
   carried on walking and been looking straight forward at
   that time and then again how many steps - it might have
   been five steps, ten steps, and then looked into the pen.
   Then it becomes apparent.    It is very difficult to say.
Q. What you are saying is that it was when you had reached,
   for whatever reason, the gate and you then looked and you
   could see action was required and you took it? - A. Yes,
   sir.
            Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING:
Q. Officer, could I try and refresh your memory about this
   particular issue which the learned Coroner has taken up
   with you.   I wonder if you could be shown what appears
   to be a typewritten version of a statement you made?
   Unfortunately mine isn't dated and I can't help, for the
   purpose of the shorthand note, when it was dated.
        MR. KING:     Sir, mine     on page 1 has a list of names.

       THE CORONER:      Yes.     Which bit   do you want?
        MR. KING:     Page 5.
       THE CORONER:   Is that the one with the word
  "Cooper" in the top corner?
       MR. KING:      It begins, "We reached the corner of the
  tack..."

        THE CORONER:  Yes, that is right.   My copy is
  highlighted in places.   Do you wish a non-highlighted
  copy?

       MR. KING:      Not at all, sir.
       THE CORONER:      I do that for my benefit, the
  highlighting.
                                                   P. HOOSON


      MR. KING:  Officer, just read that page to yourself
from "We reached the corner of the track... until it
describes how you opened the gate, which is most of the
page.
     THE CORONER:   Let's give him the original so that
is exactly the same as yours.
       MR. KING:    Have you read it, Officer? - A. Yes,
sir.
First of all, do you accept that is a page of a statement
of yours made after the events of the 15th of April,
1989? - A. Yes, sir.
Mine isn't dated.    Can you tell us how long after it
would have been made, do you think? - A. The tragedy was
on Saturday.   I started nights on Monday.    It would
have been perhaps three days, two or three days,
something like that.
It was your best recollection at that time of the events?
- A. At the time, yes.    I must admit that I found it
very difficult to write the statement itself.
Just let me take you through   certain sections of thisto
see whether you agree first of all that it is in the
statement, and whether it is right.   Perhaps it would be
best...
     MR. KING:   Sir, could I invite him to read out from
"As we began walking along the track..." to the end and
then I can ask him questions about it?
     THE CORONER:      Yes.   Why doesn't he read from the
beginning?
       MR. KING:    Yes, indeed:
Could you read out the whole   page down to "PC 3198 Akred
was with me at this time"? - A. Yes:
       "We reached the corner of the track between the
       North Stand and the West Stand and without looking
       too carefully I got the impression that the area was
       not as full as the West Stand appeared to be.    As
       we began walking along the track in front of the
       West Stand the noise was deafening.   The whole
       stadium seemed to be shouting but I didn't take any
       particular notice at this time, this sort of
       behaviour not being unusual for a game of this
       importance.   PC Packer was in front of me at this
       time. As we made our way further along the track
       towards the South Side I began to sense something
                                                      78


                                                   P. HOPSON


       was not quite right*   I could see at this time that
       there were already three other Policemen standing on
       the track in front of us. As I neared Gate 4 I
       realised that the people in the West Stand were not
       shouting but were screaming.   I realised then that
       something was seriously wrong and I heard people in
       the crowd screaming, "Let us out," "Oh God help us."
       I looked at the people in the crowd and I could see
       their faces and that people were crushed up against
       the fencing that they were clearly in a desperate
       situation.   I immediately grabbed the officer on
       the track and asked him to get some assistance to
       us.   I knew that I had to open the gate to get
       people out even if it meant getting a bollocking.
       I can remember thinking, "If you're wrong Phil lad,
       you'll get a right bollocking for this."   I then
       went straight to Gate 4 at the fence behind the goal
       posts and shouted to Sergeant Swift who was a number
       of yards away from my position to my right, "I'm
       opening the gate," and I opened the gate.   PC 3198
       Akred was with me at this time."
Q. Officer, having read it through, remembering when you
   made it, is this as best as can be an accurate account of
   your recollection of those events? - A. As best as can
   be, sir.
Q. Therefore it is clear that your best recollection is that
   your first feeling that something wasn't quite right was
   when you were making your way along the track towards the
   South Side before you even arrived there? - A. Yes, sir.
Q. It was when you were nearing Gate 4 that you realised
   that people were not shouting but were screaming? - A.
   That's right, sir.
Q. So it was when you were nearing Gate 4, rather than when
   you had actually arrived at it, that you realised they
   were desperate for help? - A. That's right, sir.
Q. Can I ask you this: you refer to grabbing the Officer on
   the track and asked him to get some assistance.   I
   assume by that that that Officer must have been pretty
   near to where you were? - A. I couldn't really pinpoint
   his position in relation to where I was at the gate.
Q. You wanted to get assistance immediately from what you
   could see and you were at the gate? - A. Yes, sir.
Q. You wouldn't have gone very far to seek that assistance,
   would you?   You would go to the first Officer you could
   see? - A. A matter of yards, I would imagine.
                                                 P. HOPSON


Is the Officer you are referring to one of the Officers
who was a track Officer as opposed to one of the Officers
who had come with your Serial? -A. It wasn't a Serial
Officer.   It wasn t an Officer from my Serial.
So it was one of the Officers already on the track? - A.
I assume so.
He hadn't come with you? - A. No, he hadn't .come with me,
so I assume he was one of those.
So he was one of the Officers already on the track before
you arrived? - A. I assume so, yes.
     THE CORONER:   Does anybody wish to ask anything?
           Cross-Examined bv MISS ADDLEMAN:

Can I just ask you one or two matters arising out of some
questions you have just been asked?   You speak about
grabbing an Officer on the track and you have clarified
that for us a little.   Can I ask you this: it follows
from what you said that you don't know what that Officer
was? - A. No, I have no idea.
You don't know from where he came? - A. Absolutely no
idea.
Immediately prior to grabbing him - is that the right
word to use? - A. Well, that may be a bit extreme.
Immediately prior to speaking to him, would that be more
appropriate? - A. Yes, in those circumstances.
You don't know where he had been and what he had been
doing? - A. Absolutely not.
And from what direction he had come? - A. No idea.
         Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING:
Officer, from the time you arrived outside pen 4 and
started your valiant efforts there to the time you
finally left, how long was that would you say? - A.
Twenty minutes, thirty minutes.   It is very difficult to
say.   A fair length of time really.
During that period at pen 4 did you see anybody being
passed from pen 4 to pen 3, and by "anybody" I mean a
supporter who was in need of assistance? - A. No, sir, I
didn't.
     THE CORONER:   Officer, thank you.   Sergeant Swift
is on his way back.   Shall I let you go and have a cup
                                                    80

                                                P. HOOSON

of coffee?   You leave us and I will just see whether
there is anything anybody wishes to say to me.
             (In the absence of the jury)

     THE CORONER:   I am not inviting you to say anything
but I am just taking the opportunity of checking to see
if there is anything.
     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Just who you are intending to call
on Monday, sir.
     THE CORONER:   Yes, all being well it will be
Mr. Spearritt, Mr. Watson, Mr. Perry, if we can get hold
of him, and Mr. and Mrs. Steele.   Then we have got a
couple of reserves, PC Cooper and PC Taylor.   We may not
necessarily take them in this order.
     MR. MANNING:   I was just going to say, sir, I was
not intending to remain, sir.
     THE CORONER:   That is perfectly all right and that
goes for anybody who wants to go.
                 (Short adjournment)
                                                              81
                                                    U.   W.    SWIFT




                 HOWARD WILLIAM SWIFT Recalled

                       Further by THE CORONER
Q. You have already taken the oath. I don't think it is
   necessary to reswear you - are we agreed about that?
          HR. PAYNE:     We are agreed.
Q.        THE CORONER:    I do apologi&e for bringing you
     back, particularly as I understand you have not had
     much sleep yet. When you see what it is that we are
     after you may be even crosser, but still.    What we want
     you to do is have a look at a photograph.   It is
     Exhibit 367, and we want you to do two things. First
     of all, can you confirm that is you on there? - A. Yes,
     with the 14 on my back.
Q. That is the second thing we want, and is that when you
   were at gate 4 assisting people to come out? - A. Yes,
   sir.
Q. What we want you to try and do, we are going to give
   you a better print. You can see the 14 - can you see
   what time it says on there? There is a time on there.
   - A. 14.59.
Q. You can see that, can you? - A. Yes, just.
Q. That, in fact, is a timing which these cameras print,
   and I think it is a minute out, we know.
          THE CORONER:     Mr. Russell, it is your point.
          MR. RUSSELL:     Sir, I was going to do   no more than
     you have done.
          THE CORONER:     Is there anybody else who wants to
     say anything?
          MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, it isn't relating to that
     matter, sir, but I did think of something. I hope the
     Officer does not mind.
            Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN
Q. In your evidence you said you also asked for gate 5 to
   be opened in the perimeter fence. I was just wondering
   why you would ask for that gate to be opened? - A. My
   immediate concern was where we were going to put these
   people when they came out of gate 4 and my intention
   was to try and direct them towards the right-hand pen.
   Obviously that proved futile.
                                                            82

                                                  H.   W.    SWIFT




Q. And that was the sterile pen, wasn't it? There was
   nobody in it? - A. No, there was people in there
   already, I think.
Q. But it is not normally used, is it? - A. Not at normal
   matches no, it is not.
Q. On that particular day if things would have gone in a
   normal fashion that would not be used, would it? - A.
   At a normal league match no, that pen is not used.
Q. Or for the semi-final that day? - A. I couldn't comment
   on that. I don't know.
Q. It was only used to put people in after the crushing,
   had occurred, is that what you are saying to me? - A.
   No, there were people already in that pen.
        MRS. McBRIEN:    I am not too happy with that.
        THE CORONER:    Well, that is what he says.         Can I
   check actually.
0. I wonder whether we have got the right pens? - A. There
   were people in all the terracing along Leppings Lane.

0. Yes, but how well do you know the terracing? Are you
   familiar with the penning? - A. Not particularly.
Q. We will put the plan up and while we are doing it I
   will tell you, there is pen 7 right in the corner, pen
   7 and 6 are the end bits, then there is the very narrow
   pen which is, in fact, the corridor, called pen 5, then
   we get to pen 4. - A. My intention was to put them into
   the main part of the terracing, the right-hand side.
Q. And is that the one you mean that had people in? - A.
   Yes.
0. Not necessarily the corridor? -     A. Not necessarily tne
   corridor, no.
Q. This is what I thought you meant.
       THE CORONER:   Does that make it clearer for you?
  That explains why there are people in there, doesn't
  it?
       MRS. McBRIEN:   I am not terribly clear on it.            My
  understanding was that is not used as a place where
  people normally go.
        THE CORONER:   Put the plan up, 274. We will get
   the Officer to tell us where he was intending to put
                                                             83
                                                  H.    W.   SWIFT




   these people if things had worked. Sergeant Griffiths
   can you pick out pen 7, that's the one in the corner,
   and show the gate. Pick out pen 6, and that is the
   gate. Now pick out pen 5 - that is the narrow strip -
   then pick out pen 4.
Q. Now, were you aware that there was that narrow pen? -
   A. I was aware of that corridor but I didn't realise
   that that gate went into that corridor. My intention
   would have been to try and put people into what is pen
   6, but I certainly shouted towards the gate, which is
   gate 5.
Q. Again you may not know, but do you recollect whether
   there were any people in that narrow corridor at that
   point or not? - A. I don't know whether there were any
   people there or not.
0. So your intention was to take them out of pen 4 and
   move them higher up into the pens .... - A. To the
   right-hand side.
Q. Yes. - A. Yes, sir.
        THE CORONER:     Is that clear to you now, Mrs.
   McBrien?
        HRS. McBRIEN:     Yes.   Thank you very much.
        MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, you asked me whether there was
   anything else. Since the Sergeant has returned to look
   at this photograph can I ask him to look at it again?
   It is C367.
        THE CORONER:     Yes.
          Further Cross-Examined by MR. RUSSELL
0. You told my   learned friend Mr. Isaacs that at the start
   of the game   the people to you seemed to be all right,
   not too far   back from the gate? Do you remember giving
   evidence to   that effect? - A. Yes, sir.
Q. I wonder if you could look at this photograph, and
   first of all the people seated in the stand, would you
   agree with this, the people seated in the stand are
   looking not at the front of pen 4 where gate 4 is
   opened but some way off to the right of the photograph,
   I think with one exception of a man in the front row of
   the stand? - A. Yes, there is just that one person.
0. Just that one? - A. Only one person ....
                                                       84
                                             H.   W.   SWIFT




Looking as it were towards you, and everyone else is
looking over to the right? - A. That is correct.
And by the same token, in what direction is the
majority of people that we can see in that photograph
in pen 4 itself looking? - A. All the people above the
fencing are looking to the right, including the man on
top of the fencing.
     THE CORONER:    Except for one chap who is looking
backwards? - A. Mmm.
There may be a few others as well. The bulk of the
people, you are saying, isn't it? - A. That is right.
     THE CORONER:   I think we have exhausted Sergeant
Swift, is that right?
Sergeant Swift, I am most grateful to you. I am very,
very sorry to drag you back. I must say I had
overlooked this photograph but it does pinpoint you so
well and is helpful in other respects.
   (The Inquests were adjourned until 10.30 a.m.
           on Monday, 21st January 19^1)
