        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER
            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                    Before
DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                     At

               The Town Hall,
                 Sheffield.
                     On

             26th February, 1991




    From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
         Official Shorthand Writers,
     55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                           ERRATA


Day 57,


Page 77:   For "Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King11, read

           "Further Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne11.
                    INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                             Page

CHRISTOPHER EDGAR NICHOLSON Recalled

   By THE CORONER                               1
   Cross-Examined by   MR. RUSSELL              3
   Cross-Examined by   MR. KING                 4
   Cross-Examined by   MR. PAYNE                5


WILLIAM EASTWOOD Recalled

   Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN               7
   Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE         20
   Further by THE CORONER                      26
   Further Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE     28
   Further Cross-Examined by MR.    KING       32
   Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN      33
   Further by THE CORONER                      34
   Discussion in the absence of the Jury       45
                                                                 1


                   FIFTY EIGHTH D A Y 'S PROCEEDINGS

                     TUESDAY, 26th FEBRUARY 1991


           THE CORONER:  You will notice there is a gap.
     Miss Sinclair is not here because there is some delay
     on her train but I think she does need to be here for
     Dr. Eastwood, so what we are going to do is we are going
     to have Dr. Nicholson back for two or three minutes and
     he is going to identify the picture which he was not
     happy with.  You may remember he did a count at 14.52
     but he was not very happy with it. We did not have
     the acetate but we have got it now so he will identify
     it and then he will also show us the enlargement.
     That should not take too long and hopefully Miss Sinclair
     will walk in in the middle of all this.

             THE CORONER:   Yes, Dr. Nicholson.


                 CHRISTOPHER EDGAR NICHOLSON Recalled

                            By   THE CORONER:

Q. Dr. Nicholson, you may remember I think it was Mrs. McBrien
   actually who raised this point and it was the issue
   of the counting of spectators at 14.52 and you had worked
   from a photograph which was not of the same, I use the
   word quality, this is not a criticism of the photograph
   but simply that it did not meet your criteria as well
   as the other ones that you had had before? - A. There are
   various differences in the two sets of photographs used
   and I could point those out which might help the Court.

           THE CORONER:  Could we just put up the acetate of
     the photograph.  That is the one of 14.52 isn't it and
     we will give it an appropriate number so we don't forget
     it.

             MR. BEECHEY:   The 'C' number for that then is
     C509.

           THE CORONER:  In fact while we leave that up can
     you hold up, so that we can see, can you turn this
     towards the jury slightly and we will give the whole of
     this thing a 'C' number.

             MR. BEECHEY:   C510.

Q.         THE CORONER:  Now you have very kindly agreed to
     lend us this for the time being, haven't you? - A. Yes.

Q. It is the top picture which we can see, it is the one
   which we have just produced C509 which is the 15.02 and
   the bottom picture is in fact the overlap of the two
   previous photographs which you have already identified
   to us? - A. Yes.
                                    C.E. NICHOLSON



And just for the record the number of those is 360 and 495.

      Now if you would turn to the top one which is the
one you are going to explain to us and indicate why it
is more problematic from your point of view? - A. Could
I in fact start with the bottom one.  It is probably
easier to explain in that way?

Indeed if you would? - A. This is a compilation of two
photographs and these were taken from the top of the
South Stand by a Police photographer with telephoto lens
so each frame covered, one frame for instance covered
from there to there, so that is the complete frame and
the second one is underneath and covers a similar area.

      Here because of the angle from the South Stand
most of the people are facing forward so we can see
almost a full face on most of the people in this Pen 3.

      I will just point out the joining line. There
are several people on that line that match exactly, that
can be matched in both photographs, so the two fit
together very accurately although the photographs were
taken moments after each other, so here you can see we
can get a good count of faces from the front and it is
a good enlargement.

      Now if I can turn to this one which was taken from
somewhere in the North Stand and it is now facing at an
angle to Pens 3 and 4, this one was taken by an amateur
photographer and that again is no criticism, but it
covers an entirely different area or field of view.  Instead
of covering a limited size of crowd it actually covers
most of the West Stand and in fact some of the South
Stand, so it is going to be at an entirely different
enlargement, the faces are so much smaller, so that
is one point.

      The second is the angle that it is at from the
North Stand means that Pen 3 is much smaller than Pen 4
in actual area terms on the photograph, so it is more
difficult to get an accurate figure of Pen 3.

      Also because of the angle that the photograph is
taken many of the heads in Pen 3 are not facing towards
the camera. Many of them are in fact turned round if
you look at it in detail and this means it is much more
difficult to discern separate heads, positive identification
of heads because that was our criteria only actually
counting positive heads that we could identify, so on
those basic differences between the two photographs we
have said that the accuracy that we could place on the
top photograph was much less accurate than the counts
that we managed to achieve on the lower photographs.
                                                                   3


                                            C.E. NICHOLSON




           THE CORONER: Thank you. Does anybody want to
     ask Dr. Nicholson any questions arising out of these
     photographs?

Q.         In effect you have dealt with this and you are
     really just reconfirming what you have said? - A. Yes,
     it is a technical matter rather than an assumption
     which was one of the points that was put forward.

           THE CORONER:     Mr. Russell anything?

           MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, it may be that I have a further
     copy of this photograph or possibly other frames from
     the same film.  Is there a reference to the photograph
     that is pinned to the board?

           THE CORONER:     The top one?

           MR. RUSSELL:     Yes.   Is it MP1A-14?

           THE WITNESS:     That is the one, yes.

           MR. RUSSELL:     Thank you.

           MISS ADDLEMAN:  Sir, might I enquire is there a
     reference for the other two frames that form the bottom
     photograph?

           THE CORONER:     Yes, can you lift it up because it
     is actually written    on it.  It is PR1-7A and PR1-8A.

           MISS ADDLEMAN:     Thank you very much sir.

            THE CORONER:  I think I can safely say that
     Mr. Russell is our photographic expert Ithink and so I
     will wait to see whether there is anything he wants to
     raise.

           MR. RUSSELL:     Sir, there is something I would like
     to pursue.

           THE CORONER:     Yes.


                  Cross-Examined by MR.     RUSSELL:

Q. Dr. Nicholson,   I don't know if you remember but when I
   was asking you   some questions last week I invited you to
   have a look at   several photographs taken of Pens 3 and 4
   at 14-minutes-to?-■ - A. Yes, I remember the frames.

Q. These photographs I appreciate are taken at 8-minutes-to
   and just to remind you of the ones that I showed you
                                                                •4

                                          C.E. NICHOLSON



   before by reference to their 'C' numbers, they are C477
   and 478 and 344.

         I don't think it is necessary for you to have a look
   at them but I want to remind you of the question I asked
   you and the answer that you gave me, namely that the
   densities of people in the foreground of those photographs
   at the front of both Pens 3 and Pen 4, which from your
   evidence at 3-minutes-past-3 was so compact that you could
   not count heads you had to rely on your model, was markedly
   different from the situation which you believed to be in
   existence at 3-minutes-past-3? - A. Yes.

Q. And you agreed with that. Can I ask you the same question,
   in relation to this photograph? - A. The one we have just
   looked at?

Q. The one you have just looked at,  yes.  It is not of course
   as clear as the other ones.  I have got a single copy of
   it if it assists? - A. Yes.

Q. The density of people in that photograph at the front of
   Pens 3 and 4 is markedly different from the degree of
   compactness that you calculated at 3-minutes-past-3. Is
   that not right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

         MR. RUSSELL:     Thank you.

         MR. KING:  Sir, if we have got a little time I wonder
   if I might just borrow the top photograph if Mr. Russell
   has a copy I might have a look at?

         THE CORONER:     Are you happy to look at Mr. Russell's?

         MR. KING:     Yes, certainly.

         THE CORONER:     Mr. Russell, would you loan your
   copy please?

         MR. KING:     Sir, I don't guarantee I will ask any
   questions.

         THE CORONER:     You just want to have a look at it?

         MR. KING:     If I may sir.


                     Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q. Dr. Nicholson, I am looking at a copy of the photograph
   which we now know to be C509 which is 2.52.  Is that
   right? - A. Yes.
                                                                 5

                                           C.E. NICHOLSON



Q. We have been looking through the evidence with you at the
   density, as best we can, of the centre pens.  I am just
   interested in the side pens for one moment shown in this
   photograph, in particular Pen 6 which is to the right
   of Pen 5.   Do you see that? - A. Yes.

Q. I know it is difficult but if you were having to put an
   estimate on the density of the crowd in Pen 5 of the bit
   you can see what would you say? Is it possible? - A.
   Not really.  I don't think I could give just a straight
   estimate. We have found it is very difficult estimating
   numbers. We have had to go to high    magnification.

Q. But I don't think it needs high magnification to say that
   such as one can see at 2.52 on this photograph there is
   really wide open spaces, isn't there, in Pen 6? - A. Yes,
   it is very open, yes.

Q. Just looking if I can to the   other wing pen which is
   Pens 2 and 1, am I right in    saying looking at the photo­
   graph that they seem at the    front there seems to be wide
   open spaces there? - A. Yes,   there are wide open spaces,
   yes.

         MR. KING:   Thank you.   I can't take that any
   further.


                 Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q. Inadvertently Dr. Nicholson, perhaps inadvertently is not
   the right word, but by his work he may in fact have
   become slightly something of an expert in estimation of
   crowd capacity and crowd numbers in the light of his
   last answer.

        Can you just explain what you meant, Dr. Nicholson,
  by the difficulty that you had in estimating numbers?
  - A. Yes sir.  In order for us to get a reasonable figure
  of density we had to study a lot of photographs and we
  found in many of the photographs we studied unless the
  faces were turned to us and were distributed evenly there
  is a possibility that a lot of heads are hidden and
  therefore invisible to the viewer so we spent a lot of
  time searching for the best photograph to use.




                             Q. How long
                                                         C. E. NICHOLSON



       Q. How long did it take to be able to arrive at some
 Q j      reliable estimate of numbers? How long were you working
          on it? - A. The overall count took us a matter of
          probably two to three weeks in all and studying
          photographs, we probably studied photographs with the
          West Midlands Police for probably three or four days
          before we decided on the best ones to use.  So we spent
          a lot of time.

       Q. You were asked just now by Mr. King to look in the top
          photograph to look at the right hand corner which is
          obviously less populated than the centre pens? - A.
          Yes.

       Q. You declined to make any estimate there on the basis of
          your experience.  Of what? - A. I would need to put a
          scale on that photograph in terms of studying the area
          that we are looking at and then to do a count.  It is
          not difficult to do that for a certain small select
          area but I would not put any accuracy on a figure - I
          would not want to say, 'One or two people per square
          metre '.

       Q. You would not want to rely on visual impression? - A.
          No, not from this angle. Not from any angle without
          doing some further work.

              THE CORONER:  Dr. Nicholson, thank you very much
         indeed.  I am most grateful to you. Miss Sinclair, I
         am sorry that you had a bad journey but what we did -
         because we thought it would be better you were here
         when Dr. Eastwood was being examined - is ask Dr.
         Nicholson to identify the photograph of the 14.52 count
         and he has answered a number of questions on it.  I
         should have asked you, did you want to say anything to
         him about that?

             MISS SINCLAIR: No, sir, I did not.   I would ask
         you to accept my sincere apologies on behalf of
         everybody.

              THE CORONER:  There is no need to apologise.  I
         know it was not your fault in any sense of the word.   I
         am just sorry you were probably a bit stressed because
         you realised that time was marching on.

             MISS SINCLAIR:   Sir, I am very grateful.

              MR. KING: While we have got a bit of time, could
         I raise a purely administrative matter? I am looking
         at the transcript from yesterday, Day 57 at page 77,
         there is a heading "further cross-examined by Mr. King"




Hi
                                                          W. EASTWOOD


         and this is with reference to the cross-examination of
         Dr. Eastwood.  In fact, it was further cross-
g |      examination by M r . Payne-

              THE CORONER:   Yes.

                        WILLIAM EASTWOOD Recalled

                      Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN

      Q. Dr. Eastwood, you were appointed by Sheffield Wednesday
         to be consulting engineer in 1978, weren't you? - A.
         Yes.

      Q. So was that before the Safety Certificate which began
         in 1979? - A. Yes.

      Q. When you were first appointed, and the terrace was an
         open one, that is there were no radial fences there,
         can you tell us what kind of perimeter fence there was
         at that time and how it compared with the one that
         there was in 1989? - A. The perimeter fence at that
         time was part of the one that was there in 1989.   Some
         time round about 1981 or 1982 - and I was not involved
         in it - the fence was increased in height by about a
         foot by putting on it the cranked bits at the top which
         were at the top which were at 45 degrees and had spikes
         on them.

      Q. So the previous one did not have spikes on it? - A. No.

      Q. So obviously the one in 1989 was a more formidable one,
         would you say? - A. Yes.

      Q. When the crushing incident occurred in 1981 on the open
         terrace I believe the fans were able to get on to the
         pitch at that time.  Is that right? - A. I was not
         present, Mrs. McBrien.

      Q. So you do not know how they made their escape from the
         terrace at that time? - A. I have read newspaper
         accounts or a newspaper account and documents but I
         have no experience of that.  I was not there, Mrs.
         McBrien.

      Q. Once the perimeter fence was made more formidable,
         would you say that more caution would be needed in
         controlling the terrace? - A. Yes.

      Q. That it was much more dangerous with that kind of
         fence? - A. It is all relative, Mrs. McBrien.  The word
         'dangerous' I would not use.
                                                               W. EASTWOOD


        Q. After you were appointed the figures you had worked out
           for the West and North West Terrace of 7,200 and 2,900
 jj I      respectively, they were accepted, weren't they? - A.
           Yes.

        Q. They would be recorded in the Safety Certificate,
           wouldn't they? - A. Yes.

        Q. Those same figures were still in the Safety Certificate
           at the time of the disaster in 1989? - A. Yes.

        Q. In 1989 the Club would have to comply with those
           figures, wouldn't it? - A. It could not exceed those
           figures.

        Q. That was so that they would know how many tickets to
           allocate at that match? - A. Yes.

        Q. They would also have to keep records of the numbers of
           spectators who had been admitted at that match too,
           would they not? - A. Yes, the Safety Certificate
           requires that, yes.

        Q. Do you think it is vital to ensure free movements
           throughout the entire exit system within the ground as
           such free movement is dependent upon the capacity of
           all the various sections of the exit systems and the
           interactions between them? Would you agree that there
           should be a flow, free flowing movement, throughout the
           whole system within the ground? - A. We are not talking
           about the whole of the ground. We are talking about
           just the Leppings Lane end, aren't we, Mrs. McBrien?
           You have used the words 'the whole of the ground', you
           see. You mean just the Leppings Lane end.

        Q. It would apply to the whole ground obviously but we are
           dealing only with the Leppings Lane end on that day? -
           A. At the Leppings Lane end all the pens were
           interconnected behind the stand with free passage from
           one pen to another via the back of the stand.

        Q. Do you think there is a safe and proper means for
           controlled entry at Hillsborough into the stadium? - A.
           I am sorry, Mrs. McBrien, I do apologise.   I did not
           quite catch the beginning of that sentence.

        Q. I am sorry.  Do you think there is a safe and proper
           means for controlled entry at Hillsborough from the
           outside of the ground to the inside? What is the safe
           and proper controlled means of entry? - A. Proper
           controlled means of entry means having turnstiles, Mrs.
           McBrien, and there were, of course, turnstiles.




Hi
The turnstile entry would not only dictate the rate of
flow into the ground and record the number of fans
entering but it would also ensure there was no cross
flow, wouldn't it? - A. The word 'proper', I think you
should substitute the words in the Green Guide of those
dates saying that ideally there should be rather than
saying it is not proper unless you do have separate,
discrete entry routes.

I am a bit lost now.     At a...

     THE CORONER:   I think, Dr. Eastwood, you may have
answered a different question.  I think what Mrs.
McBrien was trying to drive at was that if you used
turnstiles, never mind about whether they are discrete,
they control not only the numbers but the rate? - A.
Ah!

     THE CORONER:    Is that what you were after?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:     Yes.

     THE WITNESS: Thank you, sir, for your help.  Yes,
turnstiles do control the rate at which people enter,
yes.

     MRS. McBRlEN:  To a large extent would they
dictate the way that fans are dispersed within the
ground, that there would not be a large crowd coming in
all at once if the turnstiles were used? - A. That is
so, Mrs. McBrien, yes.

I would like to turn to the Green Guide please, if I
may, paragraph 44 and paragraph 45 on page 20? - A. I
have it, Mrs. McBrien.

Would you mind reading paragraph 44 please, Dr.
Eastwood?

     THE CORONER:  Have we not read this paragraph
already several times?

     MRS. McBRlEN:     Have we had it before?

     THE CORONER:  Yes, I am almost certain. We have
already but I do not think Dr. Eastwood has read it and
so, yes, you go ahead, Mrs. McBrien.

Read it for Mrs. McBrien please? - A. It says:

    "Where admission to a ground or parts of it is
    controlled by turnstiles, these, by their
    number and location, control not only the rate
                                                                    10

                                                            W. EASTWOOD


              of admission but, to a large extent, the
              dispersal of spectators within a ground to
jjI           their particular sections. Turnstiles should
              be of such numbers as to admit spectators at a
              rate whereby no unduly large crowds are kept
              waiting for admission and yet at no faster rate
              than the arrangements for distributing
              spectators within the ground permit."

      Q.       MRS. McBRlEN: Would you mind reading just for the
           first part of paragraph 45 please? - A. Yes. It says:

              "Dangerous overcrowding can be caused if
              spectators are able to force their way into a
              ground already full to capacity by scaling or
              breaking through boundary walls or fences or
              the gates in them."

      Q. That means of entry by turnstiles is totally to the
         means of exit from the ground, isn't it? - A. Yes.

      Q. Which is by means of large exit gates or concertina
         gates, A, B and C at Hillsborough? - A. Yes.

      Q- These exit gates need   to be locked very securely and
         manned by stewards to   prevent intrusion by fans from
         outside the ground at   all times except when they are
         opened ten minutes or   thereabouts at the end of the
         match to allow speedy   egress only.  Do you agree with
         that, Dr. Eastwood? -   A. Yes, Mrs. McBrien, yes.

      Q- I would like to refer to a telephone conversation
         involving you, Dr. Eastwood.  This is relating to
         allowing fans with tickets in through a gate and the
         words used in the telephone conversation were, "Can we
         let them in through a gate?" and you said, "Definitely
         not, as it would lead to a disaster" and obviously the
         proposal that was being suggested definitely....




                                      /THE CORONER...
                                             W. EASTWOOD


     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, just a minute.
Better find out whether Dr. Eastwood has any
recollection of such a telephone conversation.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, I think Mrs. McBrien is
referring to comments made by Mr. Chester of the Club,
to Mr. Strange of Eastwood's, in a telephone
memorandum, when they are discussing possible schemes,
and Mr. Chester had put could he have a gate open for
all ticket matches, and Mr. Strange had put in the
comment disaster, which I believe was a comment to Dr.
Eastwood.  It was just a proposal that was being muted
at the point when the pens were being re-organised.

     THE CORONER:    Do you remember anything like that?
- A. Yes, sir.   That account is, I think, completely
accurate.  There was a telephone conversation between
Mr. Chester and Mr. Strange in about the beginning of
May 1985, which is the subject of a 'phone memo.   That
'phone memo was passed to me and in the course of it
there had been a remark by Mr. Chester that in all
ticket games it might be permissible, instead of having
extra turnstiles, to open a gate and let people in
through the gate with the tickets.   It is also correct
that immediately after that remark Mr. Strange wrote in
brackets, "disaster".

     MRS. McBRlEN:   All right, thank you.  Do you
agree that obstructed exits within the Ground should
never be allowed to occur? - A. I am sorry, Mrs.
McBrien, I do have to apologise - do I agree that ...?

That obstructed exits within the Ground should never be
allowed to occur? - A. Exits should not be obstructed,
no.

If I could use as an example the tunnel, please? Could
I have the photograph C263? The doors leading from the
concourse there, that you can see, they are to be
locked in the open position at all times when the
Ground is in use for ingress and egress, and would you
agree with that? - A. Yes, that they have to be locked
open, yes, during games.

For ingress and egress? - A. Yes.

As I understand it, the purpose of the doors there is
for security reasons when the Ground is not in use, is
that so? - A. That is the only justification for
keeping them nowadays.

I don't know whether we need to look at page 14, number
xiv, of the Green Guide; it may be just an addition to
                                            W. EASTWOOD


what I have just said. Would you mind just reading
that one sentence, please? - A.

     "To ensure that all gangways and exit routes are
     unobstructed and capable of being used to their
     full capacity at all times when the public are in
     the ground."

Thank you. Would you mind turning to paragraph 54,
please, on page 23? - A. I have found it, Mrs.
McBrien.

I know it is a long paragraph, but would you mind
reading that, please? - A.

     "There should be no 'funnelling' effect causing
     people to converge on a narrower means of access
     or egress.  This will slow down the rate at which
     people can pass through the entire exit system and
     pack them more closely together.  However, a
     narrowing in the exit route is acceptable when it
     is preceded by an open space or 'reservoir' area
     where the holding capacity is sufficient to
     contain safely the spectators held up because of
     the difference in the flow rate into and out of
     the reservoir area.  The capacity of reservoir
     areas should be calculated using the appropriate
     flow rate given in Chapter 17 and the recommended
     exit time given in paragraph 56 below; a packing
     density of 54 persons per 10 square metres of the
     area available for standing within the reservoir
     area is the maximum for safety.  Arrangements
     should be such as to prevent this being exceeded."

Yes, and also paragraph 55, please, on that page. - A.

     "Reservoir areas should be avoided wherever
     possible and should not be permitted within 45
     metres of any combustible building within the
     ground eg a timber stand, or within 15 metres of
     any non-combustible building within the ground."

Thank you.  I wonder, would you mind commenting on
those two paragraphs to give us some understanding of
that? - A. They are obviously very reasonable and
sensible recommendations, Mrs. McBrien.

Yes, this reservoir area and the funnelling effect, how
did that apply to Hillsborough?  Can you give us more
information on that, please? - A. There had been great
care on the part of the Fire Service to ensure that
there were not adverse funnelling effects of this kind,
Mrs. McBrien, and I think that by and large
Hillsborough was free of such funnelling areas.
                                            W. EASTWOOD


It mentions a packing density of 54 persons per 10
square metres.  Would that have an effect if the crowd
outside that tunnel that day was greater than that
density, the ones going into that tunnel? - A. Yes, I
see what you are getting at now, Mrs. McBrien, I am
sorry.  Obviously when people go in through turnstiles
the rate is controlled such that the tunnel does not
really make a convergence because the people can get
into the tunnel at a faster rate than they can come
through the turnstiles, but you did, of course, then
have a situation after the gate was opened where the
gate was wider than the tunnel and obviously it would
be very difficult to get everybody who came through the
gate into the tunnel without a crowd building up at the
mouth of the tunnel, at the entrance to the tunnel.

Thank you.  You have told us that it was your
understanding that after the radial fences were
installed the radial gates in those fences would be
under Police control during every match, is that right?
- A. That is so.

In fact, this is contained in documentation, isn't it?
- A. Yes.

What would you have done if you had been told that the
Police were not controlling those gates during a match,
if you had any knowledge of that? - A. I did not have
any knowledge.  I think my reaction would have been to
have a word with the Secretary - Mr. Bownes as it would
be at that time - of the Advisory Group on behalf of
Sheffield City Council.

If you were told that the Police were not willing to
control those gates, would you have thought of removing
the radial fences and have it as open terrace once
again? - A. I think this would have gone rather beyond
my remit.  Obviously the Working Party would have had
to consider the matter, having had a formal request,
a . * think the Fire Service would be the authority
within the Officer Working Party which would have had
the lead role, and I am sure that the Local Authority,
the licensing authority, would have come to a decision
in the light of the advice it was given.

Yes, but you had no knowledge of whether the gates were
being controlled or not, that is right, isn't it?- A.
To the best of my knowledge up to the date of the
disaster I believed gates were being controlled.

My understanding of a capacity match such as the semi­
final at Hillsborough is that fans would be admitted
into the stadium at a rate no faster than the
arrangements for distributing spectators within the
                                             W. EASTWOOD


Ground would permit, and that thie tunnel doors would be
left open throughout the match, in fact, locked back in
the open position, and that the radial gates would also
be locked back in the open position.   Is that right?
A. Yes.

They would just not be under the control of the Police
but they would be locked open? - A. Locked open, that
is so.

And that no pen would be closed off entirely that day,
not for a full capacity match? - A. That is so. The
gates at the top of the radial fences should have
remained open throughout the match.

Yes, as the whole terrace was intended to be used,
wasn't it, for that match? - A. Yes.

And this was providing that the Police ensured that
there was a reasonable distribution of the fans, or at
least no dangerous overcrowding occurred in any
particular part of the terrace.  That was their main
purpose, wasn't it? - A. Yes, the justification, the
main justification, for putting in the radial fences
was to more accurately control the distribution of the
crowd.

To me it seems vital for fans to be able to use both
the tunnel and the radial gates whenever they wish to
do so? - A. Yes, except that the radial gates, when you
say whenever they wished to do so, if under Police
control the Police would obviously stop somebody going
through if it was inappropriate that they should, but
the tunnel anybody could go in and out quite freely.

Yes. Now, I would like to turn to barriers.   Firstly,
do you think it would have been safer to construct
crush barriers along the full width of the terrace
rather than have gaps throughout? - A. Where there are
no gangways, of course, you have to have gaps, and the
Green Guide recognises that gaps can still be there;
there is a diagram, you will know, in the Green Guide -
I can point to it if need be - which shows recommended
angles between the lines of gaps in various rows.   As a
general recommendation the Guide does say that there
should be long lengths, reasonably long lengths, of
continuous crush barrier.

Could that have been done at Hillsborough? - A. Very
difficult in the Leppings Lane Terrace.  It is very
technical and would take drawings and so on to
illustrate it, but difficult to split it up. A radial
gangway alone could have been put in without any cross
ones, but in that case the obvious place for it is in
                                            W. EASTWOOD


line with the tunnel, and I pointed out on Friday the
possible even greater disaster that we would have had
if there had been a gangway at that position,
absolutely packed with people and not a single
restraint from top to bottom.  That was one of the
causes of the deaths at the Burnden Park disaster in
1946.  It is recorded in Ingle's book of about six
years ago, as a warning.

You were aware that it was agreed at the Working Party
meeting on 7th August 1986 that the crush barrier
number 144 was to be removed? - A. That is so.

As you were the engineer for the Club, would you have
objected to the removal of that barrier? - A. You will
have gathered that I did not know about either the
proposal or the discussion, of course, because I was
not there, until after the decision was taken, but I
was informed within the next 24 hours or so by Mr.
Strange, who took me through with the diagrams, which
he put on our file, of what had been required.  I did
go through it with him and discussed it with him and I
heard at second hand the arguments which had been put
forward by very experienced Policeman, experienced,
that is, in operating that terrace - probably longer
than any other senior Policeman, and whose views and
judgment I know to respect.  I did consider it myself
and I looked within the next 48 hours after the
meeting, because I went on holiday on the Friday as I
know from my diary, I did go and look and weighed up
the pros and cons.  I saw there were arguments for and
against and did not think it right to raise an
objection to the Working Party.




              /Q. Would you agree
                                      W. EASTWOOD




Would you agree that it did leave a gap on the terrace,
a noticeable gap there? - A. It did Mrs. McBrien, yes.

It made the design of the barriers look rather unbalanced
don't you think, particularly near the tunnel part?
- A. I see what you are saying.  There is an asymmetry
about it, yes.

Would you agree that it also served the very good
purpose of slowing the fans down both for ingress and
egress? - A. Yes, the difficulty, Mrs. McBrien, is that
people operating terraces have to make balanced judgments
and the fact that it slowed people down going in and
coming out, in certain circumstances both those things
may be undesirable and that is in effect what the
Police were saying, that that particular barrier was
being used as a stopping point by far too many people
when coming in and was resulting in local overcrowding
behind it and in addition, and the wording is very
cryptic which I am now perhaps extrapolating, but in
addition there were difficulties for people going out.

      Now those were the arguments by and large for
removing it, but they thought and Inspector Calvert
was very adamant about it I am told, that overall
the safety of the terrace was being improved.

Yes, you would not be able to comment on this I don't
suppose, that Police could have controlled the area of
that barrier because there was a problem there but I
don't think you are the expert I should be asking
that question? - A. I can't comment on what the Police
should have done.  I don't know what they did on the
day in that respect because I was not there.

Now once the barrier had been removed    would that create
greater pressure on the barriers further down the pen?
- A. The ones immediately in front.  I will qualify
the answer slightly, Mrs. McBrien.  I have not heard any
mention of the hatched yellow lines in front of the
tunnel which are probably still visible sir, I don't
know, are they?

      THE CORONER:   Yes, they are.

      THE WITNESS:   And those yellow lines were in
effect a 'no go' area.   The lines were put there by
the Club and the intention was that spectators should
be prevented from standing there, that they would
move forward and as I understood it that there would
be a police presence which could ensure, ask people
not to stand just there.
                                   W. EASTWOOD




      Now subject to that the extra pressures lower
down would be relatively minimal and there might be
none at all in fact.

      MRS. McBRlEN:  Of course on the 15th April 1989
the rate of flow had been considerably increased,
hadn't it, by the mode of entry that day? - A. Yes,
by the mode of entry when the gate was opened, yes.

And that created enormous pressure that day, didn't
it? - A. They would obviously be very large
Mrs. McBrien, yes.

So it is not surprising that something had to give in
the pen, is it, with that kind of pressure being exerted?
- A. In some ways I am surprised, happily surprised
that only one barrier broke.

So this weakness that there was in that pen causing
Barrier 124A to collapse was because a colossal load
had been applied that day, hadn't it? - A. I think
probably unprecedented at any rate in my experience,
way beyond anything I have seen.

Now Mr. Seamen the Fire Officer told us that if the
tunnel became blocked for any reason it would take
about 8 minutes to evacuate the centre pens using
the radial gates and you would not disagree with that,
would you? - A. No, no. The way to do the arithmetic
is in the Green Guide and it is quite simple and that
is the answer you get.

He also said that if the tunnel was open as well
evacuation time would be somewhere in the order of
about 3 minutes and you would not disagree with that
either would you, Dr. Eastwood? - A. Between 3 and
4 minutes is correct.

Now were you aware that the gates in the perimeter
fence had shortly before the disaster been fitted with
new quick release bolts? - A. Yes, they were designed
in my office.

Do you know if they were fitted for safety reasons,
the reason why they were introduced? - A. I don't quite
know where it was instigated, Mrs. McBrien.  Often
there are informal discussions between members of the
Working Party and my staff and I don't recall who it
was, if anybody from outside my firm who suggested
them. All I know is we did in fact invent it if you
like.  It was a novel way, a novel idea which I have
not seen applied anywhere else.  It was submitted to
the Officer Working Party and they were rightly very
                                                             18


                                       W. EASTWOOD



   cautious about it and one trial one was fitted and there
   were inspections.  There should have been one inspection
   with both Police and Fire Service present.   Due to a
   mix up in telephone conversations one or other party
   did not turn up,  I don't know which, so there was a second
   meeting and after everybody had had a look it was decided
   that they should be fitted to all the gates.

Q. But you don't know what the purpose was, why these other
   bolts were fitted? - A. Oh yes. With the kind of enormous
   pressure that there must have been on the gates that day
   if you have one of the ordinary latches or a sliding bolt
   the pressure will be on that bolt and you can imagine
   that the force required to make it slide, bearing in mind
   that the design load on the gate is about 1,000 lbs., half
   a ton,  the force required to slide the bolt would be
   very very large and possibly more than a human being with
   his hands could work.

         Now the device with an incline sliding surface which
   we had worked out in our office was such that there was
   virtually no difference required in the force that was
   needed to open the gate whether it had no pressure behind
   it or was under full load and it was just controlled by
   a spring and in effect all the force you needed was
   sufficient to be able to extend that spring which is
   sufficient easily with one hand rather like that.

         Now on the day, as I understand, it was as easy
   as that, may be the balance was just slightly wrong.
   We had to get the angle right.  It was may be just
   slightly wrong because I understand that one of the gates
   did come open under the pressure on its own.

Q. Was the main purpose then for the Police on the track
   to be able to open the gate more quickly or was it
   if there was a great pressure in the pen that the gate
   would automatically fly open? - A. No, it was not the
   latter, Mrs. McBrien. We weren't trying to invent
   something which was so clever that at a certain pressure
   it would fly open.  Indeed such a device might in itself
   be dangerous, you would have a pile of people on the
   floor.  The intention was that any person, Police or
   anybody who saw that there was a dangerous situation
   would despite the pressure on the gate be able to open
   it with ease.

Q. When I visited the ground this morning I did not notice
   a gap where Pen 5 should have been.  I know there are
   no gates where the perimeter fence used to be but I
   did not even see a gap there? - A. No, there was some
   steps for the gate in Pen 5, there was some steps up
   to that gate.  It was not necessary to cut a slot in
                                                             19

                                        W. EASTWOOD



   the concrete wall.   I should not.say "it was not necessary"
   That gate was there before I became engineer to the Club
   and whoever cpnstructed it had not cut a slot in the wall.
   Instead you had to climb up whatever it was, about 2',
   and on the   7th August 1985 the Police requested at the
   meeting of   the Working Party that day that steps be
   placed there and they were designed in the following few
   days and were provided.

Q. All right, thank you.  It was never your task to control
   and organise the crowd arriving outside the ground was
   it, Dr. Eastwood? - A. No, I never had any duties to do
   with crowd control at all anywhere at any time.

Q. But were you aware that the turnstiles would not operate
   efficiently if serious congestion arose in that area?
   - A. I think it was not so much the turnstiles would not
   operate.   I must be careful, Dr. Nicholson gave evidence
   on this, but I believe the main difficulty was the elbowing
   of people,    two trying to get into one gap. This inevitably
   slows people down, but Dr. Nicholson possibly gave evidence
   to the effect when there was a crowd pressure on the man
   going through the turnstile that also could slow down.

Q. So it is obvious that it is vital to prevent overcrowding
   immediately before the turnstiles, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. Now you were asked yesterday about having extra turnstiles
   for the purpose of filling separate sections of the terrace
   Do you remember? In fact you did submit a plan at one
   time? - A. Yes, I submitted various plans, yes.

Q. Now let's say an exit - this is just an example - let's
   say an exit gate had been opened into the concourse area
   allowing in an unknown number and turnstiles had been
   provided to ensure a set capacity for separate sections
   of the terrace.

         Now the question I would like to ask you is this:
   what would happen to the extra numbers left in the
   concourse. Would they just be put back through the exit
   gate?

        THE CORONER: No.     That is not a question that
  Dr.Eastwood can answer.     It is not an engineering
  question.   It is completely hypothetical.   I am sorry,
  Mrs. McBrien.

         MRS. McBRlEN:   This is the last sentence now.

Q. Having said that, would you agree that it all comes back
   to control at the turnstiles wherever they may be? - A.
   It is important that there should be control at the
   turnstiles, Mrs. McBrien.
                                     W. EASTWOOD




      MRS. McBRlEN:   All right.   Thank you very much,
Dr. Eastwood.

      MR. PAYNE: May I just be allowed to ask a question
to clear up what I hope is just a misunderstanding?

      THE CORONER:    Yes.


           Further Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Dr. Eastwood, you told Mrs. McBrien that the purpose of
the introduction of the radial fencing was to improve
the distribution of the crowd, or words to that effect.

      Now in fact as far as the 1985 alterations were
concerned can you confirm please that the purpose of
those alterations and the work that was done in 1985
related to the segregation of home and visiting
spectators? - A. I saw it as more than that. The 1985
works for example included the new radial fence creating
Pens 3 and 4 out of what had been one pen. As I inter­
preted that request the essential, the primary concern
was to give a more refined control to that part of the
terrace which was most popular with spectators and that
it would be possible to fill what had been one pen now
in two halves either in parallel or in series one after
the other.

Are you drawing a distinction between the segregation
of home and visiting spectators on the one hand and
distribution of the crowd on the other. Are you saying
there is a difference between the two? - A. Yes.

Dr. Eastwood, I put it to you then plainly that the
purpose of the 1985 alterations was to segregate home
and visiting spectators.  That is why the work was done
in 1985 wasn't it? - A. No, not solely.

Well was that the primary object of the 1985 alterations?
- A. From my point of view no.  It may have been from
somebody else's point of view.

Take the black folder please.  Now in it can you find
what I think is C474.  I think this is part of a batch
of documents.  The document I want you to find in C474
is the note of a meeting held on the 7th August 1985
headed:  "Safety of Sportsgrounds Act 1975".  It looks
like this. It has got Eastwood an Partners stamp in
the top right-hand corner and it is headed:  "Safety
of Sportsgrounds Act 1975".

       MR. BEECHEY:   475 that is sir, part of four
documents sir.
                                                                 21

                                           W. EASTWOOD



           THE CORONER:  It is A, B, C, D in there.      Now
     which one do you want?

             MR. PAYNE:   Can we give this a particular number
     then?    475D?

           THE CORONER: No, before you put 'D' on that let's
     make sure. Just read me the heading that you have got
     of the document that you want ?

           MR. PAYNE: The heading is "Safety of Sportsgrounds
     Act 1975"   "Note of a meeting held at the Hillsborough
     Stadium, Sheffield on 7 August 1985".

           THE CORONER:   That is the one that I have marked
     as a 'D'.

Q.         MR. PAYNE:  Thank you very much sir. With the
     stamp "Eastwood & Partners" top right-hand corner
     "8th August 1985". Now have you managed to find that,
     Dr. Eastwood? - A. Yes, yes.

Q. Now do you see that there is a list of those present at
   the meeting representing the Sheffield Wednesday Football
   Club pic including you. Do you see that? - A. I appear
   to have the wrong document then sir. Sir, this does
   not have me down as present.

           THE CORONER: Can you pass me what Dr. Eastwood
     has got in his hand? What has happened, it is here,
     this is one of those cases where we put more than one
     document on the one 'C' number and it clearly was a
     mistake.




                             Q. Have you found
                                                    W. EASTWOOD



    MR. PAYNE:  Have you found yourself now? - A. I now
have the document, Mr. Payne, yes.

Have you got yourself present? - A. Yes.

It says:

    "Representing Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
    PLC, Dr. W. Eastwood, Messrs. Eastwood and
    Partners and P. Hough, Deputy Secretary."

and representing the Officer Working Party there are
various people.  Do you see that? - A. Yes.

It says:

    "The purpose of the meeting was to carry out
    the 'summer' inspection of the Stadium with
    particular reference to the Leppings Lane end
    improvements and the metal sheeting of the
    upper seated area of the South Stand.

    2.Ground Inspection
    A. Leppinas Lane End

    The progress of the work is to segregate
    visiting supporters behind and on the West
    Terrace and Stand were inspected with
    particular reference to the points raised in
    the Officer Working Party's meeting on 29th
    July."

This is a note of a meeting attended by you and what
has been recorded is that these are works to segregate
visiting supporters, is it not? - A. It also says "the
improvements to the Leppings Lane end".

That is right.  I am talking about purpose.  That is
all I am concerned about; the purpose of the 1985
alterations was segregation I am putting to you? - A.
And I am putting to you that it was not.  It was
general improvements at the Leppings Lane end and those
words are used there, "the Leppings Lane end
improvements".

Just have a look at the minutes of 29th July which I
think are also part of 475? This document has got a 55
in the top right hand corner and it is headed "Safety
of Sports Ground Act 1975, note of a meeting of the
Officer Working Party Sheffield District" and so on,
29th July 1985.  Have you managed to find that? - A.
Yes.
A
                                                                     23

                                                             W. EASTWOOD




B   Q. The purpose of the meeting.
       Eastwood? - A. Yes.
                                      Do you see that, Dr.


    Q. It says:

           "The purpose of the meeting was to consider the
           detailed plans submitted by the letter dated
           20th July from Messrs. Eastwood and Partners of
           arrangements for the segregation of visiting
C          spectators at the Leppings Lane end of the
           Hillsborough Stadium of the Sheffield Wednesday
           Football Club   "

       and so on. This is what they are talking about.     It is
       segregation of visiting spectators, is it not, Dr.
       Eastwood? - A. Yes, but I have never in any way raised
       any objections to those words.   I was asked what I
       thought the purpose was and I said it was wider than
       that, not just the segregation and I said that that was
D      my view and not somebody else's.   I go back to exactly
       my first answer and repeat it.

    Q. Are you saying that you had one view and everybody else
       had a different view? - A. No, that is not so, Mr.
       Payne.  I am not saying what anybody else's view was.

    Q. Do you accept that the purpose of the alterations was
       segregation, that is all I am asking you? - A. In part.
E
    Q . The primary part of it was segregation.   Do you accept
        that now? - A. No.

    Q. Look at a few more letters then.  Look also in 475 to
       the letter of 30th July addressed to you from the Chief
       Executive of the Sheffield City Council, and that has
       56 in the top right hand corner.  It is a letter? - A.
       Yes.
F
    Q. It is dated 30th July 1985? - A. Yes.

    Q. This has the same point, paragraph one:

           "The Officer Working Party (Sheffield District)
           met yesterday afternoon to consider the
           detailed drawings enclosed with your letter..."

G      - that is Eastwood's letter:

           "...dated 25th July relating principally to
           arrangements for the segregation of visiting
A
                                                                    24

                                                          W. EASTWOOD



             spectators at the Leppings Lane end of the
B            Hillsborough Stadium."

         That is the purpose, is it not? - A. Principally and
         that is a letter from the Working Party. Mr. Payne,
         sir, I wonder where this is getting us? There was more
         than one reason for the works as a whole which went on
         that summer.  Some part may be of more importance to
         some people in their estimation than it is to other
         people but there was more than one purpose.
C   Q.        THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne simply asked you whether
         you accepted that segregation was a purpose and your
         initial response was that it was not.   You then I think
         modified it to that it was a purpose but not the
         principal one. You have now said it was a principal
         purpose but that there were others.   That may well be
         so but all Mr. Payne was trying to establish was that
         certainly in 1985 there were other reasons for putting
         in radial fences other than simply more accurate crowd
D        control.  That is what he is asking you. - A. Well,
         sir, let me say...

    Q.        MR. PAYNE:  Do you need to make a speech? All I am
         asking you, I am picking up the point that you made to
         Mrs. McBrien that you say the purpose of the radial
         fences was distribution of the crowd and I am putting
         to you that the 1985 purpose was segregation of
         visiting spectators.   Do you agree with that? - A. When
E        I started the 1975 series of schemes, the prime object
         in my mind, as is apparent from four successive
         schemes, was to give completely separate routes from
         separate patches of turnstiles into various parts of
         that end of the ground and those four schemes all with
         that object in view were watered down to one which gave
         some segregation of spectators but gave some other
         benefits.   So far as I was concerned in 1985 my prime
         objective was to separate people along separate routes,
F        sir.

    Q. Have we reached the stage that you mean segregation of
       visiting supporters? That was the primary objective,
       was it not? - A. No, this was a perfect arrangement
       for...

    Q. Look at C.392. - A. Would you please let me finish, Mr.
       Payne.
G
    Q. Honestly, Dr. Eastwood - A. Please let me finish, Mr.
       Payne.

    Q. Look at the letter that you wrote at the time.




H
                                                    W. EASTWOOD




     THE CORONER:    No, Mr. Payne.

     MR. PAYNE:     I am sorry, I am just trying to get to
the point.

    THE WITNESS: Mr. Payne, I had in mind that even on
a Semi Final day when all the spectators were from one
Club my scheme with five separate exit routes, entry
routes, through five discrete sets of turnstiles, into
five separate pens, that that was what I was after even
though they were not home and away.  They were all away
or they might all be home.  That was my prime concern,
Mr. Payne.  If other people had other concerns so be
it.

No, it was your concern, was segregation of visiting
spectators.  That was your concern? - A. Mr. Payne, my
scheme is applicable, was applicable, whether it was
all home, all away or was some of each.

Do you accept that one of your main interests was
segregation? Do you accept that? - A. Now one of my
main interests obviously.  There was some desirability
for segregation as well but my prime one, Mr. Payne, as
I go back to the beginning was that there would be
separate routes.  I had tried it in 1981.  I had tried
it again in 1985 and my prime aim was to give five
separate routes.  There were not going to be five
separate groups of supporters.

Do you want to look at 392 or not? - A. Yes.

You see the heading of the letter? - A. Yes.

Do you think that is the main point of the letter, the
heading? - A. This was a heading which would apply
whether it was going to be simply for segregation.
What had been put to me was segregation of spectators.
I came back with a scheme which was much more than
simple segregation. Whatever these words say here it
is absolutely apparent that the schemes which
accompanied this letter separated spectators into five
separate groups by five separate routes and that was my
prime objective.

Very well.  The Jury can hear what you say and they can
see the letter.  Look at 484 finally, would you please?
So far we have had it from everybody's point of view.
We have looked at the Officer Working Party minutes and
we have looked at your letter. Now here is the Police
point of view in C.484.  This is a letter from Mr.
Moseley to the Club dated 4th February 1985.   They say
in the main paragraph of the letter:

    "You will see that we favour the erection of a
    stone wall on the ground side of the current
    terraces, with such wall housing a bank of
    turnstiles.  Our belief is that once a
    spectator goes through the turnstiles he should
    then be segregated from the other fans, and
    this can be achieved by the erection of
    permanent high metal railings on that concrete
    area at present behind the Stand.  Similarly,
    there should be a high metal railing down the
    centre of the West Stand. What is then created
    is total segregation of all three portions of
    the Terrace and the two areas of the West
    Stand, with each of these segregated areas
    having its own refreshment and toilet
    facilities."

and so on.  I will come back to the question I had just
asked you at the very beginning of what I thought was
going to be a short point.  Do you not accept that the
primary purpose from everybody's point of view of the
1985 alterations was segregation of visiting and home
supporters? - A. Mr. Payne, I never saw this letter
until after the disaster.  I was not a party to it.   I
have said to you, Mr. Payne, and it is abundantly clear
to anybody who looks at my schemes that I have very
much more in mind.

     THE CORONER: Mr. Payne, I have got a nasty
feeling that we have spent a few minutes at cross
purposes on this issue.

                Further bv THE CORONER

What you were saying, and let me make sure I have
understood your response, is that when you were first
approached in 1985 and said, "We want another radial
fence put in to split the centre terrace", you thought
that this was a golden opportunity to achieve what you
had always hoped for, namely that you could have
discrete entry and exit points for each individual
subsection of the terrace, is that right? - A. Yes,
sir.  The opening bit of your question, sir, is not
quite correct because the central radial fence was not
suggested until some time later.   It was not on my
first plan.   It came in incidentally.  Not
incidentally,   it came in as a thought put in by the
Police.  There was a meeting on the 4th February that
year, the annual walk round, or 7th February, and it
may just conceivably be in here, the minutes, but
within a day or two of that 4th February letter there
of 1985 about which I had no previous knowledge, there
was a meeting of the Working Party at which there was a
general discussion and I am sure it was sparked by
segregation.  I quoted the words the other day of the
minutes and they can be looked at.  The Secretariat had
not taken that discussion as being a very imperative
one and the minutes said that at some future date the
Club would prepare a scheme and I think it probably
uses the word 'segregation'.

    The copy of those minutes were delivered to my office
and I have a copy from the Taylor Inquiry here, with my
own manuscript note at the side saying, "John, get on
with this quickly.  Have a word".  I immediately set in
motion what had been something which I had wanted to do
for the previous four years, to try to get five
separate discrete entry routes. We produced a scheme
which had those five separate entry routes and it did
not depend on, nor did it aim at, the segregation of
supporters.  It did not matter whether everybody was
from the same Club or from two different Clubs.  There
were going to be five separate routes to five discrete
areas.

    That was as I saw it. The first question I had
was, "Wasn't the main purpose segregation?".  From my
point of view the answer is no but from somebody else's
it was probably yes.

Yes, but if you now have a look at 484, all I am trying
to do is establish whether in fact we are not saying
exactly the same thing but using just different words.
If you look at the last sentence of the second main
paragraph you see:

    "What is then created is total segregation of
    all three portions of the Terrace...with each
    of these segregated areas having its own
    refreshment and toilet facilities."

You may not have used those precise words and you may
not have seen that letter but does that not actually
mean exactly what you have just told me, that that is
what you wanted to achieve? - A. Yes, the question is
not what did I want to achieve but why.  Segregation,
sir, could be achieved much more simply by having far
fewer than five routes if it were merely to segregate
home from away.
That is the point that I am really driving at. Are we
actually saying that? You are saying that you wanted
discrete individual areas? - A. Yes.

Was five a significant number? If you had been told
that you could have three discrete individual areas
would you have been content with that in 1985? - A.
Content is the wrong word, sir.  I wanted five because
there were five areas.  There were five areas, three on
the front and two staircases going up.  That is the
reason for five. Now that was not to separate home and
away supporters.  From my point of view it was to get
batches of turnstiles exactly as shown on the drawing
in discrete routes into each of the five pens.

So three on the terrace and two upstairs? - A. Yes,
that is it. Obviously there was the benefit there that
when that end of the ground was to be shared, which it
was on - I do not think it ever was after that date.
It was not after it was done.  There was one occasion
later in February 1985, the occasion I mentioned in my
evidence on Friday I think to you, sir, if not
yesterday.  There was one occasion only after that date
when there were home and away fans at the Leppings Lane
end.  I saw that situation developing but I still
wanted five routes.  The only game, and I think this is
so, it could b e ---

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  Perhaps I could help, sir, if you
would allow me to intervene?

        Further Cross-Examined bv MR. CATCHPOLE

Your understanding, Dr. Eastwood, which I think I can
tell you accords with such as we know is that that end
of the ground had been used largely for away fans only
but there came times when home fans wanted to go on to
the terrace as well as the stand.  Tell me if this is
wrong because it is your evidence.  There came a time
when the Police put forward proposals which came
through the Club to you to allow for some element of
use for home fans on those terraces if the occasion
arose? - A. Yes.

The 1985 scheme arose to allow segregation on those
occasions but it was also anticipated that there would
be, on the vast majority of occasions, away fans only
at the Leppings Lane end? - A. Yes.

That is right, is it not? - A. Yes.
     MR. CATCHPOLE:  I think perhaps I can help
further.  I did have the plan that Mr. Payne showed
you, one of your drawings.  I had got C.484 but I have
obviously got the wrong number and so perhaps I can
just deal with it with Dr. Eastwood.  It is the plan
that Mr. Payne introduced but I have got the wrong
number written on mine.

     THE CORONER:   474.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  I think the purpose of the scheme,
it is clear, Dr. Eastwood, is that there are three
units of the terrace which you were trying to divide up
for control at that point? - A. Yes.

So what we know and call pens 1 and 2, pens 3 and 4,
which was one entire unit and then because of the
layout of that corner of the ground there is the North
West Terrace, pen 6 and pen 7 which would be served by
one set of turnstiles? - A. Yes.

So they are the three areas you were referring to? - A.
Yes.

So it means you could count into pens 1 and 2, pens 3
and 4, and there would have had to be a separate global
capacity for the North West Terrace, pen 7 and pen 6? -
A. That is so.

What I think your evidence is, if I understand it, Dr.
Eastwood, is that you were approached to give a scheme
which gave some element of segregation at that end and
at that time you put forward these proposals which are
far more detailed in your own mind because you wanted
to achieve something? - A. Yes.

As it turned out the purpose for which they were being
discussed by everyone else was segregation and that got
shelved, as we know, as a result of the Bradford fire
when safety work elsewhere had to be carried out? - A.
Yes.




                           /Q. What was actually.
                                             W. EASTWOOD


What was actually implemented was the more limited
scheme which was designed and the proposals put forward
by the Police and the Officer Working Party for
segregation only? - A. That is so, and in the immediate
aftermath, of course ....

There was the radial fence which you have given
evidence arose .... - A. Yes, that came in very late.

And that was for the purpose of refined control, no
doubt as a result of the abandonment of this more
detailed control scheme? - A. Yes.  I didn't suggest
that central radial fence; it isn't on this first
drawing, but I accepted it as being again another means
of fine control of the distribution of the crowd.   Now,
that is a simple statement that I saw it as important.

But you understood that the central fence was a
refinement on the existing system? - A. That is so.

Thank you very much.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, did I understand what
you were saying correctly, or did I misunderstand you?

     MR. PAYNE:   Sir, this whole episode simply arose
out of Dr. Eastwood's evidence in answer to Mrs.
McBrien that the purpose of the radial fencing was to
improve the distribution of the crowd, and I was simply
putting to him that it is quite plain on the 1985
documents that the primary purpose was to segregate
home and visiting spectators, that is all.

     THE WITNESS:      Sir,   I ___

     THE CORONER:   Yes, but surely, were you putting
to him that the primary purpose in 1985 was to separate
home and away supporters, or indeed home supporters, by
having a more extensive scheme, did I understand the
latter correctly?

     MR. PAYNE:   Certainly.  What I was putting via
those letters is that it started off as quite a
detailed scheme to divide up the concourse area, as in
the Police letter, Mr. Moseley's letter, he is
providing separate areas, and that was taken up by Dr.
Eastwood, who produced these various schemes which were
not followed up, so I was not going into the fact I was
going into the purpose behind the scheme in the first
place, which clearly was segregation of home and
visiting supporters, at least that is our case.
Whether or not the Jury accept it on the documents I
don't know.
                                                   W. EASTWOOD


      MR. CATCHPOLE:      Perhaps I can just follow that
up?

        Further Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE

I think what we have got here is that the proposals
came through for segregation; you saw the opportunity
to get an even better refinement, a more refined system
than the one in operation, by building on the
segregation purpose, and that is why you came up with
these plans, is that right? - A. Yes.

When, for the reasons we know of at Bradford, these
plans were shelved, what was left was still the desire
to achieve segregation, but also the system that in
your own mind was safe, as long as it was operated as
you described, which is the pens that were actually
there on the day, plus the introduction of the radial
fence and pens 3 and 4 which created the two pens? - A.
That is so.   I think part of the confusion, sir, arises
from the fact that Mr. Payne's first question and his
most recent statement was rather on the lines that
these radial barriers -- now, the first two, the
internal Police memo, and I can find it if given a
minute, in 1981 about these two first fences was that
they would enable more accurate control of the
distribution.

Now, come 1985 a third one was added and in the minds
of many people the prime purpose of that third one was
quite likely segregation.  In my mind it was part of a
scheme which in my mind, the fact it meant you could
teem and ladle in that central pen, which was the most
crowded bit of the Ground, that was valuable and to my
mind it was more valuable than segregation.

In your mind, once that radial barrier was in that only
increased what you understood to be a safe system,
assuming it was operated properly, which was the pens
we saw on the day? - A. Indeed.

And that is why presumably you were not saying to the
Officer Working Party or the Club you had actually got
to have this revised scheme, because as long as that
system that was there was operating properly it was
safe? - A. Yes.

     MR. KING:   Sir, might I ask some questions
arising out of this interchange?

      THE CORONER:     Yes, I have to allow you.

      MR. KING:      I hope it is not with regret.
                                              W. EASTWOOD


         Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING

I want to see that I understand the position we have
now reached.  You told Mrs. McBrien that the main
justification for the radial fences was to control the
more accurately the distribution across the terrace.
That is what you told her? - A. Yes.

Do you resile from that? Do you change your mind, do
you stick by that answer? - A. Yes, the original two
radial fences, that is in the Police memo, more
accurate control are a quotation from the Police memo
which I can find.

And you have now given two examples of how, as I
understand it, you were expecting this ease of
distribution to operate.  Almost immediately after the
question from Mrs. McBrien about that radial fence, or
the radial fences, you said this, in relation to the
radial gates at the back being kept open, that the
Police should prevent people going through the radial
gates if they thought it inappropriate that they should
go through? - A. Yes.

Was that an example of the means of control of
distribution using the radial fences and the radial
gates, which you understood was going to be operated? -
A. Exactly, and in my evidence on Friday to the Coroner
I said that before that central pen is full you would
be able to go through the gate.  You close it when it
is getting full.

And was this part of the assurances which you told us
about yesterday had come from the Police? - A. That the
gate would be open and under Police control?

Yes. - A. Yes.

And the controlling of the terrace, the distribution of
the fans? - A. Yes.

You also used, as a second example as I understand it
of this control, to my learned friend Mr. Payne, you
described how you could with the centre pens either
fill them in parallel or one first and then the other.
Is that right? - A. That is so.

Did you understand that would be a means of control,
even when the whole of the terrace was being used to
capacity for one set of fans? - A. Yes, it could be.

You also used just very recently an expression which -
it may be the same thing I just wanted to make sure I
understood it - about part of the scheme was you could
                                             W. EASTWOOD


- was it teem and ladle? - A. Yes. Teem and ladle, may
be it is an inappropriate expression.

What does that mean? - A. Well, there were two gates at
the top of pens 3 and 4 and as they were filling up, if
one was getting ahead of the other, and Mrs. McBrien
has pointed out the asymmetry - it so happens that she
thought it was easier to get in pen 3, whereas on the
day I think there were more in pen 4 - but if one pen
was getting more people in than the other then you
could temporarily close one of the gates and even them
up, and each could be controlled with obviously
somebody observing from the front, and by
communication.

When you say one getting ahead of the other, what do
you mean by that? - A. If more people went into one pen
than the other then you would be able to shut the gate
of that one that was proving more popular.

Would you include in that scheme the side pens as well,
in observation? - A. Obviously it is essential that it
is an integrated system.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Can I just ask one more question,
please, arising from what I have heard?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, certainly.

       Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Dr. Eastwood, for league matches I believe there are
only about a quarter of the numbers attending, compared
with a semi-final match.  I don't know if you are aware
of that? - A. No, that is not so, Mrs. McBrien.  The
average league gate this season I think has been around
26,000, and even prior to the disaster the maximum
capacity was just over 50,000, so it is more like a
half the spectators on an ordinary league match.

Well I have got that wrong, but you obviously have far
fewer numbers at a league match than a semi-final? - A.
At the Leppings Lane end, yes, Mrs. McBrien, and indeed
if I may correct myself, at the Leppings Lane end on an
ordinary league match it is usually less than a
quarter.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I think that is what Mrs.
McBrien was getting at. - A. Yes.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   So with these smaller numbers, or
maybe not a league match just some other match where
the numbers are smaller, and you would need to
segregate, you could use the Leppings Lane terrace for
                                              W. EASTWOOD


that purpose in that way, couldn't you, for a small
game? - A. Yes.

You could close off completely certain sections using
the radial gates? - A. Yes.  Since the 1985 works there
has not been a single game at which there has been a
mix of home and away, since the 1985 gates were put in.
There was one match which was either February '85 or
February '86, with Liverpool the visitors, a very
popular game with Sheffield supporters, they over­
filled the Kop and some Sheffield supporters were taken
round there without it having been originally intended.
That is the only occasion, and I cannot be sure whether
it was February '85 or '86, but that was the last
occasion on which there was a sharing.

So there has been no need for segregation from that
time? - A. In my mind those days were coming that
segregation was not going to be a problem because there
was not going to be any.  It was going to be properly
using that end with the separate pens being controlled.

So you stick by what you said to me earlier that for a
semi-final, when the whole terrace was going to be
used, you would expect both the tunnel and the radial
gates to be left open and the radial gates under the
control of the Police? - A. Yes.

All right.   Thank you very much, Dr. Eastwood.

     THE CORONER:     Miss Sinclair?

     MISS SINCLAIR:     Sir, I have nothing to add.

     THE CORONER:     I have got two or three questions
which I am going to   ask, and a few from the Jury, and
then that is it.  I   will do the Jury questions first
and then finish off   with mine.

               Further by THE CORONER

The Jury have asked me to ask you one or two questions.
The first one deals with the barriers.  Can you tell us
whether there was a specified lifespan for crush
barriers, and whether they would be, so to speak,
automatically condemned after a period of time? - A.
No, sir, there has never been any advice, even in the
latest Guide, which only came out in December, as to
the lifespan.  They are legitimately kept in use if
they continue to satisfy the load test, which again I
remind the Jury is an overload.  The design load for
the barrier is 5 kilonewtons, and you give it a 20%
overload when you put on 6, and subject to passing that
test it is thought then appropriate to use it for 5.
                                               W. EASTWOOD


Q. The next question is was it an acceptable and a safe
   method to repair a wrought iron crush barrier with low
   carbon steel.  Now, there is a question which I don't
   understand but you might. - A. That is more a question
   for Dr. Nicholson, sir.  It is perfectly legitimate and
   there was no question of the marrying of one to the
   other having been a part of the failure mechanism.

Q. Sorry, say that again? - A. There is no question, I
   don't think, that the marrying of the wrought iron to
   the mild steel played any part in the failure
   mechanism.

Q. You don't think so? - A. No.

Q. So your answer is yes, it was acceptable and safe? - A.
   I believe so, sir.  Could I just add, sir, that nobody
   knew it was wrought iron. You cannot tell except under
   a microscope.

Q. I see. What was the longest period of time that one of
   these barriers could stand without undergoing a random
   test, or a test? - A. Five years, sir. The Safety
   Certificate says that you are not allowed to re-test
   one in less than four and a half years.  Why on earth
   it says that I don't know but it does actually say you
   are not allowed to re-test within four and a half
   years.  It was five years, then it changed to four
   years in 1986, and there was a transition of working
   from a five year cycle to a four, which was going to
   take four years to catch up, that is by 1990.

Q. The last question from the Jury which I think you will
   be able to help us on is the gradient of the tunnel.
   Has that, as far as you know, ever been altered or has
   it always been that gradient since you were there? - A.
   The front part of the tunnel which has the slope on it,
   no. The front part of the tunnel was completely
   rebuilt in 1965. The rear part of thetunnel,   the
   brickwork - going through this morning you may have
   noticed that the bricks are older and you can see where
   the joint is between 1965 construction and sometime
   before that. The whole of the concrete of the tunnel
   floor was, I think, renewed in 1965.

Q. So since then it has been as it is now? - A. That is
   so.

Q. Now, I have got one or two things.  I am not going to
   go over this question of segregation again but there
   are one or two other things which I am a little bit
   confused about and which I just want to sort out. The
   first one is this:  you mentioned, in fact, you
   mentioned more than once, that you had specifically
                                                      W. EASTWOOD


 provided blue doors at what I call the exit of the
 tunnel, in other words the terrace end - are you with
 me? - A. Blue gates?

 Yes, blue gates, and that these, in fact, did open
 correctly in the sense that they opened outward when
 viewed from the terrace? - A. That is so.

 I think you also said, in fact, you said it a few
 moments ago, that you envisaged that these gates might
 well be shut? - A. Yes.

 And used as a means of control in some way or another?
 - A. Yes.

 And that on balance I think you preferred that to using
 the other blue gate? - A. Yes.

       n°^        Dr. Eastwood, that if you have gates
 in that location which open outward viewed from the
 terrace, that they open inward when viewed from the
 tunnel? - A. Yes, sir.

It must follow, must not it? - A. Yes.

And in a sense it is not relevant because the gates
were not used in this way, but isn't it right that if
you do shut those gates in order to control ingress
onto the terrace, and you have a flow of people down
 the tunnel, you are actually impacting them against
wrongly opening doors within a confined area, which is,
in fact, exactly the same criticism as saying when
people come out of the terrace and impact on the other
doors, they are pushing against them within a confined
area? - A. You have to strike a balance there, sir,
         you? Which is the greater danger, that there
will be an emergency on the terrace with people having
to go out in very large numbers, or that there will be
a great in rush of people going down the tunnel.   If it
were only the normal flow of 60 a minute or whatever
from each turnstile going down the tunnel, that is not
going to cause great crushing.   So you are striking a
balance and in my view the doors, the gates, should
open outwards so that they are in the right direction
tor people trying to escape from the pitch or even go
home at the end of the game.

    f,JS°nd thing» sti]4 on these gates, a few moments
ago when you were talking about control, whatever that
word may mean, my understanding of your reply was this,
that you would have expected the radial gates to be
^ n5£0lled’ SO that Pe°Ple could be permitted in or out
        c a s e ?ay bf ’ b u t you d i d s a y that the tunnel, of
course, was free for ingress and egress at all times.
                                               W. EASTWOOD

I think you used those words.   I am now getting to ray
   questions  are you saying that irrespective of who
   should do it. and whether it is a good system or a bad
   system, that your understanding of the control of the
   distribution of the fans was by means of control of the
   radial gates? - A. No, sir.   I clearly have not made
   myself clear and I do apologise.

Q. Perhaps I have misunderstood. - A. Yes.  I saw the
   radial fence gates as having a very minor role in
   control of numbers, in terms of people passing through
   them, but early before the game starts, a long time
   before the game starts, not many people in the Ground,
   somebody goes in round the end, sees the prime viewing
   area behind the goal, wishes he were in there, there is
   no reason why he should not go in and so whoever was
   controlling the gate in the radial fence can properly
   let him through.  He came early, let him have his good
   viewing space. There comes a time when you have to
   stop that because they are beginning to fill up - pens
   3 and 4 are beginning to become full - and at about
   that time you also have to be watching how many people
   come down the tunnel, and of course, it is absolutely
   imperative having created the pens 3 and 4 that there
   should be a mechanism for stopping any more people
   going in once they have become appropriately full, so
   there must be somebody at those gates, or at the top
   end of the tunnel, to stop people coming in when the
   time is right to do that.  I would prefer to see Police
   actually at the gates at the bottom end of the tunnel,
   the pitch end of the tunnel.




                 /Q. Even in both
                                                                 38


                                             W. EASTWOOD



    Q. Even if both the pens are full? Let's postulate that
       both the pens are full because that means that the
       people have got to walk all the way down the tunnel
       and back out again, doesn't it? - A. Well that may mean
B      that you have some Police or Stewards at the top end of
       the tunnel saying:  "Sorry, full" but I think it is
       important that if you shut those gates to stop any more
       people going in, that they should now be under Police
       control and if it means two lots of Policemen so be
       it.

    Q.   When we say "Police control" under the control of
         someone presumably? - A. Under control of someone
         sir, yes.

    Q.   I think you have also said, in fact you have just said
         it now, that the prime viewing area is in fact the
         centre section? - A. Yes.

    Q. And I think, if I have understood you correctly, what
       you are saying is this!   that until the terrace is
       so heavily populated, whatever that might mean, that
       some intervention is needed, people should not be
       impeded in going where they wish to go. Would that
       be right? - A. As a generalisation sir, yes.

    Q. It is when somebody perceives that a section, or sub­
       section I think would be more correct, a sub-section
       is full that intervention is necessary.  That is right,
       isn't it? - A. Yes sir.

    Q. And therefore the fundamental criteria for action is
       the perception of fullness in some section or other?
       - A. Yes.

    Q. What you then do is another matter.    That is correct,
       isn't it? - A. Yes sir.

    Q. Would you also agree with this, and in fact I think
       you have but I just want to be quite sure, that the
       estimation of accurate numbers by visual observation
       is exceedingly difficult? - A. Of actual numbers I
       think it is impossible.

    Q. So when you have a terrace like the Leppings Lane
       terrace even without radial fences, it is the only
       way in which you can be sure that there are not an
       excessive number on that terrace is by looking at
       the turnstile count and seeing how many people have
       got through? - A. Yes, this is the way which obviously
       you have to do professionally.  Every Saturday I have
       a competition with my grandson to say what the gate is
       and in the 26,000 I am usually within 1,000.
*
                                                                     39

                                                  W. EASTWOOD



        Q. By estimation? - A. By estimation.   If it is 18,000 I
           am rarely more than 1,000 out.   If it is 32,000 I am
           rarely more than 1,000 out but that is not the way that
           you do it. You don't do it by estimating numbers.     You
    B      compare the three pens.   If more people continue to come
           in, admitted because the turnstiles have not gone through,
           they are allotted 10,200, 100, whatever it is, then you
           can say:  "Let some more into the centre pens" or "Stop
           the centre pens" and direct people towards the North
           West Stand.

        Q. I am not disputing that. What I was trying to find out
           from you is (a) you accept as I understand it that before
           you implement any plan you have got to make a judgment
           as to the fullness? - A. Yes.

        Q. And (b) and this is really the point I am getting at
           perhaps, if the safe capacity is 5.4, let us say, in fact
           it was not because you had reduced it by 10% hadn't you?
           - A. Yes.

        Q. If the safe capacity is 5.4 and it is also true that one
           can get more than that into a space as Dr. Nicholson
           suggested to us if you packed them in gently so to speak,
           the observer if he is going to stick to the 5.4 limit
           must know what that looks like. Would that be right?
           - A. Yes sir.

        Q. You would accept that? - A. Yes.

        Q. Is it also right if one follows your argument through
           to its logical conclusion, that if the centre pens are
            more popular than the wings, that you may well get a
           differential distribution provided it isn't too extreme.
           That follows from what you have said, doesn't it?
           - A. It does sir, yes.

        Q.    Have I also understood you correctly that in some ways
             when you were looking at the Leppings Lane terracing
             divided by radial fences, sub-sectioned if you wish,
             there is a dilemma isn't there, because in one sense
             you have to look at it as a terrace as a whole when
             you look at the total capacity.   Is that right? - A. Yes.

        Q. And the justification for that is the gates at the back
           of the radial fences.  That is correct, isn't it? - A.
           Yes sir.

        Q. And in another way when you look at it with a bird's
           eye view down on to the terraces, you look at each
           sub-section as a unit? - A. Yes.

        Q. That is right, isn't it? - A. It is sir.
                                                            40

                                         W. EASTWOOD



Q. And you have to balance those two understandings of the
   same area? - A. It is so, yes.

Q. You have described what you considered to be a system.
   You did it when Mr. King was asking you. Was it yesterday
   you were cross-examining, weren't you, Mr. King?

           MR. KING:   Yes.

Q.         THE CORONER:  Of how one might control an even
     distribution.  You remember that exchange? - A. Yes sir.

Q. What I want to ask you is this:  I don't want to go into
   the detail of that system whether it be right or wrong,
   what I want to establish is this: was that system in your
   mind worked out in a way in which you told us on or before
   the 15th April 1989? - A. Yes sir. Perhaps one gets a
   little more clarity in one's mind after it is concentrated
   by events but I have no doubt whatever that the very,
   obviously my wanting to split people into pens with con­
   trolled entry was part of getting a system where you
   had the same number, the appropriate density in each
   pen, and you are not able to achieve that because of the
   circumstances which suddenly arose in May 1985, you
   are within an ace of it and then it is suddenly plucked
   away because of a need to spend money on other things.
   You are immediately made to think now even harder than
   you were before you put up the scheme.   You are made to
   think even harder about it that there is this concern
   that you always have if you are involved in something
   like a sportsground and there are many other roles I
   have in my professional life where there is a danger
   to life and limb and you are alwaysthinking about it
   in the bath or wherever it may be.

           I had in mind certainly that teeming and ladling
     thought of the centre two pens was something that came
     just like that when the central barrier was suggested
     and the only gates were those two wooden ones at the
     back.  That is not quite true sir, there were the two
     gates there sir but they could not be used independently.
     They were the kind of gate where you have to fasten one
     before you can fasten the other and I had that changed
     in 1985 so that each was independent of the other to
     control the two entrances.   I had that idea that you
     must be able to put people into that or that in any
     order when I altered those gates.

Q. I don't want you to take this as a criticism, Dr. Eastwood,
   but it is right, because you have already told me, that
   in fact that particular thought is not recorded in any
   of the minutes or in any of the correspondence which
   we have seen.  That is right, isn't it? - A. That is so
   sir, but the changing of the gates is on a drawing which
   I could produce, from gates which could not be used
   independently to gates which could.
                                                              41

                                             W. EASTWOOD



Q. I am not disputing that for a moment. And that brings
   me to more or less my last one, I will just check in
   a moment, and that is your use of the word "assurances".
   I must confess that I am a little bit worried about
   that.

           You used it in Lord Justice Taylor's report
     because that was put to you, but I notice that when you
     were talking to Mr. King you said:  "assurance is rather
     a strong word".

           MR. KING: Sir, with respect it was not put to
     him at Lord Justice Taylor. It emanated from his lips
     quite voluntarily.

Q.         THE CORONER:  Yes, Mr. King.  If you wish I will
     rephrase it. You used that word when you were speaking
     to Lord Justice Taylor. What I want you to do is to
     tell me what you mean by that word. That is the word
     you used, what does it mean? - A. Can I sir just make
     sure that you are meaning in connection with the gates
     being under Police control?

Q. That is right, that is the topic? - A. Would it do sir
   if I produced for you the Minutes of the Meeting of
   4th August 1985 which I think will show that I used
   those words, I used or somebody did at that meeting.
   I can't be sure but I think they were.

Q. 4th August 1985. Yes, by all means let me have a look.
   - A. Sorry, 7th August 1985.

           THE CORONER:     I think we have got those actually,
     haven't we?

           MISS SINCLAIR:  Sir, I think that is Exhibit C475.
     I think it is the last document in that group.




                          MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, to be fair
                                                                     -v 42

                                                            W. EASTWOOD



                 MR. CATCHPOLE: Sir, to be fair to Dr. Eastwood,
B I        you will recall there was a series of correspondence
           that we had before where there was a misunderstanding
           about the way the gates in the proposed radial fences
           did not go in and there was some correspondence between
           the County Council and Dr. Eastwood where he actually
           used that phrase again saying that those gates would be
           under the control of the Police in his letter back to
           them.

                THE CORONER:  I am not arguing about the word
           'control'.  That is not the point. What I am asking,
           Dr. Eastwood, is for him to tell me what he means when
           he says "I received assurances".

               THE WITNESS: Can you look at page, what has got
           161 at the bottom of the minutes of that meeting of 7tb
           August 1985, that is the second page of it? The fourth
           paragraph down.

      Q.        THE CORONER:   Yes, I have got it. - A. This is
           discussing where the new gate would be in the radial
           fence but it says:

               "On the Terrace itself, it was noted that there
               was an existing gate in the new 2 m.  wide gap
               formed by the new radial fence for use by the
               Police.  This gate would still be available for
               the use of spectators in an emergency as the
               gates at the top of the Terrace under the
               control of the Police would enable spectators
               to be directed down the 2 m. wide gap."

           Now that is a clear statement.

      Q. Dr. Eastwood, you have not quite dealt with the point
         which I am trying to establish. We know about this
         minute? - A. Yes.

      Q. We have discussed the word and we know that the word
         'control' appears in the minutes.  It appears in
         letters and appears in all kinds of correspondence.
         What I am more concerned about is your use of the word
         'assurance' and I want to know what that means? - A.
         Well now, sir, I do apologise because, as you have
         said, that is a very strong word and it is a stronger
         word than I should have used.  This would not qualify
         as an assurance because I have not asked somebody "Will
         you assure me that?".  This is somebody as stated.   Now
         it was never stronger than that, that there would be a
         reference to the fact, "Will the gates be under the
         control of the Police?" or whatever.  The word
\
                                                                        43

                                                                W. EASTWOOD



              'assurance' then, sir, is far too strong but there is a
        B     clear minute which shows that just those words were
              used on that day.

            Q. I am not arguing about that.  I accept that because we
               have got a minute and we cannot do anything other than
               accept it. - A. Sir, can I withdraw the word
               'assurance' and say that there was mention of it from
               time to time?

            Q. It is only fair because this word has appeared in this
               Inquest and has also appeared, if you like, by choice
               as opposed to any other way, at Lord Justice Taylor's
               Inquiry. As I say, I am not in a sense asking you to
               even withdraw the word. All I am interested is what it
               means in your mind.

                   MR. KING: Could you clarify with Dr. Eastwood
              whether he understands the assurances to which I
              directed my questions, to which he replied, which were
              not directed simply to whether or not particular gates
              would be under the control of the Police but was
              directed to that which I put to him and he apparently
              agreed, having already said it to Lord Justice Taylor,
              that he received assurances from the Police that they
              would control the packing of the pens.  In other words,
              that they would be controlling the pens in some way and
              not limited, sir, to the issue of assurance, be it
              whatever the word is, as to someone, or someone not
              being on the gate.

                   THE CORONER:   Very well.  It is exactly the same
              point.  It is a little bit wider from what I have said.

                   MR. CATCHPOLE: With respect, sir, it is not quite
              the same point.  This witness has given evidence on
              what he understood - forget the word 'assurance' - was
              to be the system on those terraces.   He said he
              understood a particular party was employing a system
              that he envisaged.   That party was the Police and he
              was happy in his own mind about that.   He has used the
              word 'assurance' because it was not restricted in his
              answers in evidence.

                   THE CORONER:   Was not what?

                   MR. CATCHPOLE: Was not restricted to the radial
              gates at the back but it was the whole system.

                   MR. KING: Sir, to be fair, nor was it restricted
              to just one meeting because his evidence was that this




    H
had emerged over a number of discussions over the years
at the Officer Working Party.

     THE CORONER:  Exactly the point that I am trying
to establish.  You are quite right it was precisely the
implication he gave but you know as well as I do that
the word 'assurance' is a strong word and carries
certainly to mind and ought to you, as lawyers, various
overtones and undertones.  I want to know what he means
and I am entitled to ask him.

     MR. KING: Sir, of course, you are and we are not
at odds on that investigation.  Sir, what I was anxious
to establish was that you direct the witness' mind to
the 'assurances' to which we are referring, namely not
simply whether someone was on a gate or in control of a
gate but in control of packing, control of the
terraces.

      THE CORONER:   Dr. Eastwood, you have heard the
exchange. What I am interested in is the form, the
scope, the extent of the assurances which you were
given with regard to the packing, control, manning -
any word you like - in relation to ingress and
distribution of spectators on the terraces and what it
means? - A. Firstly, sir, the word 'assurance'
certainly it can have a range of meanings as you have
just said. What I do not mean is that anybody ever
said to me, "I assure you that". Nothing as strong as
that.   There were occasions, some of which were in
Working Party meetings - Working Party visits because
it was not a Working Party meeting in that I was not a
member of the Working Party - Working Party visits when
we discussed crowd control and Officers would say, "We
have to make estimates of how many people there are".
This was normal conversation, not where you are making
a decision and, therefore, minuting it.

    There was an occasion when there was a discussion
regarding the relative role of the Police and the
stewards - I am not wanting to stir up a hornet's nest
and it is not meant for that, sir - as to who would
make decisions.  Quite rightly, the Police said that
they must make the decision as to whether an area was
getting overcrowded because the Police could not take
instructions from a civilian steward.  I recall words
of that nature being used on one occasion and that is
not to say that - that statement is not improper in my
view.  It was quite right. Now it is difficult for me
to say, sir, that this was say 1985, 1987 or 1983.   I
cannot tell you when but that was the kind of general
                                                                       45

                                                              W. EASTWOOD



           conversation that one gained confidence in the Police
Q I         knowing   what needed to be done,

      Q.    That is     in fact what you mean by that word? - A.That
           is what I mean, sir, yes.

      Q. There is one final point. We discussed the note which
         Mr. Strange made of the conversation which he had with
         Sharon Lane which you have explained to us was
         inaccurate at least as far as you are concerned as to
         what you had told him.  That is right, is it not? - A.
         Yes.  Inaccurate in some respects.

      Q.    Would I     be right in thinking though that you arenot
           denying the fact that the note exists? - A.Oh no.

      Q. Would it be right to say that whatever the
         misunderstanding of Mr. Strange's record of what you
         had said to him, the information which was given to the
         Club, right or wrong, is as described within that note?
         - A. Yes.

      Q. That is what I thought you were going to say but I just
         wanted to be sure. - A. I may say, sir, that I prepared
         a special file for the West Midlands Police in which I
         put that memo.  They did not pick it up from my file.
         I gave it to them.  It was in a specially prepared
         file.

      Q. I am merely trying to establish what in fact happened
         as far as that is concerned. - A. I would like that to
         be noted though, sir.  I have never in any way tried to
         hide it.  I actually picked it out as one that they
         should be specially given and I personally handed it to
         a Superintendent.

      Q. I am sorry this has taken a bit longer than we thought.
         Dr. Eastwood, we have finished you will be pleased to
         hear.  I am most grateful to you.  Thank you very much
         indeed. - A. Thank you, sir, for your great
         forbearance.

                  THE CORONER:  Please leave us as quickly as you
           can.    Tomorrow we start at ten o'clock.

                          (The Jury retired from Court)

                THE CORONER:  Tomorrow we are planning on calling
           PC Illingworth, plus or minus one or two more.  It is
           very difficult to tell but it will be fillers if we
           have time left.
                                                 W. EASTWOOD



     MR. KING:  Is it likely to be any of the
following, Police Sergeant Goddard, Ryan o r —

     THE CORONER: No, it will not.   It will be people,
if we can get them, like PC Packer or Sergeant Higgins,
people like that.  They are relatively what I would
call short witnesses.  That is the first thing I wanted
to say. The second thing I wanted to say is that I
have been thinking about the order in which we are
going to take the witnesses and I have changed my mind.
What I now intend to do is to take Mr. Illingworth.
Probably then Chief Superintendent Mole next.  Then
depending upon how long we take with him we will take
some of the shorter people, Mr. Packer, Sergeant
Higgins and Mr. Thomas, a supporter, who I have decided
I would call.

    Then I intend to start hopefully on Monday if all
goes well, or Tuesday, with the senior Officers who
have been involved, and we will certainly start with
Mr. Jackson.   Then I am going to take Mr. Greenwood,
Mr. Murray, Mr. Duckenfield, probably in that order.
When I have concluded their evidence we will have
another look at what is left, so to speak, and what is
necessary.   I think that will be a more sensible way of
dealing with the evidence at this stage of the Inquest.
Be prepared hopefully next week that we are starting on
the people who are represented.

    Perhaps I ought to just mention this at this stage;
there is one witness who I will not be calling and that
will be PC Smith who is the opposite number to PC
Illingworth.  I have got my reasons for it which I do
not intend to go into but obviously I would have liked
to have called him.  I have decided against calling
him. What I am I think prepared to do in this
particular case is to read his statement under Rule 37.




                                 /I have looked at the.
I have looked at the statement, and in the light of the
evidence which we have heard from various other people,
and bearing in mind what I have just said about not
calling him, I think that I can fit it into that Rule,
and it seems to me preferable to hear something from
him, even though I agree that it cannot be subject to
cross-examination and all the usual things, than to
hear absolutely nothing.  So we will read, when I say
statement it is strictly his recollection.  As you
know, I have been very reluctant to use the
recollections because they were not taken under caution
in the usual way, but I understand that you are not
going to raise any objection to me using that, is that
right?

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   Sir, that is correct.

     THE CORONER:   I think on balance that is the best
that I can do for the Jury. After all, that is my sole
objective, but I understand, of course, that other
people like to hear what is going on as well.

     There may be one other person whose statement I
may wish to read but I am not yet in a position to tell
you about him.  I will tell you about that tomorrow;   I
am still considering the situation.  There is another
supporter who definitely is not controversial - a Mr.
Bone, I think. He is in Australia and I don't think I
can bring him back but he has some connection with one
of the deceased and we will deal with him right at the
end.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Can I mention, again, a matter of
housekeeping? Are you intending to take the legal
submissions immediately at the conclusion of the
evidence, assuming it is midweek, or are you intending
to yourself recuperate and allow some preparation in
the hope that our speeches to you ....

     THE CORONER:   I think that is very difficult.
Speaking for myself it would be very nice if I could
say I was going to take a few days off, or take some
time in order to recover, so to speak, and sort myself
out, but for various reasons I think it is going to be
exceedingly difficult to do that. What I am hoping to
do is that as soon as we have finished with the
evidence I am going to ask you to give your legal
submissions, and then I want to start my summing-up on
a Monday.  I will do it as briefly as I can but with an
Inquest of this length it is bound to take a little
while.  I think if we start on a Monday that gives us a
chance - I don't want the Jury to be pressurised and to
feel that they have got to reach a decision because it
is Saturday or Friday evening, or something like that.
That would be the ideal thing and hopefully we will be
able to finish with legal submissions and everything
else on a midweek point on the week immediately
preceding the Monday.

     M R . _CATCHPOLE: The only thing I would raise, and
I think it is a matter of convenience and therefore not
due too much weight, but from our side, is that with
the senior Officers being the very last people to be
called, it is actually very difficult to put your
submissions together until you hear what they have to
say, so if there is any possibility - I am not saying
days, I am saying half a day or a day, to collect our
thoughts together, and it may be beneficial in that we
can make our submissions very short.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I am quite willing and if you
find that would be helpful I will certainly try and
accommodate you, but in fact, they won't be the last
because irrespective of the fact that I have put
Goddard, Ryan and Pritchard back so to speak, ignoring
those, there will be a few, what I call moppers up -
forgive me, I don't mean in that in any derogatory
sense - people whom we are just calling to try and tidy
up some of the personal issues which concern people, so
there will be at least another day or two between the
senior Officers and before I am ready to hear you in
any event.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   In that case it may be possible,
I don t know, for you to give us an indication of
roughly why certain of those witnesses are being
called, because some of us may be able to take a view
as to whether we need to be here and we can go prepare
our submissions elsewhere.

   t THE CORONER:   Without looking them all up now I
    t remember the detail, but in a nutshell these are
all witnesses who are specific to some individual
deceased person and where there is a particular anxiety
on a point, usually outside my overall parameter but
where I feel that it can be so readily dealt with that
it would be a shame, if you like, not to do so.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, do I take it from that they
are not going to be asked questions as to their time of
arrival, what the scene was outside the turnstiles, and
progressing through, it was actually for a particular
point?                                     v

     THE CORONER:   It is definitely for a particular
point but I will have another look at them and try and
give you some indication of what we are covering.
     MR. CATCHPOLE:      Thank you very much.

     THE CORONER:      That is your understanding, Mr.
King, isn't it?

     MR. KING:      Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER:    Is there anything else I need to
say, or that you need to say, apart from goodnight?
Tomorrow at 10 then.

       (The Inquests were adjourned until the
            following morning at 10 a.m.)
