HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




      INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

   VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

             STADIUM DISASTER

          ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                  Before

- S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B .MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                    At

              The Town Hall,
                Sheffield.

                    On

             14th March, 1991




         TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, L t d .,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
     ,
   5 5 Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                         INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT




     J-P. NICHOLL Affirmed

          By The Coroner
          Cross-Examined   by   Mr.   Payne
          Cross-Examined   by   Mr.   Isaacs
          Cross-Examined   by   Mr.   King
          Cross-Examined   by   Mr.   Hale

     D.R. GOODHALL Sworn

          By The Coroner
          Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien

     J. McBRIEN Sworn

          By The Coroner

     D.R. GQQDHALL Recalled

          Further by The Coroner

     M.J. HEMMINGWAY Sworn

          By The Coroner
          Cross-Examined by Mr. King

     P. IBBQTSQN Sworn

          By The Coroner
          Cross-Examined by Mr. King


PROCEDURAL MATTERS


    M.S. SMITH Sworn

          By The Coroner

    S. HARRATT Sworn

         By The Coroner
         Cross-Examined by Mr. King
         Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien

    J.R. MAUGHAN Sworn

         By The Coroner
         Cross-Examined by Mr. King
                    INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT (Cont)



ARGUMENT

     M- GODDARD Sworn

           By The Coroner
           Cross-Examined Dy Mr. Isaacs
           Cross-Examined by M r . Manning
                                                                            1
                                                             J. P. NICIIOLL

                         SEVENTIETH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                           THURSDAY, 14th MARCH 1991

        one   t h l n , C 0 R? Ni?!: V "    Mc3rlen>     »e start   just
        one t m n g .     I have been tninking about yesterday
       l - t ^ o u ^ i f "h ln 'r= fl? c “ 0 '1 1 regret that I "did not
       so      I fhin’ h^n fS        1      away when you asked fne to do
                   thm*c that was an error on my part and I am
       that’ V?ry Sorry if 1 have caused you distress by
       that.      I Know we retrieved it to a certain extent             but
       I just want you to know that on reflection I am sorry
       I should have let you sit down.                               sorry,

              MRb. McBRISN:           Thank you very much.

       NichollE C0R0NER:            Now we are going to turn to Dr.

                      JONATHAN PAUL NICHOLL Affirmed

                                 By THE CORONER:


 9- ™ r p ? ; r NK                     : ful1 nane? - A- Hy fui1 —      -
 Q.    Can you tell me (a) your qualifications? - A. Y-s  I
       have a Bachelor of Arts Degree and a Master of ~ ’
       ociences Degree in Statistics.

 Q.   Could you tell me what task you are engaged in, what
      is your particular speciality? - A. My work, largely
                    relatin§ to epidemiology, the study of
      health and diseases, and also into Health Services
      ^esearch, looking into different aspects of the Health
      services, particularly at the present time into
          ers relating to trauma, and also sports injuries.

                      W9 n °" turn t0 the matters in hand, I was
      whpn t f i° 7?U             in fac t ’ 1 think Prof* Williams
      be able            ° I?1"1 aiK? uh9n he thou2ht that you might
      ar.ai        “ ? *S me Wlth some of the statistical
      h ?? t’I k 0S relatln3 t0 the people who had died at
      Hillsborougn? - A. That is right.

      W e           “e C !" get “  rl8h t > 1 thln'< you yourself
      but I h a n d e d any
      hit-Q   ^ f
                                           Tiy
                                   data fr0m the ^^"scripts,
                       y0U 3 tab-Le with names and various
      bits of information on it? - A. Yes, that is ri*ht.
      e a c h ^ n d * *3St?y ^able detailing various aspects of
      each individual victim at Hillsborough.
Q.
      a0es, sex? - i!
                    A. rJfht that.the
                        That is right. tabl® contained names,
                                          J. P. NICHOLL

 Various other bits of information with regard to times
 01 death, and so on, which we were not concerned with7
 - A. That is right.

 It also contained alcohol levels which had bpQn
 measured? - A. Yes.

 And the location of the individual within the terrace
 Pens 3 or 4? - A. Yes.

 Then I think 5 columns, I suppose would be the best
 word, which were split.  Can you just confirm that
 this is right so that we know how it was done.  These
 columns all dealt with entry into the ground? - A.
 Times of entry.

That is right, and the first column was entry before
2.30? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Have a look by all means. - A. I will indeed.

The second column was entry between 2.30 and 2.47? -
A. Yes.

The third column was entrv 2.43 plus? - A. Via
turnstiles.

And those were turnstile entries? - A. Yes, that is
correct.

The fourth one was entry for which you just had Gate C
as a label? - A. Yes.

Actually there are six columns, and the next one was
possibly entry either through Gate C or through a
turnstile probably after 2.30? - A. Yes, that is
correct.

And the last column which was known as unknown? - A.
Yes, that is, indeed, correct.

The work which you have done is based on this raw
data, is that right? - A. That is correct.

Having just set the scene, so to speak, so that we
know what you worked on, I know you have prepared a
written report but I do not want you to produce it.  I
want you to tell me what you found, but your report
contained eight tables, I believe, is that right? - A.
That is correct.

     THE CORONER: How many hard copies of the tables
have we got?
                                            J. P. NICHOLL

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     Sufficient for one each, sir.

     THE CORONER: Can you distribute them? We will
distribute these tables now because it will be easier
for you if you need to refer to them.  What number are
we going to give this?

     MR. BEECHEY:     The C number, sir, is C535.

     THE CORONER: C353, therefore, consists of tables
I to 8, that is right, is it not, it was 8? - A. Yes.

I ought to say when you take us through these we do
not need necessarily a blow-by-blow account of each
figure in the table.  What we are interested in is
what they mean, but it is easier sometimes if you have
the table in front of you to understand what you are
saying. - A. I understand.

'\7hile it is being distributed, it is right that these
tables, of course, are your statistical analyses? - A.
Yes.

And form the basis on which your opinions are
addressed, so to speak? - A. Yes.

That would be right? - A. That is correct.

If you would be kind enough then to tell me what, in
fact, you found? - A. What I was addressing was the
question of whether there were any associations
between the time of entry, as the Coroner has
indicated marked in the columns in the original table,
and various characteristics of the victims, such as
tieir ages, sexes and their alcohol levels.

     The data that I had in the raw table that the
Coroner has described consisted of data on the
probable time of entry to the ground, the route of
entry, the place of death, the blood alcohol level and
the age and sex of these victims, and the first thing
that I did was to summarise this data into one table
relating to their main characteristics, which in these
tables I have listed as Table No.l, just to indicate
the categorisation that I had made.

     The first things were that I divided the age
groups up into just three ages, victims 19 years or
less, between the ages of 20 and 29, and over 30, and
divided the blood alcohol up into four groups, which I
later collapsed to three, but the four groups were
those that had a negative level, those that had merely
a trace, those that had a level of between 10 and 79
                                         J. P. NICHOLL


milligrams per decilitre, and those with a blood
alcohol level of over 80 milligrams per decilitre.
                                                          5
                                               J. P. NICHOLL


  The first thing is that how these break down in terms of
  their time of entry.   There were 22 spectators who were
  known to have entered either via Gate C, which I
  understand from the Coroner means effectively 2.48 or
  after, when that gate was opened, or via a turnstile
  after 2.30.   Their exact time of entry wasn't known
  beyond that.   There were also 13 cases whose time of
  entry was not known at all and their marked in a column
  headed "NK", towards the right hand end of that table.

0. Shall we put the acetate of table 1 up, while you are
   talking.    You just carry on and we will just swop
   acetates as we go along. - A. Now the remaining victims,
   that is, excluding these 35 whose times of entry were not
   precisely known, were effectively divided up into whether
   or not they had entered into the ground before 2.48 or
   after 2.48.    Some of them had entered via a turnstile
   and others via Gate C.    The first important point I
   noticed in these data, there are clear associations
   between both the age and the sex of the victims and when
   they entered the ground.    If you look at table 2, for
   example, you will see that more than half of the victims
   who were known to have entered before 2.48 were under 20
   years of age, while less than one-third of those known to
   have entered after 2.48 were under 20.

  Similarly there were associations with the sex of the
  victims.    All of the five women whose times of entry
  were known, and this is shown in table 3, entered before
  2.48.    There were two women victims whose times of entry
  were not precisely known, but of those whose times of
  entry were precisely known, all five were known to have
  entered before 2.48.

  In order to facilitate this analysis a little more I
  needed to collapse these times of entry yet further and
  on the basis of information about the age distribution of
  these victims and also where they died, in one
  preliminary, in one analysis I added those who had
  entered before 2.48 together with those who are known
  only to have either entered through Gate C or after 2.30.
  These two groups have very similar age distributions...
  I am sorry, I must go back and correct that.   Those who
  entered before 2.48 made one group and those who entered
  through Gate C or after 2.48 were added with the group
  who entered via Gate C or after 2.30, to form a second
  group.   I refer to these as earlier entrants and later
  entrants, these two groups.

  When we turn to look at the blood alcohol levels, which
  are first shown in table 4, where they are also shown by
  age, you will see firstly that more than half of the
  victims - 51 of the 95 - had blood alcohol levels of less
                                             J. P. NICHOLL

than 10 milligrams per decilitre.   Some of them had
negative levels and some of them had traces only.

There were only 15, that is, 16%, who had levels of over
80 milligrams per decilitre.    I have chosen that divide
at 80 milligrams per decilitre merely because, as you
will know, that is the legal limit for drinking and
driving.    I think everybody to some extent understands
that.    It is merely a convenient division and nothing is
supposed to be implied about whether these victims who
had alcohol levels over that were inebriated.    It is an
arbitrary and convenient divide for me to make in making
this analysis.

Only 15 of the victims had levels over 80 milligrams and
there were over half who had negative results.   That is,
they had no alcohol or less than 10 milligrams per
decilitre.

However, looking at table 4 you will see a strong
association with the age of the victims.    Nearly three-
quarters of those aged 17 or under, that is in the top
left hand corner of this table, showing 73%, nearly
three-quarters of those 17 or under had no alcohol or
less than 10 milligrams per decilitre;   whereas for
victims over 20 or over 30, under a half had no alcohol
or less than 10 milligrams.

The complement, obviously to that, is that only one
victim who is 17 or under and only one victim who is aged
18 or 19, had alcohol levels of 80 or more milligrams per
decilitre, compared to a quarter of those aged over 20.

Similarly, there were obvious associations with the sex
of the victims, shown in table 5, in which it was found
that of the seven women who died none of them had alcohol
levels over 10 milligrams per decilitre.   They all had
negative, that is no alcohol, or negligible traces.   Of
course, amongst the males the alcohol levels were
distributed roughly as described.

Turning then to the question of the association between
time of entry to the ground and alcohol levels, which is
shown in table 6, I found that approximately one-third of
the earlier entrants, defined in the way I have described
earlier, had blood alcohol levels of 10 milligrams per
decilitre or more, compared to nearly two-thirds of the
later entrants.

Now one convenient way of expressing this is to say that
amongst these victims, the odds of having a raised a
blood alcohol level for later entrants were three times
as great as the odds for earlier entrants.   Anybody who
is betting on the Cheltenham Gold Cup this after will
                                               J. P. NICHOLL

   understand that as being a useful way of representing
   this.

   Now because the blood alcohol levels were associated with
   both the age and the sex of the victims as well, it is
   possible of course that this fact that the earlier
   entrants less often had blood alcohol levels of over 10
   milligrams per decilitre, it is possible this is merely
   because those earlier entrants were more often young
   people and women.   The next thing I have done is to
   exclude the women and the children of 17 years or under
   from this analysis, and that is shown in table 7, which
   now only refers to men aged over 18.

   This association between time of entry and the blood
   alcohol level persists.   Here we find that for men over
   18, 45% of the earlier entrants, those entering before
   2.47, 45% of then had blood alcohol levels in excess of
   10 milligrams per decilitre, compared to 71% of the later
   entrants.   Similarly, if you look at alcohol levels in
   excess of 80 milligrams per decilitre, we find that 15%
   of the earlier entrants had these higher alcohol levels
   compared to 29% of the later entrants.   The later
   entrants, remember, are defined by combining the last two
   columns.

0. Can I just stop you.   Your table actually says 28%, but
   you have referred to 29%.   Is the table wrong? - A. No,
   the table isn't wrong.    What I am describing at the
   moment is a group of earlier entrants who entered at 2.47
   or before and a group of later entrants which I have
   defined by combining these two columns.

0. Yes, I am with you. - A. One of them is 30% and one of
   them is 28% and that works out at 29%.   It is difficult,
   of course, to know exactly when this last group of
   victims did enter the ground, the group that are marked
   Gate C or 2.30 or later.   As I say, for the purpose of
   what I have been describing up to now I have combined
   them with the later entrants, Gate C or 2.48 or later.

  Of course it is possible that they may have entered
  between 2.30 and 2.48 and so it seemed worthwhile to re­
  do this analysis and in this case consider only whether
  there was a difference between those who entered before
  2.30 and those who entered after 2.30.   In this case the
  22 victims who were known only to have entered either
  through Gate C or 2.30 or later, obviously form part of
  the later entrants defined in this way, that is, at 2.30
  as the cut-off.   If we now consider this in table 8 we
  come to a fairly clear statement of the position here
  which is dividing the 95 victims up into two groups
  according to whether they entered before 2.30 or after
  2.30 and, of course, excluding the 13 whose entry times
                                            J. P. NICHOLL

are entirely unknown, we find once again the same
association between the blood alcohol levels and the time
of entry.

Here we find that more than two-thirds of those who
entered before 2.30 had no alcohol or negligible traces,
compared to under half of those who entered after 2.30.
Looking at the other end of the blood alcohol spectrum,
we find that only 1, that represents 5%, of the entrants
before 2.30 had blood alcohols over 80, compared to
nearly a quarter - 14 out of the 63 - who are known to
have entered after 2.30

It seems quite clear that there was some association
between the time of entry to the ground and the blood
alcohol levels.




              Q. I think it is also right
                                               J. P. NICHOLL


I think it is also right from your earlier tables that
there was some association between the ages. Just
remind me what that was, the age range? - A. I will
remind you of what it was. More than half of the
victims who were known to have entered before 2.48 were
under 20 whilst less than a third who were known to
have entered after 2.48 were under 20. This is quite a
clear difference. Similarly there were strong
differences between the men and the women who died.

    The last question I have considered is whether
these alcohol levels amongst the victims and the
associations between the alcohol levels and their time
of entry to the ground might have any bearing on the
general levels in the body of spectators as a whole
rather than amongst these victims. The point that I
have made here is that if it is the case that the
alcohol levels played no part in the deaths of these
victims, then it is possible that their alcohol levels
represent, or are if you like, a sample of the alcohol
levels in the spectators as a whole. That is not my
function to say whether these alcohol levels played any
part in their deaths but my subjective and inexpert
opinion is that they were so low on the whole as to be
almost certain that they didn't and hence assuming that
the alcohol levels played no part in their deaths it is
possible that these alcohol levels represent the sort
of levels that were found in the spectators as a whole.
    This being the case we can now make a statistical
estimate of the alcohol levels in the general body of
spectators using these levels in the 95 victims as a
sample and in this case if we do this there is indeed
strong statistical evidence that there are associations
both between the alcohol levels and the age of the
spectators and their alcohol levels and their times of
entry to the ground.

     THE CORONER: Thank you. I do not think I have
got any questions. It is a bit difficult. Did you
understand? Were you able to follow? In a nutshell it
was the last two sentences which Dr. Nicholl was
explaining to us, how he got to the answer which is
right.

It was actually your last two sentences which
encapsulated your findings? - A. Yes, that is right.
There are findings of both these associations in the
victims and then the implication that these
associations were present in the spectators as a whole
also.
                                                                    10

                                                         J. P. NICHOLL


     Q. I just want to ask you one other question. In the
        light of your statistical analysis and if we just
        exclude for a moment the unknowns, the 13 unknown, in
B       effect you were able to group the other five columns in
        the end into two. Those pre-2.30 and those post-2.30.
        That is right, is it not? - A. Yes.
     Q. Again excluding the 13 for a moment who were the
        unknowns that would mean that of the victims, excluding
        the 13, a large proportion actually entered the ground
        after 2.30? - A. Indeed that is plainly the case. Of
        the victims we can see that 63 out of 82 whose times of
        entry were known entered the ground after 2.30. That
        is almost exactly three quarters.
             THE CORONER: Mr. Hale, I know that the
        statistical side has interested you particularly and so
        what I will do is let you go last in the circumstances
        if that is convenient to you.
T)           MR. HALE: I am much obliged although in fact
        virtually everything that I was interested in has come
        in the evidence and I have almost no questions to ask.

             MR. ISAACS: I was just wondering, sir, all of
        this is very fresh to all of us and it will take some
        time to take in and it may be with five minutes we
        could just look and see if there are any questions to
        be asked and we can try and extrapolate such
        information as is necessary.
             THE CORONER: I am rested    this morning and so I am
        more amenable to suggestions.    We will pause for
        quarter of an hour and then we   will come back. Dr.
        Nicholl in the interim you are   on Oath and so do not
        discuss the evidence. You are    very welcome to drink
        coffee.
                          (Short Adjournment)




G




H
                                          J. P. NICHOLL

            Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

Dr. Nicholl, can you just clarify, certainly for my
assistance, one or two of the points that you have
already made, and if I appear to be floundering please
bear with me while we make sure we understand the
consequences of what your analysis has produced.   First
of all, you said in addressing yourself to the question
of whether the sample can be treated as representative
of the crowd as a whole, you addressed yourself to the
question of whether alcohol had played a part in the
deaths of these people, and you ruled that out.   Is
that fair? - A. Yes, I did preface that remark by
saying that was an area outside my direct expertise,
but nevertheless my impression was that was the case.

It is reasonable to proceed on the basis that on the
balance of probabilities alcohol did not play a part in
the death and in giving your unexpert comment on that
you refer to the level of alcohol? - A. Mmm.

The point being that for the level of alcohol to
approach the condition where it is at risk of causing
death it has got to be very much higher than the
figures we are talking about here, that is your point,
is it?  I mean for alcohol poisoning to take hold of
somebody to cause death, is that what you have got in
mind? - A. That wasn't necessarily what I was
specifically bearing in mind, but plainly my impression
would be that is the case, yes.

Let's proceed on the basis, it will be for the Jury to
decide ultimately on the evidence that they have heard
in general, but let's proceed on the basis that there
is no evidence that alcohol of itself played a part in
causing the deaths.  In that case can you turn to your
Table 8, and look at your "Before 2.30' column,
reminding ourselves that this table represents the
whole sample of 95 people? - A. Yes.

In your "Before 2.30" column, the first figure of "13"
is people with nil or negligible alcohol who entered
the Ground before 2.30? - A. Yes.

The next two figures down the 2.30 column, "5" and "1",
they are people who entered the Ground before 2.30 with
some alcohol? - A. Yes.

Some of them under 80 and one over 80? - A. That is
right.

We can add those two figures and we get 6? - A. Indeed.
                                          J. P. NICHOLL

So do we get from that then that your analysis has
discovered that 6 people who entered the Ground out of
this sample of 95, 6 who entered before 2.30, had
consumed some alcohol? - A. I would say 6 out of 82
because there are 13 people whose time of entry is not
known in that table, and really if we were going to
talk precisely about these figures we should probably
leave them out before we start trying to say such
things, so ....

Yes, we have got to deduct the "NK" number,   the 13? -
A. Yes, the "not knowns", the 13.

So when I said out of 95, that is a mistake? - A. 6 out
of 82 would be a more precise description of what that
table says.

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   Sir, I am sorry to interrupt but
I am afraid we can't hear down this end.

     THE WITNESS:   My apologies.

     MPv. PAYNE:  6 out of the total had consumed
alcohol before 2.30 and 13 out of the total had not
consumed alcohol of those who entered before 2.30? - A.
Of those known to have entered before 2.30, that is
correct.

So that is just under half of the total going in before
2.30 had consumed some alcohol? - A. I think 6 out of
19 is a third.

I told you I would need some help.   I am sure the Jury
got it even if I didn't.  Look at column 2 because I
think the interest in the case is perhaps to compare
the two figures.  After 2.30, 27 people came in with no
or negligible alcohol? - A. Correct.

And the next two figures, the 22 and the 14 are those
who had alcohol in various levels, some over and some
under the 80 mark? - A. Yes.

So if we can add those two together we get 36, 22 plus
14?- A. Correct.

36 people who came in after 2.30 had consumed alcohol?
- A. Correct.

As compared with 27 who had not? - A. Correct.

Of those 36, 14 of them had consumed alcohol to take
them more than 80 milligrams per 100 millilitres of
blood? - A. Yes.
                                          J. P. NICHOLL

One other way we can look at this table, if one looks
at the 80+ line across, we can see that before 2.30 one
person came in who had consumed alcohol to take himself
over the 80 level, and after 2.30, 14 people? - A. Yes.

Is it on this basis that you said that there was a
clear association between the time of entry and the
blood alcohol levels? - A. Yes.

Can you explain it to us, what is the clear
association? - A. That whilst more than two thirds of
those who entered before 2.30 had nil or negligible
traces, under a half of those who entered after 2.30,
and of those who entered before 2.30 only 5% were over
80, compared to nearly a quarter of those who entered
after 2.30.  Indeed, I can express it as I tried to
express it before by saying the odds of having had a
drink before the game amongst those who entered after
2.30 are nearly three times that of those who entered
before 2.30.

It is not just 3 to 1, but it is also the level, isn't
it, the level after 2.30 is substantially higher as a
proportion than it is before 2.30? - A. Yes, that is
correct.  I think those two facts are obviously
strongly related, but yes that is indeed the case.   14
of the 36 after 2.30 were over 80 compared to 1 of 6
who entered before 2.30.

Can you, go back to Table 7? This is a table which you
have explained to us you did because you noticed a
particular characteristic which applied to the women
and the youths aged 17 or less? - A. Yes.  The
characteristic was that women and youths aged 17 or
less tended, compared to the others, both to have
entered the Ground early and not to have had any
alcohol.

Certainly that applies to the women - none of them have
had any alcohol? - A. None of the women had any
alcohol, or had anything other than nil or negligible
traces of alcohol.

     THE CORONER:   You can treat those as nil. - A.
Right.

     MR. PAYNE:   Yes, certainly we all treating less
than 10 as nothing. - A. Yes, I am happy to do that.

You are right to be careful.  For the purpose of
looking at the sample we are ruling out in Table 7 the
women and the youths aged 17 or less.  Sorry, that is
self evident and it is me trying to explain it to
myself. - A. Yes.  I was trying to investigate whether
                                             J. P. NICHOLL

the presence of the women and the youths under 17 had
been what was  causing the association that I had
noticed in an  earlier table.

Let us just examine the result, if we take out the
people with no alcohol, i.e. women and youths aged 17
or less, that segment.

     THE CORONER:   That isn't quite correctly
expressed, Mr. Payne.  What Dr. Nicholl has done is he
has excluded those people, that group, but it does not
necessarily mean -- the women had no alcohol, nobody
is arguing about that, people under 17 some did and
some didn t, but they were relatively low.  He excluded
them and thenre-analysed the figures excluding those
two groups, and that is what Table 7 is:

That is right, isn't it, Dr. Nicholl? - A. That is
correct.

     MR. PAYNE:   Can we look at Gate C, the column,
"Gate 'C' or 2.48 or later"? - A. Yes.

So we know, in fact, well we all know what that means.
Now, let's just look down that column.  Negligible
alcohol is 8 people? - A. Yes.

10-79 is 6 and over 80 is 6. - A. Correct.

So that makes a total of 12 people who had consumed
some alcohol? - A. Yes.

6 over 80 and 6 under? - A. Yes.

So do we get then from that, that of the people who
came through Gate C or came in at 2.48 or later, more
of them, more people had consumed alcohol than not? -
A. Of those known to have entered through Gate C or
2.48 or later, of the 20 who can certainly be
identified in that group, yes, 60%, that is over a
half, had consumed some alcohol, and 40%, under a half,
had none.

Can you do the same exercise for your next column,
"Gate 'C' or 2.30 or later"? - A. Yes.  The same fact
is true, which is that more than half of those who were
known only either to have entered through Gate C or
after 2.30 through a turnstile, more than half of that
group had had some alcohol, in fact, 15 out of 18; less
than half, very much less than half, 3 out of 18, had
no alcohol.

Can I just understand those two columns?  Is your "Gate
'C' or 2.30 or later", is that covering the time
                                          J. P. NICHOLL

between 2.30 and 2.48? - A. No, it is not.  The
difference is this:  the column headed "Gate 'C' or
2.48 or later", is a combination of two categories that
were supplied to me in the raw data of people who
either entered through Gate C and de facto at 2.48 or
later, or were known to have entered through a
turnstile at 2.48 or later.  On the other hand there
was a group of people who were only identified in the
raw data, in the data that was given to me, as either
having entered through Gate C or through a turnstile
after 2.30.  Nothing more detailed was known about this
group.

So the conclusion of this then is to the same effect as
the one we arrived at in Table 8 but more pronounced,
i.e., those who came later had consumed more alcohol? -
A. I would not actually say more pronounced, I would
say similar.  Once again, the odds of having got some
alcohol level amongst those who were later entrants,
that is in the last two columns combined, was again 3
times that amongst the earlier entrants, that is in the
first column.




           /Q. Can I, Dr. Nicholl
                                                           16
                                                J. P. NICHOLL

Q.    Can I, Dr. Nicholl, attempt to ask you to apply th
                                                      this
      to the population of the terrace as a whole.  If o.ne
      looks at the right-hand column in your Table 7 unde
      "Totals". - A. Yes.

Q.   We have got a total of 29 in the sample who do not
      count for this blood alcohol analysis exercise because
      they are negligible - right? - A. Who had no blood
      alcohol, yas.

Q.   We have got 24 + 14 - 38 - who had some alcohol? - A.
     Yas.

Q.   We can see what the split is between the two? - A.
     Yes.

Q.   So looking at your percentages there, you have made it
      57% of the total had consumed some alcohol and 43% had
     not? - A. Correct, of these men aged 18 or over.

Q.   Finally you arrive at the total at the bottom of this
     "Total” column of 67 people in this sample, i.e. 67
     out of the total of 95? - A. Indeed, the remaining 28
     being women or youths.

Q.   So just to try to apply this to the terrace as a
     whole, 67 out of 95 is just about 70%? - A. Indeed.

Q.    Seven out of ten then? - A. Indeed.

Q.   So if the population of the terrace as a whole were
     10,000, then this 67 would represent 70%, or 7,000 out
     of the 10,000? - A. Assuming that this is a
     representative sample of the terrace as a whole.

0.   If this is representative of the terrace as a whole? -
     A. Indeed.

Q.   So if that were correct, then 7,000 out of 10,000 of
      the men over 17 would have consumed some alcohol? - A.
      Yes.

Q.   Can we just do one more exercise on that.   Looking at
     your "Totals" table, and looking at the figure for the
     over 80 milligrams, how does that work out if we apply
      this to our total population of 10,000? - A. We would
     be saying that 21% of that population may have had an
     alcohol level over 80 milligrams, :ny arbitrary
     threshold, which would be 2,100, 14 out of 67, or 21%.

          THE CORONER: Hang on a moment, Mr. Payne, because
     I think there is an error in your thinking.

          MR. PAYNE:   I was going to correct that.
                                                             17
                                                 J. P. NICHOLL

           THE CORONER:  One has to adjust.  You have not
     got the whole sample there;   you have only got 67 out
     of 9 5 because you have excluded a group.

          THE WITNESS:     I am sorry.

          MR. PAYNE:     The Coroner's point is perfectly
     correct.

          MR. KING:   I am sorry to interrupt, and it is
     probably my fault completely.   I just want to go back
     a stage in my learned friend's questioning.   When he
     was looking at Table 7, did I hear him say and ask the
     witness that 67 out of the 95 from that table had some
     alcohol in them?

          THE WITNESS:    No.

          THE CORONER: No, I do not think he did.

          THE WITNESS:    I hope he did not.

          MR. KING:     Because he used the figure then of 70%
     as having some    alcohol rounding it up, and that
     certainly does    not arise out of this.

          THE WITNESS:  That is where we have been going
     wrong.  It is 57% of the men aged 18 or over and that,
     indeed, would be 5,700 in this imaginary 10,000.

Q.        MR. PAYNE: Right.  So 5,700 out of the 10,000
     would have consumed some alcohol? - A. Assuming this
     is a representative sample.

Q.    -2 are proceeding on the basis that we assume it is
     representative. - A. Okay.

Q.   5,7.)0 out of 10,000, and can we get a comparable
     figure then ---

          MR. KING:  Sir, I am sorry to interrupt.    That
     figure excludes women and youths.

          TIIE WITNESS: This is of 10,000 men aged over 18.
     I think the point has been made.

          MR. KING:  If we had a terrace of 10,000 men, I
     agree, but there is no factual basis for that.

           THE CORONER: Mr. Payne, may I please have a try
     for a moment myself on this, and I think we can get to
     this.   Forgive me if I interrupt you.
Q.   Dr. Nicholl, I think we are getting into slight
     confusion here.   This Table 7 excludes two categories,
                                                            :'    18

                                                    J. P. NICHOLL


         women and youths under 18, in effect, 17 and under?
         A. Yes.
B
    Q.   If you look at your "Total" column in this table, you
          have got 67 people in your sample? - A. Who are men
          aged 18 or over.

    Q.   The total number of the deceased was 95? - A. Yes,
         indeed.

    Q.   That means that this sample represents 67 over 95 x
         100, which I work  out at about 70%? - A. Indeed.

    Q.   You agree? - A. I   do.

    Q.   If you have a terrace which is populated by 10,000
          people and assume  for a moment that  this is
          representative, then 7,000-odd of those people would
          be in your sample because the other 3,000 are women
          and youngsters? - A. Yes.    If you like, the better
D         way of putting it would be to say there are 7,000 men
          aged over 18 on that terrace.

    Q.   That is right, and out of those 7,000 you can then
          apply your percentages in the respective columns? - A.
          Indeed.

    Q.   It is a matter of simple multiplication,       that is
         right, is it not? - A. Yes.

    Q.        MR. PAYNE: That is exactly right, and can you
         help, please, Dr. Nicholl then to apply the over 80
         figure to the 7,000 men over the age of 18? - A. Yes.
         Fourteen in every 67 of that group would have an
         alcohol level over 80, that is to say that 21% of that
         grouo might be expected to have an alcohol level over
         30, so that if it were a group of 7,000 people 21% of
         those represent about 1,400 and a few.

    Q.   Yes, 1,470 exactly. - A. Yes.

    Q.        THE CORONER: It is a fifth?    - A. Yes.

              THE CORONER: Mr. Payne, I hope you did not mind
         my interrupting you.

               MR. PAYNE:    No indeed, most helpful.     I am very
          grateful.

                    Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

    Q.    Just so that I can understand exactly where we have
          got to, if one makes the assumption which you were
          asked to make by Mr. Payne, namely that the proportion


H
                                            J. P. NICHOLL

of men over 17 on the  terrace as a whole was the same
as the proportion of men over 17 in your sample, then
just over 1,400 on the terrace would have a blood
alcohol level over 80, and a number over 5,000 would
have a blood alcohol level over 10? - A. No.

In fact, the number would b e     A. Not at all.   The
other 5,000 and whatever, 5,600, would have alcohol
levels under 80.  They may be nil, negligible traces
or between 10 and 79 in the proportions approximately
that about - you will   have to forgive me since I do
not have a calculator   with me - 2,000 of them would be
between 10 and 79, and the remainder, which would be
just under half of them, about 3,000 and a few hundred
would nave nil or negligible traces.

The position would be this, would it not, Dr. Nicholl,
that you would have 57% of your 7,000 with a blood
alcohol level of between 10 --- A. And over.

I should say over 10? - A. Yes, indeed.

So it would be 57% of your 7,000? - A. Indeed.

Which is? - A. About 4,000 I believe.     The men who
play darts will have a calculator.

I think it is 3,990? - A. I would say about 4,000 -
3,990 that is, yes.

But taking your arbitrary figure of 80, the figure is
about 1,400? - A. Indeed it is, about.

I think you said earlier when we were not discussing
this matter but you were dealing with the matters in
answer to the learned Coroner, now about half-an-hour
ago, that this sample did provide strong statistical
evidence for the assumptions that you were seeking to
make? - A. Not for the assumptions that I was seeking
to make - for exactly the conclusions that we have
just been reaching on the basis of those assumptions,
and I think I should like to stress this, if I may,
that just going on the basis that this is, indeed, a
representative sample of the terrace as a whole,
assuming for the moment that is the case, then
obviously when you are trying to guess at the
proportion of that terrace that have alcohol levels of
a particular level, we are taking a bit of a shot in
the dark.  All we have got is the evidence in 95
people, and we are trying now to make some estimate as
to what is the case in all 10,000.  Obviously we may
be wrong, not wrong because these people were in some
way unrepresentative, but merely that we can be wrong
by chance.
                                                               20

                                                  J. P. NICHOLL

              If I wanted, for example, to say what proportion
         of the population smoked and we pulled out all the
B        smokers in this room, we might not actually get
         exactly the true population proportion.  We should be
         close to it, assuming this is a representative sample
         of the population, but we would not necessarily get
         exactly the right figure.  This is an important point
         I wish to make, that on the basis of 95 people assumed
         to be a representative sample, we are trying to guess
         at the proportions in the terrace as a whole.   That
         guess may be wrong.  The point of the statistical
         analysis that you were referring to as to whether
         there was strong evidence is to say, is it likely that
         we could be wrong to the extent that, for example, the
         true proportions were not that approximately 1,400 of
         the men aged over IS had levels over 30, but it could
         have been 1,000 or 1,300 or something?  Indeed, could
         it be the ca3e that there was no association between
         time of entry into the ground and the alcohol levels?
         All I wanted to say was there was very strong
         statistical evidence that, assuming this was a
         representative sample, there was such an association.
         It could not just have occurred by chance.  It could
         not just be bad luck that it happened that the 95
         people who happened to have died and that I have been
         examining happened to have entered late and to have
         had alcohol.  That is not the case.

    Q.   But assuming that the proportion of men over 17 in
         your sample, which we understand to be 70%? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Is representative of the proportion of men over 17 on
         the terrace. - A. All right.

    Q.   We have all had a look at the videos and you have not
         had that opportunity, then the resultant figure would
         be 1,400 people on that terrace who had a blood
         alcohol level above your 80 figure?  That is what we
         have already established, if I may say so? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Of course, it being statistics, it may be more than
         that and it may be less than that? - A. Indeed it
         could. I ---
              MR. ISAACS: Thank you very much indeed.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   What were you going to say, Dr.
         Nicholl? - A. It is possible to say, roughly speaking,
         how much more or how much less it might be, but I have
         not done that.

    Q.   But what you did say to Mr. Isaacs was from the   work
         you have done the statistical basis is a strong   one? -
         A. Indeed.
                                                             21

                                               J. P. NICHOLL


                 Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q. I appear on behalf of the families of those who lost
   their lives.   You will appreciate that raw figures can
   give rise to much emotion if wrong conclusions are drawn
   from them.   You are simply giving figures based on raw
   material delivered to you? - A. Indeed.

0. I want to draw out, if I may, some other matters arising
   out of that raw material to give it a slightly different
   perspective from what we have seen already.   Can we look
   first at the 95 who unfortunately lost their lives?    I
   am just looking at table 1, simply looking at the blood
   alcohol content of those who unfortunately lost their
   lives.   Forty-four had absolutely no alcohol in their
   blood at all? - A. That is in fact correct.

0. Seven had barely a trace, very small? - A. Absolutely
   right.

0. So we have 53%, that is over half, of those who lost
   their lives who one could describe, really, as totally
   sober? - A. Yes, certainly.

Q. Then if we move on you then have 29 of the sample who had
   a blood alcohol content up to the limit which by law you
   are entitled to drive a car? - A. Indeed.

0. Within that 10 to 70, of course, there are variations as
   we reach the 79?   That is to say, some would be 11, some
   would be 15, some would be 40, some would be 50 and so
   forth? - A. Of course.

0. Although - and I do not blame you for this as a
   statistician - you have lumped them together of course
   there is a difference between somebody who has 10 or 11
   and someone who has 79, in terms of the content of
   alcohol?- A. Yes.

0. However, lumping it together in that way, 29 of 95, on my
   schoolboy arithmetic, is some 30%? - A. Indeed it is.

0. So that 83% of those unfortunate people who lost their
   lives were either totally sober or were fit, as far as
   alcohol goes, to   drive a motor   car?- A. Yes.   I
   actually have it   as 84%, but I   don't wish to dispute
   that, obviously.

0. I am happy and I am sure the families will be happy with
   even that figure.    If one were to apply statistically
   those figures as representative to the whole crowd, on
   the terrace, for example, we have this remarkable
   conclusion at a football match      that84% were either
   totally sober or   if they walked out of that ground and
                                             J. P. NICHOLL

got into a motor car they would be within the law? - A.
Absolutely right.

You are talking about, therefore, the overwhelming
majority of people who were in that condition? - A. I
would certainly agree with that.

Then let me look at the   16% who were above 80.    Again
you, Dr. Nicholl, would   not claim to be an expert on what
the significance is in terms of one's condition, one's
ability to look after oneself, one's ability to make
judgments as regards 80, 85, 90, 95, 100?    You have just
taken the arbitrary line which has been set down by law?
- A. Indeed.

There is always a danger isn't there, and you will
understand all your figures have been heard not only here
but upstairs in the press room, there is a danger that
one would read alcohol level with drunkenness, and you
cannot say that at all?   -A. No, and I hope T have made
that absolutely clear in my evidence.

I think it has to be made absolutely clear in this
particular situation.    Now let me deal statistically
with those 15 out of the 95, the 16% or so, who would
have failed the breath test, if I can put it that way.
I have done my own analysis of those 1 5 - 1 don't know if
you have done this - to see how many of those 15 were
less than 100.   In other words, in that category where
one as a lawyer goes along to the Magistrates Court and
you say to the Magistrates, "I know he was over the
limit, but he was only just and it did not really have
any affect on his driving at all, let him off."    You
know the sort of situation I am talking about!

     THE CORONER:   I don't think you would get very far!

     MR. MANNING:   Since my learned friend clearly does
not go in the Magistrates' Court, you can't be let off!

     MR. KING:   You understand the picture I am
painting.   We are talking about people who are just over
the limit, all right? - A. Yes.

Of those 15 would you confirm, and I will do it again
because I have got the figures in front of me, that 8
were less than 100 - 99 down to 79? - A. I have got the
figures with me.   I have just scanned them now and it
looks very much like 8.

I am very happy to show an analysis which Mr. Hale very
kindly provided me with, which gives me the figures very
conveniently and by all means check it. -A. Can I have
two minutes?
                                             J.   P.   NICHOLI­


     THE CORONER:    Of course.   While Dr. Nicholl is
doing that, Mr. King, I understand your anxieties in the
matter but you have to be careful with table 1 because
table 1 is an overall table and you have to draw...    You
cannot - which is what you did, actually - attribute that
table to the terrace as a whole.     That is in fact
precisely what Dr. Nicholl tried to do in table 7, to try
and sort out...

     MR. KING:   Sir, we arrive at the same conclusions,
but I will develop it with the witness.

     THE WITNESS:   Indeed it is 8 who were between 80
and 100 milligrams per decilitre.

     MR. KING:     Of those who died and who were over the
driving limit,   just over half were between 80 and 100? -
A. Indeed.

Of the 16% who were over the driving limit, if I can put
it that way, one could divide that up into two figures
and one could say that of the whole, that is, where 100%
is everybody, 16% were over 80.   Another way of looking
at it is to say roughly 8% or so were between 80 and 100
and 8% or so were over 100? - A. Indeed.

So we are getting down to very small figures indeed? - A.
Absolutely right.

Now the learned Coroner said it would not be right to
apply the analysis of the 95 to the whole terrace.    Let
me investigate that slightly.   The 95 are made up of a
proportion of men, women and children? - A. Yes.

I need not worry about the proportions for the moment.
Those proportions can be translated on to the terrace,
can't they?   I am not saying there are but if you were
going to try and do this analysis you would have to say
that? - A. Yes, you can talk out of 10,000 instead out of
100, which is all a percentage, if you wish to do so.

Therefore, my analysis of 83% of the 95 being either
totally sober or fit to drive a motor car, if it was
reasonable to carry over the same proportions on to the
whole terrace you would arrive at the same conclusion for
the whole terrace? - A. Indeed you would.

Just so the learned Coroner doesn't think I am
hoodwinking him, if in fact you look at your table 7 for
a moment, which is the table which excludes women and
youths, we find a very similar proportion of those who
are either totally sober or within the driving limit, if
one looks at your total on the right hand side and adds
                                                               24
                                                     J. P. NICHOLL

         together 43% and 36% we get 79%, don't we? - A. Indeed we
         do.

 0. I, of course, had 83% in the other one, but we are not
    talking in any different terms at all?   We are talking
    about small differentials there, aren't we?   It is still
    the overwhelming majority for within the category? - A.
    Indeed it is, it is still the overwhelming majority.

Q. These are the points I want to concentrate on because we
   are looking at it in the round. - A. Right.

0. Can I now look at equally your analysis of entry before
   and after 2.30 pm and your analysis of the odds about
   whetner or not one would have had some alcohol in one
   before or after 2.30?    Again look at the figures, if we
   may, for time of entry after 2.30 - table 8.    Now we
   have got to be careful with words.    If I have a milk
   bottle which is exactly 50% with liquid in it, I can
   either say it is half full or I can say it is half empty,
   can't I? - A. Yes.    That is exactly why I hesitated in
   tne last question you put.

0. Of course it can be pejorative sometimes, according to
   which way one describes something, as half full or half
   empty? - A. Indeed.

0. I was interested in some words you used, and I don't mean
   this too critically.    When you were describing the
   position after 2.30 and we can all see the third column
   along in the table, you told us in these words that under
   half nad either no   alcohol or just a trace.  That was
   the expression you   used. - A. Yes.

0   .   However, when you went down that same column and came to
        the figure of 14, which, of course,  is under a quarter
        isn't it? - A. Yes.

0. You did not say to us "under a quarter" were over 80.
   What you said to us was, "nearly a quarter" was over 80?
   - A. Indeed.

Q. I could use the same analysis in this way, and use these
   words as regards after 2.30 entry, nearly half after
   2.30, nearly half the people who came in after 2.30 were
   really totally sober? - A. Indeed.

0.       If 22% can be described as nearly a quarter, equally 43%
        can be described as nearly a half? - A. Absolutely right.

Q. One can then go on   and see that 35% after 2.30 had up to
   the driving limit? - A. Indeed.
                                            J. P. NICHOLL

You see, in the analysis which has been put to you so
far, whatever one has been doing, has been adding
together all those with alcohol and saying, for example,
after 2.30 you have 57%, that is the 35% and the 22%, who
had some alcohol in them.   That is one way of looking at
it.   However, equally, one way of looking at it is to
add the nearly half who were totally sober and the 35%
who were up to the driving limit and one could say that
even after 2.30 entry, 78% of everyone in this sample who
came in after 2.30 were either totally sober or fit to
drive a motor car?   That is right, isn't it? - A. That
is indeed correct.




      Q. Of the proportion who would
                                               J. P. NICHOLL


Of the proportion who would have failed a breath test,
that is the 22 per cent after 2.30, if my earlier
analysis of the difference between those over 100 and
those under 100 is correct and it is because you have
agreed with me, of that 22 per cent, we could halve
that into two and we could say that of that 22 per cent
11 per cent statistically were between 80 and 100 and
11 per cent were over? - A. That may be the case. You
do not actually know how your - it is split up in terms
of times of entry. You may be right and you may be
wrong.

Let us be fair. You are only splitting up 15 people,
are we not? The 15 people who were over 80 which I
divided up before into 8 and 7 have now been split up
into 1 and 14. So it is not going to be much
difference whether that 1 we have taken out of our
analysis is under 100 or over 100? - A. Of course it
isn't.

     THE CORONER: The 1 is over 100. I think in one
of the other tables he has ascertained that.

     MR. KING: So in fact if one assumes for the
moment it was over 100 and we have got to increase the
percentage between 80 and 100 who entered after 2.30.
Can I just bring thistogether if    I may? It does mean
that on your statistics taken as a whole of the 95 poor
people who lost their lives over a half were totally
sober, 53 per cent? - A. Yes.

The overwhelming majority had either consumed no
alcohol or were fit to drive a motor car? - A.
Absolutely right.

Of the remainder one is talking about 8 per cent, a
very small proportion as a whole, who were over 100 if
I can put it that way. We can translate that same
analysis roughly to whether one looks at the terrace as
a whole if one is transferring it statistically? - A.
Yes, indeed.

Or if one is looking at entry after 2.30. The
overwhelming majority of any of these groups, whichever
way we look at it, the were either totally sober or fit
to drive a motor car. That must be right as a
conclusion? - A. That is absolutely correct.

You, of course, and quite fairly, cannot draw any
conclusions at all as to that small minority who were
not fit to drive a motor car as to how their particular
alcohol level translated it in terms of its effect on
                                               J. P. NICHOLL


them because that is not within your scope at all? - A.
Exactly right.

Your figures would not lend any statistical support to
a suggestion that there was an overwhelming proportion
of people who were drunk on the day. That would not
support the proposition, would it?

     THE CORONER: I do not think you can ask him that
he has no expertise and then ask him to give an opinion
as to behaviour. You cannot have it both ways.

     MR. KING: Sir, I can in terms of sobriety against
drunkenness because that does not need expertise.

     MR. PAYNE: There are lots of comments that could
be made. I mean I could have made lots of comments
about it.
     MR. KING:   So be it, sir.

     THE CORONER:   No.

     MR. KING: Sir, I make no bones about why I have
gone through this exercise. The danger is not that
you, sir, will misinterpret these figures. I even
trust everybody here, all my friends, and I trust the
Jury. What is the danger, sir, and I say it openly, is
what is reported arising out of these figures because
they can be totally misleading if one takes it very
simply.

     THE CORONER: Yes, I do understand, and that is
why I have not in any sense tried to intervene or stop
you but I think you cannot ask the two questions next
to each other which in fact you did.

     MR. KING: It also follows, and can I go back to
Table 8 please, Dr. Nicholl, you were saying that on
your analysis there was three times greater chance that
if you came in after 2.30 that you would have had some
alcohol in you or have had a drink which is what I
think you said? - A. The relative odds in the one group
relative to the odds in the other group. That is not
quite the same thing.

Can you tell us what are the odds, given those figures,
that if you came in after 2.30 that you would either be
sober or under the limit? - A. They are going to be
well over. Sorry, the odds of being sober or?

Under the limit? - A. You mean the other way round.
They are going to be well under a third.
                                               J. P. NICHOLL



No, sorry, you misunderstand me. Either anybody who
came in after 2.30 on your figures, because I have been
through them with you, 78 per cent you have agreed with
me were either no alcohol or trace or simply under the
limit? - A. Indeed, yes.
So the odds of a given individual, if one just picked a
person out after 2.30? - A. Yes, compared to those,
that is exactly the right concept.
If you put their names in a hat and I picked one out
the odds are it is more likely, and indeed far more
likely, I would be picking out somebody who was either
no alcohol at all or under the limit as opposed to
someone who was over 80, is that right? - A. For those
coming in after 2.30 that would be absolutely right.
Relative to those coming in before 2.30 though, which
is the point that I was making, the odds in this case
will not be 3 but more like 10.
Yes. - A. I mean you are actually going in the wrong
direction here.
What I am trying to elicit is how we can translate your
statistics into the likely make-up of the people who
were coming in after 2.30. That is what I am
interested in. The likely make-up is likely to be the
figures you have given us which is 78 per cent of those
people are likely to be either under the limit or no
alcohol at all? - A. Indeed.
     THE CORONER:   Are you happy with that or did you
want to add something? - A. I would like to add one
thing if I may because I very much appreciate these
questions which have been put to me and I think all of
this has been well said. I would just like to clarify
that part of my purpose was not to look just at those
who entered after 2.30 but perhaps to contrast them
with those who entered before 2.30 and this Table 8
could be looked at in either way. You could either
look at those who entered after 2.30 or the contrast
between those who entered earlier and those who entered
later. My preliminary statements were really relating
to that contrast rather than just to the group after
2.30 but I accept everything that you have said about
the results.

    MR. KING: The danger of simply looking at that,
Dr. Nicholl, is not what conclusion you will draw from
it but what others might draw from the conclusion that
you are three times more likely to have had a drink
after 2.30 when you enter than before. That
                                                 J. P. NICHOLL


statistically may be right but also statistically right
is that those who came after 2.30, the proportions were
as we have been through, the overwhelming majority
having either had no alcohol at all or under the limit?
- A. Indeed, that is absolutely true.

One might have had a situation before 2.30 that
everybody had been stone cold sober with no drink in
them at all and the starting point would be 0? - A.
Indeed and then the odds would be very great indeed.

Then you get huge odds after that event? - A. Of
course.

If for some obscure reason no public house opened until
after 2.30 shall we say? - A. Yes.

I am interested in what we analyse as to the
proportions of figures that we have. - A. And I accept
all of this very much.

     MR. KING:    Thank you, Doctor.

     MR. RUSSELL: Sir, I have just been handed a note
and I would like a moment before I cross-examine.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, we will start with Mr. Hale.

                 Cross-Examined bv MR. HALE

Dr. Nicholl, while we are making statements of intent I
would like to make it clear that no one is suggesting
that I know of from this side of the table that there
were large numbers of people who were drunk or anything
of that nature. What the significant figure is
impairment in the ability to respond to a novel
situation and that is in the evidence that has already
been given to this Inquest in Dr. Forest's evidence and
the figure for that is 20 milligrams to 40 milligrams.
I know you have taken over 10 milligrams and that is
perhaps a little more severe. The figure I would have
taken would have been anybody over 20 milligrams as
having their ability to respond to a novel situation
impaired. Taking that figure, I do not know if you
have the figures there, Mr. King has actually put it in
writing that there are only 4 people between 10 and 20
milligrams? - A. That is certainly of the right order.

Therefore, your figure of 10 and above is not a mile
out if one takes instead a figure of 20 and above? - A.
Indeed.
                                                J. P. NICHOLL


Therefore, just taking the matter very simply, I am
very happy to put everybody together and not to exclude
the women and young children, I do not know if you have
this in front of you but 44 people, including all
categories, had absolutely no alcohol whatever? - A.
That is correct.

44 out of 95? - A. Yes.

Then the next category is a trace, less than 10? - A.
Yes.
In that category I have 7? - A. That is indeed right.
I have just given the 10 to 20 which is 4? - A. Yes.

Numerically going through the 95 we have now reached a
figure of 55? - A. Yes.

So that means there are 40 left and 40 of the people
had the figure of over 20 milligrams in which their
ability to respond might have been impaired. Everybody
can work out that 40 out of 95 is nearly half, is that
right? - A. Yes.

     MR. RUSSELL:   I do not need to take it further,
thank you.

     THE CORONER:   Dr. Nicholl, you will be relieved
to hear that we have finished. I am most grateful to
you for coming and doing some work on the figures. We
have spent a lot of time talking about alcohol because
that is obviously an interesting and important point
but your analysis goes deeper than that because it also
analyses out ages and age distributions. That is
right, is it not? - A. Yes.

I used the word 'deeper' and that may be the wrong
word? - A. Yes.

It is wider? - A. It is wider.

     THE CORONER: We will pause before the next
witness. We will adjourn for about eight minutes or
so.

                    (Short Adjournment)
                                           D. R. GOODHALL

            DAWN ROSEMARY GOODHALL Sworn

                    By THE CORONER

Good morning.  Can you tell me your full names, first
of all? - A. Dawn Rosemary Goodhall.

Tell me who you are and what you do? - A. I am a Senior
Plan Drawer for the West Midlands Police.

Is it right that we sent you some plans down on which
people had put crosses, and asked you to prepare a
composite drawing, which you have just recently done,
is that correct? - A. That is right.  They were done on
two drawings, reference DRG13 which shows a plan of the
terracing only.

     THE CORONER:   Can we just put that up, Sergeant,
and what "C" number are we going to give this?

     MR. BEECHEY:   The "C" number of the first one,
sir, is C536.

     (C536 was distributed)

     THE CORONER:   We can talk it through while it is
being distributed.   This is a drawing where you have
indicated the locations of the people who are named at
the top of the plan, that is right? - A. That is right,
sir, yes.

And it is as near as you can get  it in relation to
where people have put crosses? -  A. That is right.    I
took the centre of the cross as their location.

Yes, as their marker? - A. Yes.

In fact, it includes two people who were added at a
very late date, namely Mr. Case and I think Mr. Thomas,
is that right? - A. That is right.  Mr. Thomas is on


On the other one, sorry. - A. Yes, he is on DRG14.

But Mr. Case is shown on .... - A. Mr. Case is shown on
this one, yes.

It gives us a visual representation of where these
people placed themselves? - A. That is right, sir.

Whilst I am on this drawing perhaps we can just get
this right, some of the drawings which were sent to you
had more than one cross or marking? - A. That is right.
                                            D. R. GOQDHALL

I think we decided on a convention.  What was that? -
A. Yes.  Where there was more than one cross shown on
the witness's plan the second position was always
taken.

So these are either a single cross or second position?
- A. Or second position crosses.

However many marks there might have been? - A. That is
right, sir.

Then you did another composite drawing.  What was the
reference of this one? - A. DRG14, which is of the
Ground as a whole.

     THE CORONER:   What number will that be, please?

     MR. BEECHEY:   The "C" number, sir, is C537.

     THE CORONER:  Basically it is exactly the same?     -
A. Just the same convention was used, yes.

And it gives a schematic and diagrammatic
representation of where the people were? - A. That is
right, sir, and number 23 was added, Mr. Thomas was
added to this one.

It is right, isn't it, that although we have not seen
you here before we have felt your presence because all
the plans with little round spots on have been prepared
by you? - A. Yes, sir.

Which we have used? - A. Yes.

           Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Miss Goodhall, there is a query I have about the plans,
C275 and 276, not the ones that have just been given
out this morning but the ones that were in the black
folder.   When I attended the preliminary Inquest in
April the summary that was read out did say that John
moved to the right and I have studied various
photographs and John is clearly seen in the right
position.   Now on C276 he has been marked showing his
position is to the left.

     THE CORONER:   Can you find this, and the drawing
on which it was based, Sergeant Griffiths?

     THE WITNESS:   What was the reference number on
the plan, please?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   C276, that was the one I had the
query about.  I have marked on this one where I believe
                                          D. R. GOODHALL

John should have been according to the photographic
evidence.  Could I pass this to you, please? - A. Has
it got a reference number on the bottom?

DRG10.  If I can pass this to you for you to have a
look where - he was given the number 68 - and it will
show the blue spot marking number 68, and on top of
this there is a point been marked where he is seen on
the photographs.  If I could just pass this to you
please?

     THE CORONER:   Can I just look at it before you
give it to the Witness?  (Mrs. McBrien's copy of
Exhibit C276 was passed to the Coroner and then~~to the
Witnessl                                               ’

     MRS. McBRIEN:   If I could just pass you these two
plans as well, please?  These are earlier ones.  These
are the ones I believe you used to mark that one? - A.
I used them in conjunction with Inspector Layton, yes.

I think those show that he has been marked to the left,
d o n 't they ?

     THE CORONER:   Can I see those?   Are those
exhibits or your own markings?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   No, the ones I have just passed
now are not.

     THE WITNESS:   Could I confirm that where you have
marked the composite plan is where you think the red
dot is?

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes, that is right.  According to
the photographs, he moved to the right.   The original
one he r e , 276 ....

     THE CORONER:   Miss Goodhall cannot deal with the
evidence as to what people said.  You can ask her
whether the composite plan is correct in relation to
the earlier plans, but she was not there and she did
not take the statements as to which way he moved, left,
right, or back or front.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    Sir, I think there might be a
slight confusion.   I think Mrs. McBrien has identified
John on a series of photographs and the position on the
photographs ties in with her understanding of the
evidence given at the preliminary Inquest.   It does not
accord with the position shown on the plans as marked
by the spectators so it may be that it would be wise to
ask Mrs. McBrien to mark another plan, an additional
                                             J. McBRIEN

plan where she thinks John is according to the
photographs.

     THE CORONER:   That is an excellent idea because
there is no point at issue here.  It is your chance,
Mrs. McBrien, to actually give evidence.  Miss
Goodhall, would you take a back seat? Mrs. McBrien,
you will come up here and you will mark for us on a
plan, put a cross up - that is the only way to do it.
If you consider there to be an error then you must do
it properly.  I thought we had actually dealt with
this.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    No, we haven't.

     THE CORONER:   Well, I thought we had dealt with
it on two occasions, but be that as it may, Miss
Goodhall, go and sit at the back, and Mrs. McBrien, you
come up here and take the oath ....

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Sir, I have marked on the plan I
sent across now where I believe according to the
photographs John was.   Do you just want me to mark that
on a plan?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, that is right.  We will do it
exactly the same as with every other witness and then
Miss Goodhall if need be can re-draw the plan or make
an amendment to it.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Perhaps in that case it might be
wise to give Mrs. McBrien the plan she has handed up.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, but we need to do it properly
if we are going to do it at all.

                 JOAN McBRIEN Sworn

                     By THE CORONER

I think it is Joan McBrien, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Mrs. McBrien, I know that you have lost your son John,
and this has been a very terrible trauma to you, but
the only point that we need to deal with is this issue
of where he is located within the pen, that is right,
isn't it? - A. Yes, that is right.

The matter that concerns you is that the drawing which
was produced, you feel the marking is not quite
accurate as to where he was seen on the photographs
where you saw him, that is right, isn't it? - A. That
is what I think, yes.
                                                                35

                                                         J. McBRIEN

Q.   What I would like you to do, Mrs. McBrien, is to do
     what all the other supporter witnesses have done, but
     you were not there, but that does not matter.   If you
     would just go up and show us, and you can take your
      own copy with you to help you.  Put a cross on the
      spot where you believe you found John in the
      ohotographs - all right? - A. Yes, all right.

Q.   Have a good look, Mrs. McBrien, so that you get the
      cross in the right spot. (Witness marks plan)

          MR. BEECilEY:   The C number,   sir, i s C 5 3 8 .

          THE CORONER: I think that is all we need to do,
     and you can go back to your place and we will now just
     leave that plan up.  Can you come back Miss Goodhall.

               DAWN ROSEMARY GOODTfALL Recalled

                   Further by THE CORONER:

Q.   If you turn round, you will have to turn round I am
      afraid for this, can you see that cross? - A. Yes.

Q.   Have you got the original plan where his position is
      marked in front of you? - A. Yes, I have two.  I have
      the one with the red dot and the one with the blue
      dot.

          THE CORONER: Mrs. McBrien, is that where he was
     supposed to be seen dead or alive?  Dead I take it?

          MRS. McBRIEN:  Quite honestly, I am not sure
     whether he died as he was being taken out of the pen.
     I know he was sick and I do not know even if he died
     when he was put on the concrete, so that is a problem
     which I do not think we are going to find the answer
     to.

          MR. GRIFFITHS:  The red dot, sir, indicates the
     location when he was last seen alive.  The blue dot is
     later.

Q.        THE CORONER:  Have you got C49 in front of-you,
     the blue dot one? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   If you comDare those two plans, w h i c h is our C49? - A.
     Yes.

Q.   If you compare that with the plan which is at present
     on the screen, it would appear that the position on
     the screen is longitudinally displaced towards the
     left, is it not? - A. Yes sir.
                                          D. R. GOODHALL

The up/down position is more or less right, that is
correct? - A. Yes sir.

Assuming for a minute that Mrs. McBrien is accurate,
and the chances are that she is because she is John's
mum, that would indicate that the positioning on C49
is not entirely right? - A. If you look at C276, that
is a composite plan of the location of the diseased
which corresponds to the blue dots.  The location of
C49 on the composite plan is about right.

But it would have to be repositioned along that line
towards the left if the new plan were substituted,
would that be right? - A. Yes sir.

That is right, is it not? - A. Yes sir.

How long would it take you to re-do another composite
plan and re-mark the position? - A. Not terribly long,
sir.

\ou could not do it here, could you, because you have
not got the little spots? - A. Mo.

     THE CORONER: Can we put Mrs. IIcBrien's plan up
for the moment because we did not give it a C number.

     MR. BEECH2Y:   I have already given it a C number.
It is C538.

      THE CORONER: It is not really necessary to do it,
but perhaps when you go back you could just re-do
that.   You do not have to re-draw all of it, do you? -
A. No sir.

You can delete and insert? - A. We can find ways round
it.

Then send it off to us and we will use it as
documentary evidence. - A.  Yes.

     THE CORONER: Are you happy with that, Mrs.
McBrien?

     MRS. McBRIEN:  Yes sir.  When I phoned the West
Midlands Police up and I enquired of John's movements,
I was told that he was one of three people whose
movements they could not trace at that time.

     THE CORONER:  That may well be so, but I have
done my very best to assist you and, in fact, it makes
no difference to the verdict.  I am merely doing it in
order to please you, if I can put it like that.
                                              D. R. GOODHALL

     MRS. McBRIEN:     Thank you very much.

     THE CORONER: Any further questions of Miss
Goodhall?  (No response)
Before you go, if you would be kind enough, we will
give you a copy of that to take with you and do it and
send it back to us as soon as possible.  We need it as
soon as possible. - A. It will be done tomorrow.

That is fine and you can fax it up if need be.   It
will not be blue, but that does not matter, and send a
coloured copy through the post.   But before you go I
want to take the opportunity of thanking you for what,
in fact, is a big job and to commend you very much for
what you have done.  It has been of big assistance to
us in understanding and being able to visualise where
people were without necessarily having to look at
individual photographs. - A. I ara glad they have been
of help.

     THE CORONER: The next witness is Inspector
Hemmingway, is it not? We are now moving, Mr. King,
to two or three witnesses associated with specific
individuals who will deal with specifics.

     MR. KING:  I think it is in relation to
Christopher Edwards.

     THE CORONER: Mr. Edwards, yes.

             MARTIN JOHN HEMMING!-/AY Sworn

                    By THE CORONER:

It is Martin John Hemmingway? - A. Yes, that is
correct.

I think in 1939 you were a Police Sergeant, but I am
pleased to see that you are now an Inspector? - A.
That is correct, sir, and thank you.

Mr. Hemmingway, we have got you here really just to
deal with one specific point, and that is one of the
deceased was named Edwards, as I think you know,
Christopher Edwards, and I think I am right in saying
that at some stage you viewed some photographic
evidence and you felt that one of the people whom you
had had an association with was this lad Christopher,
is that right? - A. That is correct, sir, yes.

What we   are particularly anxious to try and establish
is what   time it was when you came across him, so to
speak.    Before you answer that I am just going to try
and fix   a few points of time for you so that we can
                                                                38
                                               M. J. HEMMINGWAY

         narrow it down. - A. Right, sir, I understand.

B        I think you were actually in the South Stand, that was
         where your job was? - A. Yes, that is correct.  I
         started the afternoon in the South Stand, yas.

         I am not concerned about what went on there and what
         you did, or anything like that, but you can recollect,
         I think, that the game kicked off at about 3 o'clock,
         is that right? - A. Yes.

    Q.   You remember the kick-off? - A. Yes, I saw the kick-
         off.

    Q.   Tnan you went up a gangway somewhere within the South
         Stand, is that right? - A. Yes, that is correct.  At 3
         o'clock I was at the top of the gangway of the South
         Stand nearest to the Leppings Lane end.

    Q.   At some point your attention was drawn to the fact
D        tnat there were various Officers on the perimeter
         track near Gate 3? - A. Yes, it was exactly at that
         point.

    Q.   You could not quite see what was going on, so you
         decided to go and have a look? - A. That is correct.

    Q.   You presumably came down the gangway - right? - A.
         Yes.

    Q.   I think you met Superintendent Murray, is that right?
         - A. Yes, that is correct.   I went right to the edge
         of the gangway , near to the perimeter of the pitch,
         and I tried to see what was going on.   I couldn't see
         w'ut was going on, so I turned round and there I saw
         Superintendent Murray and two Constables at the head
         of tne gangway where I had been standing a few moments
         earlier.  They were approaching me down the gangway.

    Q.   So they were coming out? - A. Yes, that is correct.

    Q.   Towards the pitch? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Having seen them, you then ran round the perimeter
         track, or walked round, I do not know, towards Gate 3,
         is that right? - A. That is correct.

         Can you recollect whether, by the time you got there,
         the match was still in play or whether it had ceased?
         - A. Yes, I think the match was still in progress.

    Q.   In fact, we do not need to go through all the details,
         but it is right that there were people trying to help
         people to come out through the gate at that point when
                                                              39
                                               M. J . HEHMINGNAY

      you got there, is that right? - A. That is correct,
      sir.

Q.    Some of the people, unfortunately, who were coming out
      were trapped for various reasons? - A. Yes, indeed.

Q.    You, in fact, assisted at that gate initially, is that
      right? - A. That is correct, sir, and I believe at the
      time for between 5 and 10 minutes.

Q.   So you were actually outside on the perimeter track
      near the gate assisting people? - A. Yes, on the
      perimeter track immediately outside Gate 3.

Q.   You think it might have bean a period of 5 to 10
      minutes? - A. I think so, sir, but given the
      circumstances of what was taking place at that time,
      it is very difficult for me to put a time on it, of
      course.

Q.   I think you then discovered that you really ought to
      go in? - A. Yes, that is correct, sir.  We were making
      no progress at all, so it was apparent that we had to
      try and climb in and do something inside the pen.

Q.   Indeed, that is precisely what you did? - A. Indeed,
     yes.

Q.   You went in through Gate 3? - A. Through Gate 3 with
     another Officer.

Q.   Of course, you had to go over the people who were
     still within that gate? - A. Yes, unfortunately that
     was the case, sir.

Q.   Then when you got there, once you got inside, you
     noticed that there were quite a lot of people, and did
     they appear to you to be dead at that point? - A. Yes.
     I climbed some distance into the pen over people, and
     at the point where I was able to force my way to the
     ground, when I turned and looked back towards the
     pitch, it seemed to me that everybody behind me was
     either dead or in great distress.

Q.   This is where we    get, I think, to Christopher,   is that
      right? - A. That   is correct, sir, yes.

Q.   I do not want you to describe him in any sense of the
      word which would be upsetting, do you understand? - A.
      I quite understand, sir.

Q.   But when you first saw him, first of all was he still
     within the terrace? - A. Yes he was, sir.  He was
lying down near to the broken crash barrier, just
behind and to the left of it is my recollection.
                                                          41
                                            M. J. HEMMINGWAY

0. This side of the crash barrier? - A. Just a little
   further away.

0. When I say "this side", I mean the pitch side or the far
   side? - A. The far side, sir, is my recollection.

0. Did you think he was alive or dead when you first glanced
   at him? - A. My first impression, sir, was that he was
   dead.

0. LNevertheless I think you did try some cardiac massage? -
   A. Yes, indeed.    I tried to give him external air
   resuscitation and cardiac massage for several minutes,
   unfortunately to no avail.

0. Then I think somebody else called because somebody was
   found who appeared to be alive? -A. Yes, that is right.
   There was some shouting.   Somebody was shouting, "He's
   alive."   My attention was attracted to another man who
   was lying some distance away on the terrace.

Q. It is fair to say that by the time you got to him your
   first impression was that he was dead? - A. Yes, that is
   correct, sir.

0. You second impression after you had tried some
   resuscitative efforts is that you obtained no response? -
   A. That is correct, sir.

Q. Can you say in relation to anything what time it was when
   you actually got to him? - A. It is very difficult for me
   to be precise given the nature of what was taking place.
   I would say it would be some time just after 3.10.

Q. Do you recollect whether the ambulance was already on the
   pitch? - A. I don't remember seeing anything on the pitch
   after arriving at gate 3.   My attention was directed
   away from the pitch from that time onward.

Q. So it is purely an estimate as to how long you think time
   had passed? - A. That is correct.

0. As far as you can tell Christopher appeared to be with
   friends or people who were interested in him?   Is that
   right? - A. Yes.   There was certainly a group of people
   behind him who were obviously taking a very close
   interest in what was happening to him.

Q. They were very upset? - A. Enormously upset, yes.
                                                              42
                                                 M. J. HEMMINGWAY

                   Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Q. Officer, I am sorry to have to ask you what can be
   difficult questions but you can appreciate the family has
   a very great interest in the last moments of their son. -
   A. Absolutely, sir, I quite understand.

        THE CORONER:   Can I just interrupt you?   If
   necessary you have to give a proper description of what
   you saw.   I deliberately asked you not to, but if need
   be then so be it.   It was intended to spare the family.

        MR. KING:   I know that and sometimes one has to
   have a balance because of the concern of the family.

        THE CORONER:   Yes, indeed.     However, I don't mind
   so long as that is understood.

        MR. KING:     Yes, I am very conscious of that:

0. Officer when you got into the pen and you told us that
   you looked around and you saw a number of people all of
   whom, or a large number of whom, appeared dead or in
   distress? - A. That is correct.

Q. You selected Christopher Edwards - the person we believe
   to be Christopher Edwards - as somebody you would try and
   resuscitate?   You selected him? - A. I think to be
   entirely frank the word "selected" is too strong.   I
   found myself standing next to Mr. Edwards.    The scene
   was obviously one of enormous catastrophe and to be
   perfectly honest I started resuscitating Mr. Edwards
   because he was closest to me.   My feelings at the time
   were ones of near panic, frankly.

Q. That is really want I wanted to investigate, going as
   gently as I can, without needing to go into too much
   detail, but you will understand your evidence that there
   were a number of people who appeared dead, and yet you
   were attempting to resuscitate Christopher, might lead
   one to say there was something you saw which gave you
   some hope that he might be still alive.   That is really
   my question.   Was there anything you saw in his
   condition, when you first him, as you describe, near the
   barrier, which gave you hope that he might still be
   alive? - A. No, sir, there was not.

       MR. KING:      Can I take some instructions, sir?

       THE CORONER:   I don't mind the Officer saying
  precisely what he did see.

        MR. KING:   That is why I   want to take    some
   instructions, sir:
                                                            43
                                             M. J. HEMMINGWAY

Q. That has been very helpful because we have done it in
   that way and you have been able to tell us very openly
   that you sought to help him simply because he was near
   you, and thank you for that. - A. Yes, if I might just
   enlarge in order to clarify the point entirely.   I think
   if I made an error in my actions inside that pen it was
   in not properly assessing the situation.   Had I done so,
   then my actions would have been different.

0. Officer, there is no criticism of you at all and indeed I
   say thank you for what you did do on behalf of
   Christopher's family.   How long do you think it was that
   you took these efforts to resuscitate before you were
   called away? - A.  I would say more than five     minutes, but
   given the circumstances that would at best be an
   estimate.

0. So be it.   I say that because five minutes is a very
   long time actually. - A. Yes, it was an extremely long
   time.

Q. It seemed as though you were working on him for that
   length of time? - A. Yes.

0. It would follow from your evidence that during that
   length of time, throughout that time nothing occurred
   which in any way started to give you hope that you might
   be succeeding? -A. That is correct.

Q. Then you were called away.   Did you ever, after you had
   been called away, see Christopher again in the pen? - A.
   No.   The circumstances were that I assisted in carrying
   a man who was clearly alive at that stage, from the pen,
   and tried to resuscitate him on the pitch.  I did not
   subsequently re-enter the pen.

0. You cannot assist with a question I know the family has,
   which was how long it was after you left your efforts to
   resuscitate did other Officers who we know of lift
   Christopher from the pen? - A. No, I am afraid I can't.

0. Just finally one little effort of mine to try and
   pinpoint time.   Do you know a Chief Superintendent
   Nesbit? - A. Yes, I know Mr. Nesbit.

0. When you arrived at the pen to enter it, and you entered
   it through the gate? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. Was Chief Superintendent Nesbit within your eye sight at
   all at that stage? - A. He wasn't, but having said that,
   I was concentrating entirely on looking inside the centre
   pen.
                                                             44
                                               M. J. HEMMINGWAY

Q. So be it.     It is simply that we know roughly when he
   arrived.

        THE CORONER:   Mr. King, I think I will pass you
   this sheet simply so that you can see it.    What I am
   worried about is that I don't want to feel that I am
   suppressing something from the family.    On the other
   hand, I cannot see any point in upsetting them
   needlessly.   If you could have a look at that.    It is
   marked with a pencil.

        MR. KING:   Officer, I have no questions save to
   repeat again my thanks for your coming to assist us.

        THE CORONER:      Inspector Hemmingway, thank you very
   much for coming.

        We have got three witnesses connected with
   Christopher.    In correct sequence we ought to hear
   PC Smith but unfortunately he isn't here.    He is coming.
   If I may I will take Paul Ibbotson.    It will be out of
   sequence.    Is that OK with you, Mr. King?

        MR. KING:      That is fine, sir.

                       PAUL IBBOTSON Sworn

                         By THE CORONER:

0. Now you are Paul Ibbotson? - A. Yes.

Q. You are   Police Constable 54? - A. That is correct.

0. I think I am right in saying that at some point or other
   you managed to identify yourself as helping to carry
   somebody across the pitch on a stretcher? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you looked at various photographs and in the end
   you came to the conclusion that the person was probably
   Christopher Edwards? - A. That is correct.

0. What I want you to do, and you may well have been doing
   many other things as well that day, but what I want you
   to concentrate on is when you came across him.   Perhaps
   you ought to say what time you entered the ground? - A. I
   entered the ground between quarter past three and twenty
   past three.

0. I think you initially formed a cordon by the North Stand?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. It was after that that you went off somewhere else? - A.
   Yes.
                                                                        45
                                                           P. IBBOTSON

    O. Then you came back on to the track? - A. Yes, with three
       other Policemen with a stretcher.

    0. Was it when you then returned on to thepitch       that    you
B      came across Christopher?   - A. Yes.

    0. Where was he when you came across him? - A. Facing the
       goal at the Leppings Lane end he was to the right of the
       penalty area.   That is all Ican remember.

    0. Was he completely alone or were there other people with
       him? - A. I believe a doctor attended him at the time and
       he was surrounded by other people.

    0. When you say you believe it was a doctor,       did heidentify
       himself? - A. He said he    was, yes.

    0. Did you see him apparently undertaking resuscitative
       steps? - A. Yes.

    0. What happened then?   Did he tell you to put him on the
       stretcner and carry him away? - A. Yes, he said he was
       dead and could we put him on a stretcher.

    Q.   So he actually told you   that? - A. Yes.

    0.   You then carried him...- A. We carried      him to the
         gymnasium.

    Q. Were there other Officers with you? - A. There were four
       of u s .

    0. In fact your number was written on his hand for
       identification purposes? - A. Yes.

    0. However, in the events which happened...        You left and
       went to help others? - A. Yes.

    0. By the time you got back another Officer had taken over
       responsibility? - A. That is correct.

    0. So you did not actually deal with Christopher in the
       mortuary.   Would it be right to say that the earliest
       you could have come across him must have been after
       twenty past three? - A. Yes, it was probably half past or
       even later.

    0. Your evidence is that at that time there was still
       somebody trying to resuscitate him who identified himself
       as a doctor and who then told you that unfortunately it
       was too late? - A. That is correct.
                                                              46
                                                      P. IBBOTSON

                     Cross-Examined by MR. KING;

     Q. I assume from your evidence that you saw no signs of life
-j      either in Christopher? - A. That's correct,
o
     0. Can you help the family on this:  the doctor who was
        resuscitating or attempting to resuscitate him, in your
        eyesight how long did he continue for? - A. He was there
        before I got there but while I was there thirty seconds
        to a minute.

     0. It appears that he gave you what appeared to be a very
        firm opinion that unfortunately the life was lost? - A.
        That is correct.

             THE CORONER:   Mr. Ibbotson thank you for coming.
       PC Smith has not arrived and I think that rather than
       move on to another person we will break for lunch and
       come back at two o'clock and hopefully he will be here by
       then.     Members of the Jury, would you jus t go?

                        (The Jury left Court)
D




                 THE CORONER:




H
     THE CORONER: In the light of the evidence which
we have heard I had decided that I was not going to
call Sergeant Goddard, PC Bichard or indeed PC Ryan
because although no doubt what they can tell us is
icing on the cake I did not think it would add that
much. Having thought about it and taken that decision
I reflected upon it this morning and in the light of
some of the questions the Jury have asked about the
panning facilities on the camera and one or two matters
like that I thought what I would do is ask Sergeant
Goddard and PC Bichard to come along. I am going to
limit their questioning to very specific points.

    I do not intend that we go over and re-explore the
whole aspect of the case or indeed the Control Room. I
say that now because I intend to complete the evidence
in certainly not more than an hour and possibly less.
I hope that is clear. The intention is that they can
clarify one or two aspects which are a little bit vague
because people cannot quite remember what happened and
that is all I want to do.

     MR. MANNING: The problem with that in itself,
sir, and I perhaps would be one who would say it would
not be necessary to hear them at all, is that in
picking out one or two specific items is that there
becomes or may become a necessity to relate back or to
relate forward. If it is not entirely consistent with
other evidence then you have certainly to take them
back or forward and to try and make that a reference
point. Of course, that then leads you to that whole
area where you want them quite rightly to avoid, from
the moment that they came on duty until the moment that
they went off duty in which case they will be here four
days, two days each like the two other people in the
Control Box.

     THE CORONER: There is no way that is going   to
happen and that is why I am warning you now.

     MR. MANNING: I think, if I may say so, the Jury
were interested in the technicality and my learned
friend, Mr. King, explored what was capable of being
seen, for example, from the video camera and that may
be a matter that was mentioned by the Jury as to what
could or could not be seen. That, I would respectfully
submit, is about the limit of what they are going to be
asked save if it is in your mind to say to them, "Did
you yourself see anything which caused you concern and
if you had seen anything would you have done something
about it?". If you are going to do that, sir, the
limit is finite but we cannot, it seems to me, go
through the whole of this evidence. If you had said,
as you have said already, that you were not intending
to call those witnesses at all because we have all been
there, we have all played around with the buttons and
we have seen it, then I do not think any complaint
could have been drawn. I think it has to be clearly
and definitely said what is to be the limit and we have
all got to stick to it.

     THE CORONER: That is the point I am trying to
make. What I want them to do is to give me strictly
factual evidence. If I can take Sergeant Goddard
simply as an example, he responded to the request about
delaying the kick-off. We know that from several
sources and we do not actually need that proved. What
I want to know from him is (a) did he say it and (b)
were the players on the pitch when he said it. That is
all I am interested in. I am not interested in
anything else because that is simply factual.
Secondly, what was his view of the terraces, how much
could he see of them and thirdly, some other factual
point which just escapes me for the moment. Certainly
I do not want to go into, and I can see absolutely no
advantage, re-exploring what Operational Orders were or
indeed anything else. I do not think that is going to
be any problem. Mr. King, I am sure you accept and can
see the point of it.

     MR. KING: Sir, as you have only just mentioned
it, I wonder if during the short adjournment I could
consider what you have said.

     THE CORONER:   The alternative is not tocall   them.

     MR. KING: Sir, my opening thought throughout is
that you have the complete discretion and the witnesses
are yours.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.

     MR. KING:   I merely want to reflect on what you
said, sir.

     THE CORONER: I just feel that they could give us
some helpful factual evidence but we do not need to
explore all the ramifications. As I say, we can get
everything we need which will beof assistance to the
Jury within a very short time.

     MR. KING: My only immediate thought, sir, is that
if they were witnesses of fact to matters in issue,
that is to say, witnesses of fact as to lengths of time
between messages, witnesses of fact as to reaction of
individual Officers, conversations they heard or did
not hear, not asking their opinions about anything, it
would be difficult to limit questions which were
themselves touching on their immediate eyesight vision
of what was happening in the Control Room at the given
time. That is what I say, sir, as a thought process
but I will reflect on it, sir.
     MR. MANNING: I understand entirely the logic of
it. I think I anticipated the logic of that when I
came to my feet and the only caveat I would make to the
statement I made before was that if they were not
commenting on the Operational Order and if they were
not giving matters of opinion but were commenting on
what they saw at a particular time throughout...

     THE CORONER:   Or indeed heard I suppose.

     MR. MANNING: Indeed, and heard, sir, then the
estimate of four days comes down to three days.

     THE CORONER:   It   comes down to one hour asfar as
I am concerned.

     MR. MANNING: It cannot be done, sir, with
respect. I could not properly object. You have the
conduct of the Court and as my learned friend rightly
said, and all of us must remember, at the end of the
day you make the decision whether the witness is called
and whether a witness is not called but if a witness is
called and that witness may have some ability to
comment upon what he heard or what he saw, then the
danger of excluding it by you is, I am sure, apparent
to you. I only present the balanced view because it
may very well be that having heard what my learned
friend has said it may be that others of my learned
friends would want to say something as well. You may
take the view that the only way in which to deal with
it is in fact not to call them at all because of those
problems.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: Perhaps I could rise as probably
someone who would not have any questions of the junior
Officers in the Control Box that the difficulty, even
on the basis that my learned friend, Mr. Manning, put
then the question, "If you had seen something which
caused you concern would you have said something about
it?" that has got to be explored. It would quite
properly be explored by my learned friend, Mr. King, in
the context of what they understood their duties were,
what their senior Officers were doing, what they heard
on the radio coming in from the Officers on the
perimeter track and West Stand. If it is simply, sir,
say PC Bichard being asked, "How do you operate the
video and what can you see during a normal match? Can
you see pen 6 and can you see pen 7?" then that is
giving some kind of technical evidence from somebody
who is an expert. If you are asking Sergeant Goddard
"What happens when you are on talk through and please
explain what you are doing?" then that is some sort of
technical evidence.
    Once you stray outside that, with respect, sir, you
open up a quite legitimate exploration by a number of
my learned friends into the events of the day in what
evidence they give and in the proper context of what
was going on around them. That, I regret to say, is
inescapable.

     MR. PAYNE: Sir, I wonder if I might just be
allowed to add that on the basis of your first
indication I did not rise because I was trying to work
out what my duty was in the face of such a direction.
I am very conscious of the fact that when I have
finished others have the opportunity to ask questions
and I am very anxious indeed to avoid the situation
where I have to jump up and interrupt other people by
saying, "This is going beyond whatever has been
permitted" when in fact the questions might seem to be
perfectly reasonable and very appropriate. I quite
agree about the three or four days estimate. One can
embark on it and one can quite see that a very
substantial enquiry could be embarked on along the row
here as to what those witnesses could contribute to the
issues which the Jury have to decide.

    In anticipation of that I am like my learned
friend, Mr. King, because I do not know what my
response is to the indication you have given because I
would have to decide what questions I need to ask of
the witness in order to put our side of the story.

     THE CORONER: It seems to me I think that we have
got the sides of the story in the greatest of detail
from the maximum number of people one can conceivably
imagine. I do find it difficult to see why, for
instance, it is not possible to ask Sergeant Goddard
whether or not he said X to Superintendent Murray. If
he says no to that, for instance, I can see no absolute
necessity to then explore with him why he did not say
X, whether he should have said X, what his orders were
with regard to saying X, whether Superintendent Murray,
Duckenfield or anybody else had given any directions.
I am interested in what he said and what he did and not
why he said it and why he did it.         Although I
agree that one could, if I asked that question, then
spend two days exploring the detail I do not think it
is necessary and I do not think we need it.

     MR. PAYNE: May I say this, sir? Our difficulty
as advocates is that we are familiar with the tradition
that when a witness is in the witness box he may have
been called for one purpose by one party but he is then
available to any other party to give evidence and be
asked questions about any aspect of the case which may
help the point of view which they want to advance and
just because he is being called for one purpose does
not mean that he is restricted to that purpose when it
comes to cross-examination. One can see it could be
quite legitimate for him to be asked a lot of
questions.

     THE CORONER: If I refer you to ex parte Spooner
where precisely this situation arose and where the
learned Coroner in that case was asked to call certain
witnesses, refused, but did agree to call one person to
give limited evidence, no criticism whatsoever was made
with regard to that by the Divisional Court or the
Court of Appeal. I think it was the Divisional Court.
I can see absolutely no reason why I cannot do
precisely the same and that is all I intend to do. If
you wish, I will do the examination-in-chief and none
of you ask any questions. That way it may well be that
you will not feel prejudiced because my objective is
simply to ascertain what his recollection on a number
of specifics.

     MR. PAYNE: I think in Spooner one of the comments
in the Divisional Court is that you or the Coroner is
master of his own procedure.

     THE CORONER:   You are quite right.

     MR. PAYNE: In view of what you have said earlier,
certainly from my point of view, we would not quarrel
with the procedure you have just suggested namely that
you ask the witness the limited points that you want to
deal with and that is the end of it.

     MR. KING: Can I just repeat my observation, sir?
Could I have a little time to reflect?
     THE CORONER:   Of course, yes.

     MR. KING: Clearly Sergeant Goddard and those who
were in the Control Room at the time were witnesses of
fact as well as whatever opinion may or may not be
sought from them and I find it difficult for a witness
who was present when the events we know we are talking
about were taking place for no questions to be asked
from any quarter as to what they saw from the Control
Box and what they heard in the Control Box as factual
matters. If that is your ruling, sir, so be it but it
would look strange to those behind me and I suspect
strange to the Jury if you had people so closely
present in physical terms to those we have already
heard and where there are great issues as to what
happened, it would seem very contrary to witnesses
being called as witnesses of fact on which they can
genuinely help for no questions to be asked of them
because it would leave a lacuna which would be obvious.
I say no more than that, sir, other than to remind you
that they were witnesses of fact. Of course, I have no
knowledge of what they would say on that.
     MR. CATCHPOLE: Can I just add one brief point?
In relation to the matters that even you, sir, were
thinking of exploring, say you asked Sergeant Goddard,
did he say to PC Buxton, "I cannot postpone the kick-
off because it is too late. The teams are already out"
that, with respect, has to be put into context. It is
not necessarily for me to do it but I can see that my
learned friend, Mr. King, for example, would be
entitled to ask properly "Did any of the senior
Officers say anything about that? What had you been
given to understand was the arrangement for postponing
kick-off? Was there a flexible or inflexible system?"
All that is being done is to put that conversation in
its proper context and there will be other questions
from my learned friends further along. With respect,
it is not a question of simple questions. We have to
see it from what lawyers call the factual matrix. If
you are going to go down that road it does, with
respect, run the risk of curbing legitimate enquiry if
you are not going to say to whoever wants to ask
questions, "Put those limited conversations in their
own context".

     THE CORONER: If that is the view you take then
you will have to do without the benefit of the witness.
It seems to me that that is a rather - I will think
about that as well.

     MR. ISAACS: I have listened to everybody and I
agree with Mr. King, I agree with Mr. Catchpole, and my
learned friends here, that if they are going to be
called it would seem very strange to the Jury, to those
behind, to all of us listening, and they can be
witnesses of the facts and yet their views, what they
saw, what they were told and what they heard are not
examined and that is going to be two or three days. I
have little doubt about it. Whetherwe have two or
three days is entirely a matter for you, sir. I am
quite happy to take us through it all.

     THE CORONER: I do not think they form an
essential component. If I did then we would have to
have the two or three days whether we like it or not.

     MR. ISAACS: Certainly as I understood it, sir,
that was the view that you had come to and one that I
would not quarrel with.

     THE CORONER:    I am sorry, which view?

     MR. ISAACS:    They are not an essential component.

     THE CORONER:   That was the view I had come to. It
was simply that upon reflection I thought that they
might be able to give us a little more background but I
would rather not call them if we were going to have
considerable difficulties over it.
     MR. CATCHPOLE: It might be worth letting Mr.
King, as he has asked, to reflect it over lunch and
perhaps us as well and then a decision can be taken at
some stage or other.

     THE CORONER:    Yes, indeed.

      MR. KING: Sir, could you indicate when you were
contemplating those witnesses if you did choose to call
them?

     THE CORONER: If I did choose to call them, when
we have finished with the witnesses whom we are dealing
with at the moment.

     MR. KING: You were intending to call them today,
sir, is what I was enquiring about.

     THE CORONER:    Yes.

     MR. KING: I am sorry, sir, I did not know whether
they were here or not.

     THE CORONER: I do not know whether they are here
but I asked for them to be alerted to the possibility.
I do not know who they are. I have never seen them.
At least if I have seen them I do not recognise them.
                    LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT
                                            M. S.’-SMITH

             MARCUS STANLEY SMITH Sworn

                   By THE CORONER

Now, you are Marcus Stanley Smith, is that right? - A.
That is correct, sir.

P.C. 2515, I believe, is that right? - A. That is
correct.

P.C. Smith, I have asked you to come because you at one
point were shown some photographs and you identified
somebody who you thought you had had some dealings
with, namely Christopher Edwards? - A. That is correct,
sir, yes.

Can you remember that? - A. I do remember, yes, sir.

I think I am right in saying that you were away from
the Ground and what time was it when you were at
Claywheels Lane, when you were told that you were
needed somewhere else? - A. Approximately 3.15 p.m.

You went from there and you were told to go ....- A. To
the Ground.

Which in fact you did.  In fact, you went by vehicle,
you didn't walk? - A. That is correct, yes.

You came in to the Leppings Lane entrance, is that
right? - A. That is correct, yes.

There were a lot of people about? - A. There were a lot
of people, yes.

I am not concerned about any of that.  How long did it
take to get from Claywheels Lane to the Ground, would
you say? - A. Two or three minutes at the most, a
matter of minutes.

In fact, you went down the tunnel, is that right? - A.
That is correct, yes.

I think by the time you were going down the tunnel fans
were already coming out, is that right? - A. Yes, they
were.

You got out of the tunnel and you went onto the
terrace, is that correct? - A. To the front of the
terrace, yes.

To the front of the terrace, and having got to the
front of the terrace do you remember seeing anybody
there? - A. Yes.
                                             M. S v SMITH

Tell me a little bit about that. - A. What I exactly
saw?

Yes. - A. I saw a lot of bodies piled up at the front,
at the very front, underneath the actual terracing
itself.  As I approached I estimated immediately there
must have been 50 to 100 people that I could see who
were all lying entangled together.

Did you notice this particular lad, Christopher
Edwards? - A. No, not initially.

When did you come across him? - A. After being   there
for a few minutes.

So you were at Claywheels Lane at quarter-past, two or
three minutes down .... - A. Yes, probably sometime
around 25-past I would say, I actually saw that
gentleman.

When you saw him what did he look like to you? - A. He
looked like he was dead to me.

Did you have any doubt at all about that? - A. No,   I
had no doubt, no doubts whatsoever.

Did you assist to get him out? - A. I did, yes.

Which way did you get him out, backward or forward? -
A. It was sideways and then forwards onto the pitch.

Yes, sorry, you misunderstood me. - A. Sorry, yes, we
went forwards onto the pitch.

Onto the pitch? - A. Yes.

Through the little gate, is that right? - A. Yes,
through the gate.

Do you know Chief Superintendent Nesbit? - A. I do know
Mr. Nesbit, yes.

Can you remember whether he was already there? - A. He
was there, yes.

He was there? - A. He was, yes.

You yourself did not attempt any resuscitative action?
- A. No, all I tried to do was to get to the bottom.

But in your mind there was not any doubt about this
gentleman's state? - A. No, there wasn't, none at all.
                                                     M. S . 'SMITH
                                                      S. HARRATT
 Q. Having got him onto the pitch did you put him down and
    run back to get somebody else? - A. No.   Where I was we
    actually formed a chain and basically what I was trying
    to do was just to get to the bottom, because all that
    was going through my mind was whoever was at the bottom
    obviously would not be getting any air, so all I was
    trying to do was get to the bottom and just pass them
    out.  I took no part with him on the pitch.   I did not
    actually go onto the pitch until afterwards.

 Q.   You were onthe terracing? - A. I was on the terracing
      until practically all the bodies had been moved.

 Q. You would estimate it was about 3.25 when you came
    across this lad? - A. Yes, I would say so.

 Q.    Mr. Smith, thank you very much indeed.   Thank you   for
      being here.

                      STEPHEN HARRATT Sworn

                         By THE CORONER

Q. Now, it is Stephen Harratt, isn't it? - A. Yes.

Q. P.C. 2872, is that right? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I have asked you to come along because you, I think,
   were also involved with somebody whom you subsequently
   identified, is that right? - A. Yes, sir.

Q*                y°u identified, is it right it was somebody
      called Adam Spearritt? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. How confident are you of the identification? - A. When
   I was shown the photograph, sir, some months
   afterwards, I was sure that it was the person that I
   had seen passed in front of me.

Q. He was a     young lad, wasn't he? - A. He was, sir, yes.

Q. You were on duty somewhere else, at Catchbar Lane and
   so on, initially, that is right? - A. Initially on
   Catchbar Lane and Parkside Road.

Q. In fact, you came into the Ground after a message was
   received that Officers were required? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I am taking you through a lot of stuff which we don't
   need to hear about.  You entered through the Leppings
   Lane entrances? - A. Yes.

Q. Then round the front onto the pitch? - A. Yes, sir.
                                                           57
                                                S. HARRATT

Q. At the time when you got there were the players already
   off the field or were they still on the field, as far
   as you remember? - A. I seem to recall that they were
   still on the field but not actually playing football.

Q. You made your way to one of the gates, is that right?-
   A. Yes, sir.

Q. Do you know which gate it was? - A. At the time I
   didn't, no.  It was the one directly behind, or
   slightly to the left of the goal mouth.

        THE CORONER:   Can we put the plan up, please,
   Sergeant, C274:

Q. On that plan can you say which gate it was you went to?
   - A. Gate 3.

Q. I think somebody was passed out and you tried to assist
   that person? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. That wasn't this youngster? - A. No.

Q. Then did you enter the terrace? - A. Yes, after a
   period of time I did go into Gate 3.

Q. First of all, what period of time would you say? - A.
   Possibly about 20 minutes after I first got into the
   Ground.

Q. Quite a time? - A. Yes.

Q. So you then entered in through Gate 3 and did you make
   your way towards the dividing fence between Gate 3 and
   .... - A. I did.  There were some other Officers in
   there already and people were being passed along a
   chain and out of Gate 3, and I joined in on that chain,
   passing the people out.

Q. At what point did you see this youngster? - A. I don't
   really know at what point.  I had been in quite
   sometime, a fair few people had been passed when this
   young lad was passed in front of me.  I didn't actually
   touch him, there was two lines of people and he was
   passed in front of me and that is the point that I saw
   him.

Q. Are you confident that you were in Pen 3? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. There is no doubt about that in your mind? - A. No.

Q. Just so that we get this absolutely straight - I will
   tell you why in a moment - are you saying that the
                                             S. HARRATT

youngster, you did not touch him, in fact? - A. No, I
didn t touch him.

You just recognised him later from the photograph? - A.
I stopped what I was doing and looked at him because I
thought to myself at that time he was no bigger than my
young boys.

I see, he attracted your particular attention? - A.
That is right.

That is why you remember him, is it? - A. Yes.




          /Q. Are you saying
                                               S. HARRATT

Are you saying that he was being massed in front of
you by people, or Officers, I do not mind, whilst you
were in Pen 3? - A. Yes sir.

The reason why I ask you so closely about this is
because there is very good evidence that this
youngster was in Pen 4 initially.  Did you sae how he
got to be in front of you, had you noticed 'vhere he
came from? - A. No, I didn't, but there were lots of
people being passed over the sort of radial fence, the
one with spikes on, and then out through Gate 3.
Presumably he was one of those.

Uhen you say the "radial fence", if you turn round and
look at the photograph, do you mean the fences that go
across? - A. The one that comes from the back of the
goal-mouth up to the tunnel.

Th.it one there you are talking about? - A. Yes.

Were the people being passed in towards you and out of
Pan 3, or wera they going in both directions, can you
remember? - A. I really can't recall.

But you have got a recollection that people were bein




                                                           ftO « 3
passed across that fence? - A. Yes, there was clothin
on the fence to afford protection.

Tiat was, in fact, your sole contact with this lad,
this passing? - A. Yes, it was a few seconds.

Did you form an assessment of him at that time as to
writ he looked like? You may not have done. - A. No,
I don't think I did.  I think I feared the worst for
h in .

           Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G :

Officer, I appear on behalf of the family of the young
lad n o died and the particular concerns of Hr.
Spearritt, his father.  Can I just explain to you what
the problem is in a little more detail to see what
help you can give us.  I will try and not be too long
over it.

     THE CORONER: It is all right, Mr. King.

     HR. KING:  Could I show you C275, please.     It is
the plan of locations of those last seen alive.

     THE CORONER:   Have you found the plan? - A. I
have got C257, sir.
                                                            60

                                                   S. HAIRATT

Q.        rlR. KING: Just so that you can orientate
     yourself, Officer, that is a plan showing the two
     centre pens, Pen 3 on the left, Pen 4 on the right as
     you look at it, the tunnel in the middle and you see
     the radial fence down the middle of the two? - A. Yes
     sir.

Q.   Ne can sea Gate 3 and Gate 4 at the bottom. - A. Yes
     sir.

Q.   tfhera Gate 4 is, you see a marker 94? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   For your information, that is believed to be the last
     location where young Adam Spearritt was last seen
     alive, that was the young man you saw. - A. Yes.

Q.   Tha original timing as to when he was next sean, which
     we re the events you were describing, was originally,
     for whatever reason, given to Hr. Spearritt in a way
     \-
      .
      Thich led him to believe that it was 5-past 3. How
     one is certain your evidence today is that it was much
     later than 5-past 3 when you were in Pen 3 and you saw
     the person you believed to be Adam Spearritt being
     passed in front of you? - A. Yes.

Q.   Doing the best you can, and if necessary it is not
     trying to trap you at all, it is trying to elicit
     information, Officer, have a little look at a
     statement which may not be dated.  Yes, it is dated
     4th October 1939.  It begins, "Further to my statement
     dated 27th J u l y   " It is two pages.

          THE CORONER: I have found it.

          .'IR. KING: I wonder if he could beshown that,
     sir. (Handed).
Q.   Ofiicer, that is a statement which I think you would
     recognise as your statement made on 4th October 1939?
     - A. Yes sir.

Q.   I suspect that when you made it you were doing your
     best, from your best recollection, to put down what
     you believed to be accurate? - A. Yes, I was.

Q.   Do you see how in the opening paragraph you refer to
     having looked at a video film timed about 22 minutes
     past 3 and you refer to seeing certain deceased, which
     I need not concern you with as regards identity, but
     the timing begins at 22 minutes past 3? - A. Yes.

Q.   You describe how, in fact, you carried a man out onto
     the pitch and around this time you were helping to
     work upon him in terms of trying to resuscitate him? -
     A. Yes sir.
                                                               61
                                                    S. HARRATT

Q.   You dascribe how you were working on this man,
      according to the video film, until 26 minutes past 3,
      and this would be actually on the pitch in front of
      the pens near 2 and 3? - A. Yes, near the goal-mouth.

Q.   You say at half-past 3 you are seen on the video with
      others running across the pitch with a hoarding with
      the poor unfortunate man upon it? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   Then you say this:

           "At some point around these times I went into Pen
           3."

     So "around these times" you mean 22 minutes past 3 and
     half-past 3, do you? - A. No sir, it was after I had
     carried the body to the far side.  When I got back
     from doing that task it was then that I went into Pen
     3.

Q.   So you went into Pen 3, if the video recollection is
     right, after half-past 3? - A. Yes.

Q.   That is helpful, and it was when you were in Pen 3
     that your recollection is of seeing young Adam
     Spearritt? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   Using C275 - I know it has got a number of markings on
     it - can you indicate roughly where you would have
     been in Pen 3 when you remember seeing Adam Spearritt?

          THE CORONER:    Stand up and walk up to the plan.

          THE WITNESS:   I believe that I was stood
     somewhere around there, sir.

Q*        MR* KING:  So as we look at the plan you are to
     the right of Gate 3 further towards a barrier which
     leads to the radial fencing? - A. Yes sir.

Q.   Dividing Pens 3 and 4? - A. Yes.

Q.   When you saw, first of all, people being passed over
      generally, inhere were they being passed over in
      relation to where you were, can you show us? - A. They
      were being passed over in this area here and then
      along a chain of Officers and supporters to this gate.

Q.   So they were slightly in front of you as you look
     towards the pitch? - A. Yes.

Q.   Being passed over the radial fence from Pen 4 into       Pen
      3 in a diagonal chain towards Gate 3? - A. Yes.
                                                           62

                                                   S. HARRATT


Q.   Nere you seeing a number of people being passed over
     in this way one after the other? - A. Yes, there were
     quite a few.

Q.   Do you actually recall seeing Adam Spearritt being
     passed, actually the process of seeing him being
     passed out of Pen 4 into Pen 3? - A. No.

Q.   Uhere did you actually see him in relation to where
     you were standing? - A. As I have said, sir, I was
     stood somewhere here and he was directly in front of
     me with some other people where the young boy was.

Q.   Are you saying that he was being passed in this c h a i n
     which you have described? - A. There were two chains.
     There was a chain somewhere here, and there were other
     people passing people along there, and it was those
     people that passed him.

Q.   The chain which you saw him being passed along, could
     you see where it extended to, where its extremes were?
     - A. No.

Q.   Obviously one end was to Gate 3? - A. Yes.

Q.   You could not see where the other end was? - A. No.

Q.   Again this is not critical because we are trying to
     find out as much as we can.    Is it mere assumption on
     your part now that Adam xtas actually passed over the
     radial fence? - A. Sir, I don't know whether he was
     passed over or not.

Q.   I only say that because in your statement - and again
     it is not critical because I am trying to find out
     some facts - do you want to come back into the witness
     box - if you look on page 2 of that statement which
     you gave, you actually say, do you not:

          "I recall a young lad passed over the fence from
          Pen 4 to Pen 3 to Officers at the front and he
          was taken to gate at Pen 3."

     Then you identified that young lad as Adam Spearritt?
     - A. Yes.




                                 /Q. Is your evidence
                                                            63
                                                     S. HARRATT

0. Is your evidence today that in fact for whatever reason
   it is not right to say you recall him being passed in
   that way? - A. When I made the statement I probably
   assumed that that is what had happened with him.

Q. That is helpful.   So it was an assumption based on the
   material which you had in front of you? - A. Yes.

0. I cannot take that any further with you.   Can I just put
   another puzzle to you which you may not be able to help
   on but which I know Mr. Spearritt wants me to ask.
   Given it is believed that Adam Spearritt, and we can see
   it on C.275, was last seen alive very close to, if not
   in, the area of gate 4 in pen 4, you see on the plan
   again? - A. Yes.

Q. You cannot help at all on how it comes about that as
   terms of rescue he would be passed into pen 3 to be taken
   out of gate 3 as opposed to being taken out of gate 4? -
   A. It does appear that it would have been quicker to go
   through gate 4, but there was so much turmoil there
   perhaps people were passing people on what they
   considered to be the quickest way.

Q. Were you able to see what the position was at gate 4 at
   the time? - A. No, I wasn't.

        MR. KING:   Sir, it may be a puzzle you can help me
   on.   Have you got the summary in front of you which was
   for the mini-inquest.

        THE CORONER:   I haven't got the transcript but I
   will give you the draft.

        MR. KING:   Sir, I have it in front of me.      I want
   to refer you to it, sir.

        THE CORONER:   Yes, go on.

        MR. KING:  I am looking at paragraphs 5 and 6, sir,
   on page 2 of that:

0. Again, it is a puzzle which you may not be able to help
   us with, Officer.   From your evidence it looks as if it
   was after half past three when you saw Adam Spearritt
   being passed in some way within pen 3? - A. Yes.

0. You have very properly told us that you cannot actually
   say as a matter of evidence that you saw him being passed
   from pen 4 and you cannot help us on how it would come
   about that he was not taken through gate 4 as a means of
   escape.   It is also thought, and I wonder if you can
   help on this, that at twenty five past three - and I am
   looking at paragraph 6, sir, of that summary - that
                                                                 64
                                                         S. rtARRATT

       another Officer, Special Constable Pearson, was at the
       front of the Spion Kop when he saw two unidentified
       supporters helping to resuscitate a boy who, he says, was
       Adam Spearritt.   It appears Special Constable Pearson
B      was saying that he actually went to help and render mouth
       to mouth resuscitation to the boy on the pitch area.
       That, of course, is five minutes before you even go into
       pen 3. - A. Yes.

    Q. That is a puzzle which I am trying to investigate and see
       if you can help on that. - A. Sir, I really do not know.
       I do not know what happened to him once he was passed
       along the line.

    Q. It looks to me as if you are quite confident from looking
       at the video evidence that it was after half past three
       when you went into pen 3 and were in a position to see
       the person you believed to be Adam Spearritt? - A. Yes.

    0. In terms of distance, what was the closest Adam Spearritt
       would have got to you as he was being passed along? - A.
       About as far away as this lady in front of me.

    0. You obviously were able to see his facial features? - A.
       Yes, sir.

    Q. You would be able to recognise him.    Did you see
       anything which gave you reason to believe that he was
       alive at that time? - A. Sir, no.   I really did not make
       any assumption on the state of his health at that point.
       I just recall there was young lad and that was it.

    Q. That is helpful.   You did not even make the assumption
       that he was deceased at that point? - A. No.

    0. You did not make any assumption at all? -A. No.

    0. If I can press you on timing, ever so gently, as
       Mr. Spearritt reminds me that Special Constable Pearson's
       ability to identify Adam Spearritt went as far as having
       parts of his clothing and being able to identify him
       through other belongings which he had taken possess of or
       knew of.   It looks as if Mr. Pearson was very confident
       that he had the right person.   I don't want to press you
       too hard.   Do we take it that you are confident that the
       person you saw was Adam Spearritt? - A. Sir, I am as sure
       as I could be in the time that had elapsed from seeing
       him to seeing the photograph.

    0. You are as confident as you can be that it was after half
       past three? - A. Well, that timing was taken from the
       video.   It wasn't a case of looking at my watch.
                                                S. HARRATT

     MR. KING:   Sir, as much as I would like to help
Mr. Spearritt further on the issue, and you can
understand his concern, sir, unless you can give any
assistance, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I can see what has happened with
regard to the 15.05, because we said "shortly after".
We did not mean that that was within minutes or seconds.
What we meant was that when the message was received it
was some time, not a long time after, but I can see that
could be a cause for confusion.   What I am puzzling
about is the timing of David Pearson.   What have we said
in the summary?

     MR. KING:   Sir, it is paragraph 6.   It says:

     "Special Constable David Ernest Pearson was at the
     front of the Spion Kop at about 15.25 when he saw
     two unidentified supporters who were attempting to
     resuscitate a boy whom he now knows to be
     Adam Spearritt.   He went to assist them and
     rendered mouth to mouth resuscitation before placing
     the boy on to a temporary stretcher.   With
     assistance he carried Adam Spearritt from the pitch
     to the area behind the North Stand."

     THE CORONER:   What Mr. Pearson said, and where we
have got the 15.25 from, he said:

     "At about 3.15 I took up a position in front of the
     Spion Kop which housed Nottingham Forest
     supporters."

Then he says he could see something going on at the West
Stand.   The he goes on to say:

     "For some ten minutes I observed the situation and
     saw there were injured supporters being carried
     towards ambulances.   At this time my attention was
     drawn to a man lying behind me on the pitch.    I had
     not seen anyone deposit him there.   He was a well
     built man, middle-aged."

So that clearly wasn't Adam:

     "I don't recall what he was wearing.   There were a
     number of supporters around him but none were
     touching him.   An ambulance was driving from the
     West Stand towards the Penistone exit.   I could see
     this man was lying in its path.   I moved him to one
     side as the ambulance neared.   I enquired with the
     driver in relation to the removal of the body of the
     man on the pitch.   The driver stated the ambulance
     was full.   At this time a supporter called for my
                                               S. HARRATT

     assistance.   He and another supporter were
     attempting to resuscitate a boy."

Then he identifies him - actually he got it wrong, he
identified him as Thomas Howard initially.   He
subsequently corrected that.

     Ue took the 15.25 obviously by adding ten minutes to
the time when he took up his pitch position.   If you
read it more carefully it is clear that several other
events happened, including him dealing with this man and
discussing matters with the ambulance driver.    I am
only saying this because this might clarify the anomaly
between the timings.




          MR. KING:   Would it be fair
     MR. KING: Would it be fair to say, sir, therefore
that Special Constable Pearson in his statement does
not in fact attempt to identify a precise time when he
sees Adam Spearritt.

     THE CORONER: I think what we did was probably in
error. We took 3.15 plus ten minutes which makes it
3.25 and transcribed it and did not allow extra. What
we should have done, as we did in most cases, was say
about, around or some time after.

     MR. KING: If one just takes the times he gave in
his statement, sir, as the beginning of the events
there is nothing which on its face directly contradicts
this witness's evidence as to 3.30.

     THE CORONER: On the contrary. If one allows for
the fact that things take longer than most people
imagine I think it supports it.

     MR. KING: Finally, Officer, a question which I
suspect you will not be able to help at all on. If it
was after 3.30 before Adam Spearritt was taken out of
the pens can you help at all on why it had taken to
that time before he was actually taken out of the pens
given that he must have been in the condition which we
know he was in for some considerable time before
that? - A. Once again, sir, I really don't know on the
timings but people were being passed out as quickly as
could possibly be done.

You cannot help at all on the state of gate 4?   - A. No,
I certainly didn't see it. I was in    pen 3.

     MR. KING: Sir, I know it is not fair to devote a
lot of time on one individual case.

     THE CORONER:   He was a very young boy and I quite
understand.

     MR. KING: I understand from Mr. Spearritt his
understand is from a contact he had in speaking to Mr.
Pearson and, of course, it is only his recollection but
he is very clear on it, the Officer was very clear that
he was only a minute or so on either    side of twenty
past three and secondly it was about twenty to four or
quarter to four when Adam arrived at the makeshift
mortuary.

     THE CORONER:   That may be so.   It is not in the
statement.
                                                                  68

                                                          S. HARRATT


          MR. KING: It is a puzzle I do not think we will
     be able to resolve, sir.

Q. Is there anything else, Officer, you can help us on as
   regards timings now that you have heard the puzzle I am
   dealing with? - A. I can only say that the timings I am
   quoting are the ones taken off the video film. I
   certainly did not look at my watch at all.

Q. The only other alternative is that the person you
   identified as Adam Spearritt may not have been him? -
   A. It may not have been, sir, but I am fairly sure that
   the photograph I saw was of the boy I saw.

Q.        THE CORONER:   There is no doubt in your mind that
     you did not go into the terraces to help with the
     movement until after you had been working on the pitch
     in the way that you have described? - A. No. The first
     time I went into pen 3 was after I carried the man on
     the hoarding.

Q. There is no question about that? - A. No.

            THE CORONER:   That was the only other possibility,
     M r . King.

          MR. KING:    Indeed, sir.   Officer, thank you for
     your help.
          THE CORONER: Strictly speaking, Mrs. McBrien,
     this is not really your Inquest. What is the problem?

          MRS. McBRIEN: It was just about the fence.      It is
     not to do with the victim at all.

                   Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN

Q. Officer, when you described the fence you said that it
   had spikes on it and that there was clothing on it to
   protect the fence as people were being passed over. I
   just query that because I thought the radial fences did
   not have spikes on them. That was the only thing
   puzzling me about what you said. - A. I described them
   as spikes. Because the clothing was put on them I am
   again assuming that is what they were trying to afford
   protection for. I do not know. I am not familiar with
   the ground but, as I say, the clothing was there, both
   Police uniforms and supporters' clothing as a buffer.

Q. I thought it may have been the perimeter fence and that
   you had been mistaken that you had seen them? - A. No,
   it was the fencing between pens 3 and 4 that had the
   clothing on.
                                                           S. HARRATT



It was definitely the radial fence, was it? - A. Yes.

Hasit got spikes     or    not? - A. I don't know.

     THE CORONER: I   do not think it has got spikes in
the conventional sense.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   It is the sort of fence which has
a number of metal railings going up which is spiked at
the top and a metal bar runs about two or three inches
across from the top and so there are straights rails
going up to the top butthey are not the angled ones
that we see in the picture.

     MRS. McBRIEN: I am very sorry about that but I
had to come in on this.

     THE CORONER: I was puzzled as well which is why I
got him to show us which fence it was. We wanted to be
sure we were talking about the right one.

     MRS. McBRIEN: I just thought I would be helpful.
I did not want to interfere in any way at all.

     THE CORONER: No, Mrs. McBrien, it was a helpful
intervention I am quite sure.

    MR. GRIFFITHS:        I think C.521 might help, sir.

     THE CORONER: Just stick it up on the screen and
let us have a look. This is dealing with the railings.

Just turn round, Officer. That is the top end of one
of those radial fences. Is that what you mean? - A.
Yes, that is what I am referring to, sir.

     THE CORONER:     There is nothing else, Mr. King?
     MR. KING:    No, sir.

     THE CORONER: I wish we could do better but we
cannot. Thank you.

                 JOHN RAYMOND MAUGHAN Sworn

                          Bv THE CORONER

You are John Raymond Maughan I think? - A. Yes, that is
correct.

You are a PC and what is your number? - A. 2105.
                                                                    70

                                                          J. R. MAUGHAN


Q. Mr. Maughan, I have asked you to come because I want
   you to deal with a specific matter? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I think you had some dealings with a gentleman on the
   pitch, is that right? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. Am I right in thinking you eventually identified this
   gentleman as being Michael David Kelly? - A. That is
   correct, sir.

Q. That was from photographs? - A. Yes, sir, that was from
   photographs.

Q. How confident are you about your identification? - A. I
   am pretty sure it was the same man.

Q.   You are pretty sure about that? - A. Yes,   sir.

Q. Is it right that your duty was off the field initially.
   You had to go somewhere else? - A. That is correct.

Q. You got on to the field just after three, about four
   minutes past three, is that right? - A. Yes, the
   players were still on the pitch.

Q.    Pardon? - A. The football players werestill       on the
     pitch when I came on.

Q. We are not too concerned about what you thought was
   going on but eventually you came upon a man on the
   pitch, is that right? - A. That is correct.

Q. He did not appear to you to be breathing at that stage?
   - A. That is right.

Q. He also looked blue, is that correct? - A. That is
   right.

Q. I think you then positioned him and started
   resuscitation, is that right? - A. That is correct,
   sir.

Q. In fact, you thought you were successful, is that
   right? - A. I did think I was successful.

Q. What actually happened? - A. When I approached the man
   he was laid on his side by the side of the goalposts.

Q. Just speak up and lean forward. — A. He was laid on his
   side by the goalposts on the grass part of the area
   behind the bye line and he did not appear to be
   breathing and with the help of some civilians we turned
   the man over, worked on him for a few minutes. He
                                               J. R. MAUGHAN


appeared to start to breathe again and then we got a
hoarding and carried him to the ambulance area at the
other end of the pitch.

Before you tell me about that you came on to the pitch
about three or four minutes past three. How long was
the time interval before you got to this chap? Have
you any idea? - A. Probably three or four minutes.




                                /Q. Not very long.
                                          J. R. MAUGHAN

It was not very long, in other words? - A. No.

Then you worked on him with the help of some
supporters? - A. That is correct.

Did he, as far as you remember, actually breathe
spontaneously on his own, or did you have to continue
breathing for him? - A. We continued breathing for him
for a while, then he appeared to slip unconscious but
he was breathing, this was just before we took him away
to the other end of the pitch.

So then you picked him up on a stretcher or hoarding? -
A. On a hoarding.

And carried him across the field? - A. That is correct.

Towards the gymnasium, is that right? - A. That is
right, where the Ambulance Service, or there were some
Ambulancemen there who had sort of set an ambulance
station up, just on the pitch itself, on the corner.

What did you do with him when you got to that position?
- A. We handed him to the ambulancemen and he was left
in their care, and we came back down the pitch for a
second time.

That was the last you saw of him? - A. That is correct,
sir.

Of course, you can't help me as to what happened to him
subsequent to that? - A. I can't sir, no.

             Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Officer, I on behalf of the family of Michael Kelly am
seeking to investigate as much detail as the family can
obtain about the last moments of his life, and you will
bear with me on that? - A. Yes.

I want to see if I can pinpoint the time slightly more
as to when you went to Michael at a time when he was
not at first breathing, then you worked on him and he
appeared to be breathing.  You say the players were
still on the pitch when you got onto the field? - A.
That is correct, sir.

Were they actually playing, do you remember, or just
standing around? - A. Nottingham Forest was attacking
the Liverpool end.

Can I show you a photograph - I don't want to deal with
anything as regards wordings ....
                                                           73
                                              J. R. MA0GHAN

        MR. KING:   Sir, so you know, it is from the
   Sunday Mirror newspaper of April 23rd, 1989.  It shows
   a photograph, and I am going to try and ask the Officer
   if it was the sort of area where he found Michael
   Kelly.  I am going to point out someone on the ground
   who it is believed by Mrs. Kelly ....

        THE CORONER:      To be him.

        MR. KING:      Yes.

Q. Officer, do you see that newspaper, and it shows a
   photograph which we are led to believe is of the scene
   on 15th April, 1989? (Passes newspaper to Witness) - A.
   That is correct, sir.

Q. It shows the Leppings Lane goal and it shows, I think,
   a well known goalkeeper, Bruce Grobbelaar, clearly in
   the picture, doesn't it? - A. That is correct.

Q. He is clearly still on the pitch there.  Do you see
   somebody on his back in white? - A. That is correct,
   sir.

Q. Is that the sort of position you found Michael Kelly
   in* “ A. Looking at the photograph I would say the
   position was probably two or three more to the right of
   the gentleman lying on the ground.

Q. As you look at the picture? - A.    Yes.

Q. Does the gentleman on the ground you see, I know it is
   very difficult, does it jog any memories, such as you
   can see on that photograph, as to whether it looks very
   similar to the person you were dealing with? - A. The
   chap who I found and approached on the ground had a
   blue jacket with him.  If I could be certain he had the
   jacket with him I could say that was the man.

Q. When you say he had the jacket with him, do you mean he
   was wearing it or it was simply on the ground? - A. It
   was beside him on the ground.

Q. So he was not wearing a jacket.   I think the photograph
   shows that gentleman has a white shirt on of some sort,
   doesn't he?  Does that tie in with your recollection? -
   A. I would not possibly say that.

Q. Certainly, give or take a few feet, the sort of
   position and the sort of timing looks about right? - A.
   It is about right, sir.

        MR. KING:   I don't know whether you want to see
   that, sir?
                                                            74
                                              J. R. MAUGHAN

        THE CORONER:   Yes, could I just glance at it?  If
   it is shown to Sergeant Killoch the chances are we will
   be able to find this photograph and then if need be we
   can exhibit it.

        MR. KING:   That is helpful.   I am obliged, sir.

Q. I know it is difficult, but you say you worked on the
   man Michael Kelly for a few minutes, I think you put
   it, didn't you? - A. That is correct.

Q. You are clearly confident in your recollection that you
   appeared to have won through, if I can put it that way?
   - A. Yes, sir, I was.

Q. That was an expression which you used when you were
   describing it - I think you have spoken to Mrs. Kelly
   about it, haven't you? - A. Yes.

Q. And you used the expression, "We have won that one", or
   something like that? - A. That is right, I did.

Q. So it does sound as if you were quite confident in your
   own mind when you took the man over to where you put
   him into the care of the St. John's Ambulance, that he
   at that stage was still breathing? - A. I was quite
   confident he was, sir.

Q. How did you actually deliver him to the St. John's
   Ambulance?  Did you lay him on the ground, did you
   actually hand him to somebody or what? - A. No, we
   carried him on a hoarding across the pitch to, as I
   have described, as you come out of the gymnasium onto
   the pitch itself, the first aid people had set a sort
   of reception area up in the corner, and we put the
   hoarding down on the floor and what they were doing,
   they were moving them off the hoardings so that we
   could have them to carry back to the other end of the
   Ground.

Q. Did you actually receive back the hoarding on which you
   had carried Michael? - A. Not the same one.

Q. Did you actually yourself see him being taken off the
   hoarding? - A. No.

Q. So the last you saw of him was when he was laid down on
   the ground in the way you have described? - A. Yes.

Q. It looks then, it is fairly obvious from your evidence
   but I will put it to you and ask you so the family can
   hear me, there is from the summary of evidence which
   they have been provided with, evidence that at 15.35
   (sir, this is paragraph 4 of the summary), at 15.35 an
                                              J. R. HAOGHAN

Officer, Police Constable Wilmot, made his way into the
Spion Kop end of the Ground, and he says apparently
that at 3.35 he saw a man who he believes to be Michael
David Kelly lying on the pitch on his back, who
appeared unconscious, and it is said that with another
Officer, that is Police Constable Lalley, the original
Officer, Wilmot, checked for vital signs of life but
could not find any, and Mr. Kelly was placed onto a
temporary stretcher and taken into the gymnasium, and
at about just before 4 o'clock, 15.59, Dr. Byrne
certified life extinct.  You have no knowledge at all,
do you, as to what happened to Mr. Kelly, what
attention he received or otherwise, from the moment you
laid him down, and you presumably went back to help at
the other end? - A. That is correct, sir.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I always regret mistakes on
sensitive matters.  I have referred throughout to Mrs.
Kelly - it is his sister, and I am sorry.  I hope the
family will forgive me for that:

It was Mr. Kelly's sister you had been speaking to in
the way you have described to me?  It is Mrs. Sinclair,
the lady we see there who you were speaking to, wasn't
it? - A. That is right.

     MR. KING:   I am sure she will forgive me if I
have mis-described her.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I knew about that and I
overlooked it too, I am sorry.

     MR. KING:   You have been very helpful, Officer,
because you can obviously see the concern of the
family.

     Sir, subject to the photograph being found I don't
think I can take that any further.

      THE CORONER:   We have not got the photograph
here.   It is either in Birmingham or it may be in our
office.   What I propose to do is to try and retrieve it
and make an acetate of it in the usual way.

You did not actually identify Mr. Kelly on that
photograph, did you? - A. No.

       THE CORONER:   Do we need it?   Is it going to   help
us?    I don't mind doing it.

       MR. KING:   Sir, I think the witness could go this
far:
                                             J. R. MAUGHAN

I think you could say that it could be Mr. Kelly? - A.
Yes.

There is nothing in it which makes you say that it
definitely isn't? - A. That is correct.

I think you can say that subject to moving a few feet
to the right in your recollection, it is the sort of
area of the goal where you saw him? - A. That is where
he was found, yes.

Given that we see Bruce Grobbelaar on the pitch it is
the sort of timing you would be expecting from your
evidence? - A. That would be about right.

     MR. KING:      Sir, it may be helpful for the family.

     THE CORONER:   I am very happy to do it, it just
may take a little while.

     I think that is the sum total of the cases where
we needed to do urgent things, so to speak.  We will
pause for a little while and have a cup of coffee.   Did
you want to say anything to me, Mr. King?

     MR. KING:   Sir, there are one or two matters I
would like to mention to you.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.  Leave us and you will have a
slightly longer coffee break.

            (In the absence of the Jury)

     MR. KING:   Sir, in relation to the witnesses
Bichard and Goddard, are they in Court now?

     THE CORONER:     They may well be, so if they could
just leave us?

    (Mr. Bichard and Mr. Goddard left the Court)

     MR. KING:   Sir, I have taken the opportunity
during the lunch adjournment to read through as best I
can the evidence they gave, certainly to Lord Justice
Taylor, and certainly two matters, sir:  I would invite
you to call them but I would invite you to call them to
give a full witness account of the events in the
Control Room during the relevant period, that is to say
on the day of the match.

     Sir, having read through what they have said in
those accounts they clearly have eye witness evidence
as to the circumstances leading up to the request for
the closure of the gates.  Their evidence is not on all
                                            J. R. MAtfGHAN

fours with the evidence which we have heard at all from
Mr. Duckenfield as to what was said in the Control
Room, what was believed in the Control Room as to the
gates which were to be opened, the circumstances in
which Gate A came to be opened are dealt with, the
circumstances in which kick-off was or was not to be
delayed are dealt with and the decision to refuse the
request of P.C. Buxton to delay kick-off is dealt with,
the decision   to send serials round to Gate A or onto
the North Stand is dealt with, and sir, Mr. Bichard,
and I say it   so you can hear me so      I do not in any way
take anybody   by surprise, actually gives evidence as to
what Mr. Duckenfield said in his presence as to how it
had come about that the problems had arisen on the
Leppings Lane end, and you know, sir, to what I am
referring in that respect.




   /All those are matters
     All those are matters which I have to say to you,
sir, on behalf of those I represent, I would want to
and would submit I should be entitled to investigate
if you call them.  I would be failing in my duty°if I
acquiesced in a ruling which you have indicated you
would oe minded to give, that if you did call them,
sir, you would restrict them in the way you have
described, because they are giving factual evidence on
matters which the Jury have to determine and, indeed,
deal with quite vital matters relating to the
behaviour of Mr. Duckenfield.

     In those circumstances, sir, I in fact have two
applications.  One is to invite you to call them, in
your discretion, and to invite you, sir, to take this
stance, that if you do call them you should allow
questioning on all the matters to which I have
referred.

     Sir, if your ruling is that in your discretion
you will call them but restrict them to only the
matters you have referred to, in my submission that
would be the worst of both worlds and, in fact, one
would be giving a false picture to the Jury rather
than no picture at all, and a false picture and a
misleading picture can be worse than no picture.

     THE CORONER: That, of course, is the last thing I
want to do.

     MR. KING:  Of course, sir.  But my strong
submission to you is notwithstanding the time problem
we have, these are witnesses of substance on the vital
events which this Jury are particularly concerned
with, which are the events leading to and then
immediately following the decision to open the gates
at the Leppings Lane end, and it is hard to see a
rationale for having included so many other witnesses
who do not go to such vital events in the overall
picture and not to call these witnesses.

      If it be, sir, a matter of convenience because of
time, and I am not so insensitive as not to appreciate
that problem, all I can say on behalf of those I
represent is - this is not meant facetiously at all,
sir - rather like the argument that kick-off should
not be delayed merely because of a reason, if, in
fact, they are witnesses of substance then they ought
to be called as full witnesses, even if we have to
recognise, and I am sure I play a role in the blame
for this as much as anybody else, that our time­
tabling has gone awry in this Inquest.   I say that
without meaning any disrespect to you, sir, at all
because I mean what I say about my role at all times.
      THE CORONER: Did you want to say something, Mr.
Payne ?

     HR. PAYNE:  Sir, a lot of what Mr. King has said,
I think I would agree with, that once the witness has
been called then he is at large, and it is difficult
really to see any legitimate basis on which
examination can be restricted, but I think our
position would be to invite you to adhere to the
original approach that you intended to follow, namely
that on balance, having heard the evidence of the
principal occupants of the Control Box, you will
probably not need to recall the other people.

      I am only going to add this because I did not
mention it before the adjournment, but I am slightly
concerned about the sequence of witnesses.   Mr. King
has very fairly indicated the lines of cross-
examination which he would intend to open up with
these witnesses and, of course, one cannot pre-judge
what they would say or how it would come out, but one
cannot help feeling that these could be points which,
in fairness, ought to have been put, or at least they
ought to have had the opportunity to deal with it when
the other occupants, Messrs. Duckenfield and Murray,
were giving their evidence.    It would be very
unfortunate if the Inquest got into the stage of
leaving matters in the air which could perhaps be
dealt with by those other witnesses who might then
have to be recalled.   This is a ghastly prospect which
certainly I think we would wish to avoid, but in the
interests of fairness one can see that if particular
points were to be made, or evidence were to be given,
then this is the kind of thing which Messrs.
Duckenfield and Murray ought to have a chance to deal
with.

     THE CORONER: I think that that goes without
saying, but if matters were to be raised where Mr.
Isaacs and Mr. Manning were to say to me, "Hang on, we
want Mr. Duckenfield and Mr. Murray to have an
opportunity to answer", I would certainly not raise
any objection if I were to call these witnesses.    I
think that point goes without saying, whatever the
effect on timing, I am not really interested.    It
does not matter to me.  I want to finish this month if
I can, but if we do not, we do not, we adjourn it to a
convenient time.

     MR. PAYNE:  I think we would be at one with Mr.
King on this, that one recognises that time pressures
do not really have any input into this decision at
all, it has to be taken on its merits.  That is why I
think our oosition would be that we would invite you
to adhere to the original approach that you had,
namely that having heard the evidence of the principal
people, and their evidence having been thoroughly and
lengthily gone into by all interested parties, it
would not be necessary to take the matter further.

     THE CORONER: '.Je are going to have a coffee break
in a minute.  Yes, Mr. Russell?

       MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, I have not risen to say
anything in this particular debate.     I am almost
exclusively on the sidelines in respect of these
witnesses who are to be called, save for one very
minor matter.    But perhaps I could come to your
assistance to this extent.    T7e appear here with your
1 ■?ave, we ask questions of witnesses with your leave.
They are your witnesses and you call them for the
purposes that you see fit for the purposes of these
Inquests.

     You indicated at one stage that it was your
purpose to call the Officer who was responsible for
operating the video camera, or the console of video
cameras, to be in a position to explain to the Jury
the technical capabilities of those cameras.  That, it
seems to me, is a wholly different area of evidence
from the factual recollection of those Officers,
either the person operating the camera or the person
operating the radio on that day.  Inasmuch as with
some of the witnesses we have had today you have said,
"These witnesses are going to deal with a very limited
area of evidence and nothing else", and we have
aiiered to that, I do not see why there is a problem
in you dealing with these witnesses, these two Police
Officers, in that same restricted manner.

     Certainly Inspector Hemmingway, as you will
appreciate, could have dealt with all sorts of matters
relating to the conduct of the afternoon in question,
not least the rescue and the role of my client in it.
I did not seek to ask him those questions because I
understood the very limited ambit and the very limited
purposes for which you wanted those witnesses called.

     But, sir, if you seek to elicit matters of fact
and matters of recollection of these witnesses as to
what they saw on the day, then of course I can
understand the position that my learned friend Mr.
King is in and, no doubt, tny learned friend Mr.
Isaacs, and Mr. Manning as well, as to what evidence
they might wish to elicit once you go down that road.
But it does appear that there is a very clear and
obvious cut-off point in their evidence whereby you
can limit the evidence of these witnesses to the
                                                           81



tecnnical capabilitias of the paraphernalia that they
nad at their disposal, that they were operating, and
limit it to that.  Once you open up the .factual
account of the day in question, then you have embarked
down the road, and certainly within the areas that you
have explored so far in these Inquests it would be
very difficult to stop either :ny learned friend Mr.
King, or my learned friend Mr. Isaacs, or Mr. Manning,
from asking questions about those subjects as well.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: If it is of any assistance, it
does appear tiat all the legal representatives are of
the same mind, at least in relation to the second limb
of Mr. King's application before you.  I make no
comment as to whether you ought to call these
witnesses or not, it is a matter for you, sir.   But I
do believe, as my learned friend Mr. Russell has said,
that if you embark on any attempt to elicit factual
evidence, it would be inappropriate to prevent any of
my learned friends from exploring those matters and
putting it into its proper context.

      THE CORONER: I accept that point.  If we go into
the facts, then it is only right that they should be
explored, but it is the extent and the method of
exploration which I an concerned about.   I have no
objection if, for instance, I were to ask the Officers
to recount in examination-in-chief what their
recollection is with regard to the events, to that
point being examined but purely factually.   What I am
not going to have is what we have done in the past and
which we did at great length with Mr. Murray and Mr.
Duckenfield and which, in fact, I knew we were doing
and I thought in the circumstances was right, but I am
quite entitled to say, "You have asked enough
questions on this, next subject", as I do quite often
with Mrs. McBrien, and that is all I am saying, and
that is   the way I am    going to doit. So Iam going to
call Mr. Goddard and when I have  heard him I will
probably call Mr. Bichard and we will obviously be
sitting tomorrow and if need be we will sit on Monday
if we have not finished, and that is it.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:  You mooted the possibility that
tomorrow might be put into a full day.

     THE CORONER: Yes, we will sit t as a full day.

     MR.   CATCHPOLE: That is very helpful,   thank you.

     THb COROi\jiR: The way I put the order was not an
accident, that was after some considerable thought.    I
could lave got it wrong.   Be that as it may, certainly
if at tne end of the evidence it would appear that it
                                                    82



is right to ask Mr. Duckanfield and Mr. Murray to come
back to daal with any outstanding points, I will do
so.
     MR. PAYNE:  Will you allow me to go last if this
happens?  These are Police Officers.

     THE CORONER: Yes.  So we will have a quick break.
I am afraid you will have to be back in Court as fast
as you can.

               (Short Adjournment)
                                                                  83
                                                          M. GODDARD

                       (The Jury returned to Court)

               THE CORONER:   Sergeant Goddard.

B|                        MICHAEL GODDARD Sworn

                              By THE CORONER:

     0. Are you Michael Goddard? - A. I am, sir.

     Q.   Police Sergeant 616?- A. That's   right.

     0.    For four years prior to 1989 you had been doing work as
          the Sergeant in the Control Room? - A. That is correct,
          sir.

     0. Which year did you start? - A. 1985/86.

     0. Had you worked with Mr. Lock at all in that Control Room?
        - A . No,sir.

     0.    There were actually three of you who did this job
          regularly - you, Mr. Bichard and Mr. Ryan? - A. Correct,
          sir.

     0. You task normally was to deal with the radio
        communications? - A. Yes, sir.

     0. I will take you straight to 1989.   You turned up in the
        Control box after having been to the briefing, is that
        right? - A. No, I did not go to the briefing.  I started
        at 8.00 am directly in the Control Box.

     0. You did not go to the briefing on the North Stand? - A, I
        did not go to the briefing, no, sir.

     0. I think I am right in saying that various tests were
        carried out on the tannoy to check that it was working? -
        A. Yes.

     Q. I think the radios were tested to see if they were
        functioning? - A. That is correct, sir.

     Q. Is it right they were functioning? - A. Yes, sir.

     0. This is all, of course, before the match had begun? -A.
        Yes, sir.

     Q. In fact we were told it takes quite a long time to test
        all the radios.   Would you agree with that? - A. It did.
        It took far longer than it would normally take, than you
        would normally associate...
                                                   M. GODDARD

 Was that because there were so many of them, or what? -
 A. Two points.   One, there were so many.   Number two
 was the fact that there were repeated interruptions in
 relation to the movement of fans, both Nottingham and
 Liverpool fans, around the ground in the areas, not quite
 at Hillsborough but around Hillsborough.

 You mean messages were coming in? - A. That is correct,
 yes, sir.

 I do not think we need to be too concerned about those
 early times, by which I mean certainly up to half past
 one, quarter to two.   I know there was various activity
 but we will not deal with that.   I want to take you in
 the first instance to about two o'clock on that
 afternoon. - A. Yes.

You were in the Control Box? - A.    Yes, sir.

The other two men were there, Mr.    Ryan and Mr. Bichard? -
A. That is correct, sir.

Is it right that around that time Superintendent Murray
left the Control Box to go, as you thought, to see the
referee? - A. Yes, to see the referee.

That is normal practice? - A. Yes, sir.

He then came back at what time? - A. Around 2.15.

Was he accompanied by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield?       -
A. Mr. Duckenfield was with him.

He had gone with   him, do you mean, or he came back   with
him? - A. No, he   came back with him.

I think you also saw Mr. Jackson for   a time?   - A.Yes,
Mr. Jackson came in.

He was in civvies, is that right? - A. That is correct.

Did he stay for any length of time or not? - A. He stayed
quite a while.    I am totally unaware of when he left us.
I know he was with us quite a little while.

Was it general chit-chat, if I can put it like that, or
specifics to the match? - A. It was something of both,
both specifics and general talk.

At around that time, at about 2.15, did you have a look
round the ground, you yourself? - A. Yes, I did, sir.
It was a visual thing, not through the cameras, but from
my position within the Box.
                                                                 85
                                                         M. GODDARD

    Q. You sit in the centre of those three in the front row? -
       A. I am the centre one of the three in the front row,
       yes.

B   Q. Would it be right to say that Notts, seemed to be filling
       but they appeared to be a relative emptiness at the
       Liverpool end? - A. Yes, that is correct, sir.

    0. Was that uniform in the Liverpool sector, or was it more
       marked in one place than another? - A. No, it was
       uniform.    The fact that the Kop and the South Stand
       area, what we could see of the South Stand area, was
       filling quite well yet the Liverpool area, the North
       Stand, the West Stand, was relatively empty in
       comparison.

    Q. Did you pass any comment about that? - A. Yes, just a
       general comment how the Nottingham area had in fact
       filled.  They were in bright and early, that is basically
       what it was about.

    Q. Let's get this right.    Mr. Murray was sitting in his
       seat on your left? - A. Immediate left.

    0. You were sitting in the middle.   Who was sitting on...    -
       A. PC Ryan on the other side.

    0. He was the tannoy man? - A. The tannoy/telephone man.

    0. On the back row PC Bichard? - A. PC Bichard.

    0. Where was Mr. Duckenfield? -A. Somewhere over my right
       shoulder on the step.   Sometimes on the step up to the
       video area and sometimes on the floor.

    0. He was standing up? - A. He was standing up.

    Q. You did not have room for him to sit down? -A. No room,
       sir.

    Q. At about 2.30 - can you remember 2.3? - A. Yes.

    Q. Did you look at the TV monitor with regard to Leppings
       Lane? - A. Yes, my attention was drawn to that by a
       comment made by PC Bichard and obviously I then looked at
       the Leppings Lane camera, on the outside of the ground on
       Leppings Lane itself, to see there were quite a lot of
       people in Leppings Lane.

    Q. When you say Leppings Lane, do you mean the whole of the
       road, or the concourse? - A. The concourse...   The area
       prior to the...   Outside of the ground.




H
                                                                       86

                                                         m   . Go d d a r d

     Q. I think you noticed that this was a substantial number? -
        A. There were a substantial number.

 i   Q. Was it unusual to have that man there at that time or
B|      not? -A. I would say it was unusual.   I had seen it
        before, but on the number of matches I have covered, yes,
        it would be unusual in that I have seen it but not very
        of ten.

     Q. Had by that time a message come through asking for
        Leppings Lane to be closed as far as you can remember? -
        A. I don't believe at that time a message had come
        through.   Obviously I have since learned certain things.

     0. Yes, tell me what you can remember from the time. - A. At
        the time the way I believed it to be was at around half
        past two Mr. Marshall radioed in asking for Leppings Lane
        to be closed and that is something obviously we took up
        by asking other Serials to do the closing of the road.

     Q. You would have passed all the messages because you were
        the operator? - A. That is correct, sir.

     Q. The instruction to close the Lane, did that come from you
        or from Mr. Murray, or Mr. Duckenfield, or from somebody
        else? - A. The instruction basically was from
        Mr. Marshall.

     Q. So you merely activated that? - A. Yes, that is correct.

     0. It did not need further intervention from Control Room
        staff apart from passing the message on? - A. Apart from
        passing the message.

     0. Any comments made about it at the time? - A. No, sir, not
        at all.

     0. Now the radio I think throughout the relevant period was
        working on talk-through, is that right? - A. That is
        correct, sir.

     0. We have already been told, and you can confirm that I
        have understood it correctly, that when you are on talk-
        through everbody can hear every message in and out? - A.
        That is correct.

     0. Provided, of course,   they can hear the radio? - A. That
        is correct.

     Q. Did you notice at some point that your radio was not
        working properly? - A. We were told.   We got a message
        that our radio transmissions were hopeless, were useless,
        and immediately followed within seconds the civilian
        communications man came into the box which obviously
                                                            87
                                                     M. GODDARD

   means the radios had been going down for some while for
   him to get across to us.   Yes, that is what happened.

Q. He messed around with the various sets? - A. Yes.

0. How long were you actually off the air? - A. Off the air
   itself probably a couple of minutes.

0. Did he fi rst of try and substitute a temporary set for
   you? - A. Yes.   We were using a tulip mike which he
   unplugged and put a depression mike in.     The telephone
   handset w ith a central depression mike in.    That was
   found not to work so we then took on the base pack, the
   substitut e pack, which again had to be plugged in etc.
   There was one problem there.    It was a fixed lead from
   the thing itself which was under the bench.     The lead
   was quite short.    Although it came above the desk there
   wasn't a lot of room so any messages through that,
   basically you would be bending down to talk into the
   telephone handset.

0. So it was jolly uncomfortable? - A. Quite, sir.

Q. Did it actually work but did you in the end finish up
   with your hand held sets? - A. It did not work, sir, no.
   I finished up with the hand held...

0. Those, of course, were on talk-through but you could not
   override messages, is that right? - A. That is correct,
   sir.

0. Did you receive any message from Superintendent Marshall
   about tne closure of gates? - A. I received...   The
   closure of gates, sir?

0. No, opening of gates? - A. Yes.   Mr. Marshall came
   throu~n asking that the gates at Leppings Lane be opened.

0. Before we go any further, can you remember how many
   requests he made? - A. In total I remember three
   requests.   Well, two requests and one demand.

Q. Was there a time interval between these or did they come
   in rapid succession or did they come in groups or what? -
   A. I am not quite sure on this, but I think they all came
   in a period of just a few minutes.

Q. When these requests came through.   Perhaps you can help
   me on this because I am still not entirely clear, is the
   message broadcast because you happen to be on talk-
   through so that everybody who wants to listen can hear? -
   A. Yes, that is correct, sir.   In the box behind the
   radio set itself are loudspeakers, very small square
                                                                     88

                                                          M. 'GODDARD


           loudspeakers, so the relaying of the messages would come
           through those speakers.

        0. So the people in the box would be able to hear? - A. Yes.
    B
        0. Does that mean there was no necessity for you to speak to
           people and say, "Did you hear that?"? - A. That is
           correct.

        0. Did you in fact do that or did you just take it that they
           had all heard it if you heard it? - A. I took it that
           everyone had heard it.

        0. You say there were two requests and then a demand? -A.
           Yes.

        0. Any action, if that is the right word, on the first
           request that you can remember?   Any action by anyone?
           Did you radio back with any response? - A. No.   There
           was no response in relation to that.   I don't know if it
           was on that occasion or the second occasion, the gates or
           C Gate opened, or was opened and a few people came in.
    D      On that one there was basically no response.

        0. Because that happened are you saying more or less at the
           same time as the message was coming through? - A. Very
           shortly afterwards.

        0. Did you yourself see that on the screen or were you told?
           -A. No, I did not see the gates open.   Somebody said,
           "Look, the gates," and I just saw people coming in
           because ours is a view that is not a front-on view.    It
           is a side-on view.

        0. I see.   You could see people coming in? - A. People were
           coming in, yes.

        0. As far as you were concerned you received no further
           instructions with regard to that and you took no further
           action? - A. That is correct.

        Q. The third time - there is some dispute as to how many but
           you remember three - there was a demand? - A. I believe
           it was a demand.

        Q. Unat was the substance of it? - A. It was a demand that
           if the gates weren't opened someone was going to get
           killed.




                       0. What happened then.




H
                                                    M. GODDARD


What happened then? - A. The demand came through. I
looked at Mr. Murray on my left who turned round and
said to Mr. Duckenfield, "Mr. Duckenfield, do we open
the gates?" and Mr. Duckenfield immediately replied,
"Open the gates, yes".

That was his response to Mr. Murray? - A. That was his
response to Mr. Murray, yes.

What did you do? - A. I said, "Open the gates".

Did you as a matter of interest say in which part of
the ground these gates should be opened? - A. Not at
all, sir. "Open the gates". It was apparent to me and
obvious to me that all the concentration of radio was
on Leppings Lane and when I talked about "Open the
gates" it was again apparent to me that we were talking
about Leppings Lane and Leppings Lane gates, no other
gates wherever on the ground.

In other words, you did not think there was any
ambiguity in that? - A. None whatsoever, no.

Was it the plural or singular so far as you remember? -
A. It was in the plural, sir.

You are sure of that? - A. I am positive, yes, sir.

Prior to all this happening do you recollect requests
for assistance from serials, mounted Officers or
anything else arriving? - A. Yes, there was certainly a
request for more mounted Officers to go to Leppings
Lane and I directed a Sergeant Soresby directly round
there with what available horse power he had got to go
round to the Leppings Lane end. I think at that stage
the C&V with Sergeant Higgins and Mr. Delaney, I think
they were directed as well but I am not quite sure time
wise on that.

Having passed the order on, so to speak, to open the
gates did you get a further request to open another
gate? - A. Yes, some short time afterwards. That was
from Sergeant Higgins in relation to A gate.

Did you yourself know which was A gate? - A. Yes.

What did he tell you? - A. Basically the same, the same
as Mr. Marshall had said, that if we don't open the
gates someone is going to get killed.

Can you recollect whether that request was actioned? -
A. It was immediately, yes, sir.
                                                     M. GODDARD


Was it actioned by whom? - A . It was actioned by me at
that stage, sir.
Did you get authority to action it or not? - A. No. As
I say, Mr. Murray is at the side of me. They can hear
it totally, totally plainly. Mr. Duckenfield was
behind me and when it comes to the fact, yes, someone
is going to get killed, you open the gates. I said
that knowing full well that C gate was certainly open
and that A gate would not lead on to the West Stand
area because of the railing factor and would lead to
the North Stand area and so there would be no mass of
people in on the concourse.

How many gates did you know were at the Leppings Lane
end as a matter of interest? - A. How many gates?

Did you know how many gates there were at Leppings Lane
end? - A. Three gates, sir.

You knew that at the time? - A. I knew that at the
time, yes, sir. Can I add one thing there, sir?

Yes. - A. I said, "Open the gates" but my thoughts at
that stage and it is probably because my concentration
was totally on C gate and the screen was on C gate,
that although I am saying, "Open the gates" I still
thought it was C gate and only C gate that was meant to
be opened although I did say it in the plural. That,
as I say, is probably my fault in that my concentration
was totally on that gate, not on B gate which I
couldn't see, or not on A gate but just on C gate.

Do you know when A gate was opened, actually opened as
opposed to the request to actually open it? - A. Time
wise, no, sir.

Do you know when the opening is in relation to C gate
at all? - A. It was after C gate. It was certainly
after C gate, yes.

We know that C gate opened and shut again
temporarily? - A. Yes.

Then it opened and stayed open a while? - A. Yes.

Then it shut and then it reopened. Do you know whether
A gate was opened while C gate was still open? - A. At
the time I didn't know. I have subsequently learned.

No. - A. At the time, no. I understood that C gate had
closed and A gate had opened but I know now that is not
the case.
                                                  M. GODDARD


Pardon? - A.   I know that is notthe case now.

That is what you thought at the time? - A. I thought
that at the time, yes, sir.

You did not see A gate open at all ordid you? - A. You
saw, as I say, looking on the screen you could see
people coming in from the area of A gate, yes.

In addition to all these messages about gates and so
on, did you get a message from PC Buxton? - A. I did,
sir, yes.

What was his message? - A. His message was in relation
to the delaying of the kick-off.

Tell me then what the response was inrelation to that?
- A . As he said that and as his words were coming
through, one of the teams came out. I know my reply
was in relation to the fact, "It is too late. One of
the teams is already on the field". It was the
Liverpool team that ran out and came to the Leppings
Lane end.

You are quite certain in your mind that the team was
actually coming on to the field as you said it? - A.
Were running out, yes, sir.

In fact that was your response, "It is too late"? - A.
That was my response.

I do not want you to take this as a criticism of you
but in fact that was your response and not as a result
of any order? - A. That was my response and not as a
result of any order, sir, yes.

It could have been countermanded, of course? - A. Of
course.

If somebody did want to? - A. Yes.

Had you had any instructions with regard to match
postponement? - A. No particular instructions but I was
aware of the reasons, the general reasons, as to why
matches would be delayed, kick-offs would be delayed,
but that was in relation to matters, as I say, road
accidents, motorway road accidents, weather conditions
etc., that type of thing and nothing specific in
relation to around the ground.

Had that been discussed that day or was it just from
general knowledge of previous occasions? - A. This was
general knowledge of previous occasions.
                                                  M. GODDARD



Can you recollect any discussion within the Control Box
at all about delaying kick-off? - A. I cannot, sir, no,
none at all, no.

You were dealing with this and you were sitting, of
course, looking forwards? - A. Forwards, yes.

How much of the Leppings Lane terrace could you see in
a normal sort of day? - A. Yes. You could see the
whole of the terrace but because of the fences at the
front it is a very slight angle so that basically you
could see the whole of pen 1 except the little bit that
was underneath you and then it went out at an angle so
that by the time you got to say pen 6 you would be
missing or you would be unable to see probablythe
first five or six steps prior to the fence.

You are saying part of pen 6, which was nearest to the
ground, was the bit that you could see least well? - A.
The part of pen 6 which was nearest to the North Stand
was the area I could see least well and it came down so
that when I got to pen 1, which is by me, you could see
that in total but because of the fences and the
structure of the fences and the angle we were sat at,
it got less and less. You could see less and less,
although as I say about seven steps.

On this day, 15th April 1989, at what point did you
yourself first notice anything unusual about the
pens? - A. The first point I noticed, the unusual part,
was when I saw people start climbing over the fences on
to the perimeter track and then I saw a gate open. I
don't know whether it had been opened but my first
thoughts were in relation to the climbing of fences and
then I saw people coming out on to the perimeter, not
in a flood but as a trickle. I thought, "We have got a
pitch invasion but why?". I couldn't understand as to
why.

Had the match kicked off by then or not? - A. I don't
know, sir. I just do not know, sir.

Had you noticed any particular surging within the
terraces at all? - A. No specific surging, no. I mean
they were swaying, yes, but that is the norm. I have
seen it, times many, at football at Leppings Lane,
certainly in the period I have worked there, yes.

Did you after the requests for the gates to be opened
and Mr. Buxton's request to you look at the Leppings
Lane terraces at all? - A. I was all over, looking all
over.
                                                  M. GODDARD



Did you notice anything unusual with regard to the
distribution? - A. Not particularly. The pen nearest
to us, pen 1, was not as full as I would have
anticipated but as you went down the line all you can
then see is heads.

How did pen 6 look to you? - A. As I say, all I could
see of pen 6 was heads but it did appear to have less
people in although I couldn't see directly into the pen
because all you can see from my vantage point is in
fact heads.

I take it from what you said, and again I am not
putting this in a critical way at all, that you did not
say to anybody in the box "This looks unusual"? - A.
No, not at all, sir. I knew there were people still
coming into the ground at that time and if those people
were still coming in, yes, that probably was my
reasoning, rightly or wrongly. That was my reasoning
as to why it was probably a bit lighter than it may
have been.

I did not ask you before but I will ask you now; it is
right, is it not, that having given the order to open
the pens no further orders were given as regards to any
diversion of fans over the radio? - A. That is correct,
yes.

Have you any recollection of any discussion regarding
that matter in the Control Room? - A. No, none at all,
no.

Having seen these people climb over after a little
while you saw Superintendent Greenwood? - A. I saw Mr.
Greenwood. It was fairly obvious he was trying to
transmit and we were getting nothing from him and then
I saw him and he was signalling. It came through then,
"Stop the match, stop the match" and the next thing I
saw Mr. Greenwood running on the field and obviously
the game was stopped. I didn't see the game stopped
but I just saw him going on to the field because by
this time there were quite a lot of people, in fact
many people, on the perimeter track and encroaching on
the field.

Was Chief Inspector McRobbie in your Control Box at any
point? - A. He was, sir, yes. He was in civilian
clothes and he had just joined us. He had just come to
the Division or he had not been in the Division long.
He came up into the box and I remember he was stood
behind Mr. Murray for most of the time and when it
started, when the people started coming over the
                                                 M. GODDARD

fences, there was a Police lady down on gate 1 who did
not appear to see them. I could not understand as to
why she wasn't seeing them and I commented on this
like, "If they are coming across put them in pen 1" and
it was Mr. McRobbie who said, "I'll go down and sort it
out" and he then left the box.




                                /Q. When did.
                                                             95
                                                    M. GODDARD

Q. When did the ACC come back, ACC Jackson? - A. I don't
   know, sir.  Certainly some little while after this, but
   how long in time I just don't know, sir.

Q. Was it you who put the radio message out for the
   ambulance? - A. No, it wasn't me, sir.  It was done on
   VHF by P.C. Bichard.

Q. I just want togo back      to 1988. - A. Yes, sir.

Q. You were   there then as   well? - A. I was there, yes.

Q. The only question I want to ask with regard to that is
   were you    aware that in 1988 fans were diverted on the
   concourse area? - A. Not at all, no, sir.

Q. You were not aware of that? - A. Not at all, no.

               Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS

Q. Sergeant Goddard, how long have you been the Sergeant
   in the Control Box operating at Hillsborough? - A. From
   1986 and I still do it now.

Q. So by 1989 you had had plenty of experience? - A. Yes,
   sir.

Q. How well do you know the Ground, that is the layout of
   the Ground? - A. I would suggest as well as any other
   Police Officer in South Yorkshire.

Q. So you knew, as you have told the Coroner, about the
   gates and where they were on the Leppings Lane end? -
   A. Yes, sir.

Q. And I expect you knew about the wall that went from
   behind the turnstiles up to the back of the West Stand?
   - A. Yes, I did, sir.

Q. And you would have to know    about these things because
   being the Sergeant who was    involved controlling
   serials, you would have to    know the layout so you could
   direct them from one place    to another if you needed to?
   - A. That is correct, yes,    sir.

Q. It also seems, if I may say so, that you had a pretty
   good relationship with the people who were normally in
   the Control Box, is that right? - A. Yes, it was a good
   working relationship.  It was a team, we worked as a
   team.

Q. Mr. Duckenfield was joining the team for the first time
   on that particular day for a big match, if I am not
   mistaken? - A. For a big match, yes, sir.
                                             M. GODDARD

The team before that big match had been Mr. Murray, who
was in control of the Control Box, is that right? - A.
That is correct, yes, sir.

Yourself, Mr. Ryan and Mr. Bichard? - A. That is
correct, sir.

I think you had been there even before Mr. Murray's
time? - A. That is correct, yes, with Mr. Freeman.

With Mr. Freeman? - A. Yes.

I expect from time to time, and we have heard about it,
Mr. Mole would be in the Control Box during certain
games? - A. When you say in the Control Box, yes, he
would visit the Control Box but he was never there as a
permanency in the Control Box.

That is what we have understood.  He took his role to
be a roving commissioner? - A. Roving, yes.

You certainly seem, from what you have told us about
what happened in 1989, to have had the confidence of
Mr. Murray, for example, in relation to being able to
take certain decisions yourself? - A. Yes.  As I said,
it is a team, we work as a team.  Bear in mind I know
the area, not just at Hillsborough but around
Hillsborough, far better than Mr. Murray did, so going
away from the Ground, if certain things were happening
I would be able to direct, and with all due respect to
Mr. Murray some of the areas he probably would not
know, whereas I knew them.

If you felt that as a result of a decision made by Mr.
Murray it was necessary to move men from one place to
another, do I understand you to be saying that if Mr.
Murray did not give that order and you thought it was
necessary you would do it? - A. That is correct, sir,
knowing full well obviously Mr. Murray could say, "No,
I don't want that".

Absolutely, and I get the impression, correct me if I
am wrong, that your relationship with him was such that
if you felt that there was something that needed doing,
either you would say to him, however you referred to
him, "I think this needs doing", or you would do it
yourself if you felt it was within your chain of
responsibility? - A. Yes.  If I thought there was
something needed doing I would approach him first.   I
would say, "What about so and so, do we need this, that
or the other?", and he would say yes or no, but I would
not do it straight off my own bat and then say, "Oh, I
have done so and so", especially when we are talking
directly at Hillsborough, I certainly would not do
                                              M. G60DARD

that.   The areas around Hillsborough I would certainly
do that, as I outlined to you, because I knew the area
better.

Certainly if there was something within your area of
responsibility and you felt it needed doing, you would
not even need to refer to him? - A. I would not need to
refer to him, but I think I would refer to him.  Bear
in mind that he is sat directly at the side of me.

But by the same token, if you felt that something did
need doing, whether it was in your direct sphere of
responsibility or not, the fact that he had not
mentioned it to you, or the fact that he perhaps had
not thought of it, would not stop you from mentioning
it if you thought it was necessary? - A. That is
correct, sir.

Your relationship was as good as that? - A. It was,
yes.

To be fair, having regard to the team approach, as far
as you can say, and if you think you can t please tell
us, but would the same apply to Mr. Ryan and Mr.
Bichard? - A. Exactly, yes, sir.

They had the confidence both of Mr. Murray and they had
the confidence in themselves to be able to mention
things if they felt it was worth mentioning? - A. Most
definitely, yes.

Thank you very much.  1988, you had effectively the
same view of the Leppings Lane Terrace as you had in
1989? - A. Correct, sir.

There was nothing in what you saw that day in 1988 that
gave you any cause for concern in relation to any
possibility of overcrowding in the central pens? - A.
Nothing at all, sir, no.

Do you keep an eye on those pens? - A. Yes, sir, as
well as the rest of the Ground.

I assume that as you are looking round the Ground if
you see signs, either visually or through a monitor,
that appear to suggest that an area is overcrowded, you
would do something about it? - A. Yes, sir.  I would
certainly make mention of it to Mr. Murray, or I would
certainly do something about it, yes.

In 1989 we have not heard you tell us that you thought
there was any sign of overcrowding on the Leppings Lane
Terrace, prior to you seeing somebody come over a
fence.  Is the position that you didn't think that
                                             M. GODDARD

there was any such overcrowding? - A. That is the
position, yes, sir.

I am very grateful.   Indeed, nobody, whether it be an
Inspector or a Sergeant who was in the West Stand, or a
Police Officer on the perimeter track, had suggested to
Control that they felt there was any overcrowding? - A.
That is correct, sir.

Could I take you to the period between quarter-past-2
and just after kick-off on 15th April, 1989, Sergeant?
There are the three people who are on the three seats
at the front of the Control Box, you, Mr. Murray, Mr.
Ryan.  Mr. Bichard is at the back, Mr. Duckenfield
somewhere behind you.  I expect if you are looking
forward you cannot see where he is? - A. I knew he was
somewhere over my right shoulder, yes.

Certainly you have a recollection of him being on the
step next to Mr. Bichard? - A. Certainly, yes.

There was also, we understand, Mr. McRobbie there? - A.
Yes .

Would it be fair to say that even before any crisis
things were pretty tight? - A. We had a full house,
sir, yes.  You can put Mr. Jackson in there as well so
it was full, yes.

I think Mr. Jackson was there and then he wasn't there,
so we need not really trouble with him, I think, for
the period that we are talking about.  Your
recollection is that it was about half-past-2 that Mr.
Marshall radioed in for Leppings Lane to be closed? -
A. That is correct, yes.

Your view of this is that was an instruction on the
part of Mr. Marshall because that was within his
operational responsibility? - A. Totally, yes, sir.

At that stage, to you, was there any cause for concern
about any aspect of the safety of the crowd?- A. Not at
all.  I was quite confident that okay, there is a big
crowd there, but they would    get in.

Is this right, that from your point of view, thinking
perhaps to yourself about it, you thought the crowd
would get in that you could see? - A. Yes, sir.

Did you express that view to anybody else? - A. No, not
at all, it was my own thoughts.   I had heard, maybe
before or after that, where   Mr. Duckenfield had a
conversation with Mr. Murray on those lines and Mr.
Murray ....
                                             M. GODDARD

And Mr. Murray, I think we have heard said he thought
that the crowd would get in? - A. Yes, he was quite
confident the crowd would get in, yes.

That as I understand it, and can you confirm this,
appeared to be just a matter of routine, the sort of
thing that would pass between people in the Control Box
- "Do you think they will get in?", and the response
was, "Yes, I think that's right"? - A. That was my
understanding of it, yes.

With your experience of these matters you agreed with
that? - A. Yes, most definitely.

From what you are telling us, keeping that to yourself?
- A. Yes.

You have told us about the radio breaking down and the
length of time that caused actual disruption being off
the air.  We have heard, would you agree with this,
that the effect so far as disruption is concerned goes
far further than merely the time that you were off the
air.  Is that your understanding, your recollection? -
A. Yes, most definitely.  Okay, we may be off the air
for just a couple of minutes but it is an ongoing
thing, and you get basically of messages wanting to
send, and coming in.

You are the man who was in charge of the radio
communications in terms of sending the messages and
receiving them to a degree.  How desperately did that
effect what was happening in the Control Box at that
time? - A. It affected us -- it was devastating
basically.  It was something that quite honestly we had
never been used to, this going down at a particular
time as it did, with so much going on, so much going on
that it seemed like, I know I said two minutes, it
seemed like hours before we got back into radio
communication, and there was so much needed to be done
and said.

It also seems to have had the effect of diverting
attention as well, away from what may have been
happening outside Leppings Lane to moving around inside
the Control Box, people getting up, people moving back.
Is that the position? - A. That was the position, yes,
sir.

Is this also right, that it appeared that the situation
outside Leppings Lane, outside the turnstiles, from
before the radio went down to the situation as it
turned out after communication came back on, that
situation had changed quite dramatically from what
appeared to be public order but something that Mr.
                                                                           1no
                                                                 ?!.   GODDARD

       Marshall was felt to be able to cope with,
         -1   I- .   n   O   A   T7   »                     *
                                                                to
       crisis? - A. Y !s sir.

 Q.    Is that fair? - A. I think so, yes,

 Q.     am sure, sergeant, that at the- time ___ wien :nis was
      happening you were not thinkii.ng, 'I’ve got to try and
      remember all of this1. It was something that was just
      happening and seemed to be a crisis situation? - A. It
      wao ^ crisis situation, and it was something that I
      didn't think, 'Oh, I've got
                                !?ot ?
                                     ■<•> rpn^inSor
                                     to   remember all
                                                    all this'. It
      was just that things we; •e happening and, 'Gat started
      as soon as we :an'

 Q.   There is a message, you say possibly a second, that
      comas from Mr. Marshall asking for the gates to be
      opened, that is the first of a series of messages a s                 I
      understand your evidence, is that correct?  This is
      before we get to the one which actually leads to
      anything? - A. Yes sir.

Q.    Your recollection is that shortly after that, possibly
      within seconds, the gate that is being shown on the
      monitor has burst open, some fans have come in but
      then the situation is retrieved, is that correct? - A.
      That is correct, yes.

      Does it appear to you at that time that that crisis,
      the opening the gate crisis, at that stage has been
      resolved? - A. Partially resolved, yes sir, with the
      numbers that came in, but knowing that there were
      obviously quite a few people outside, or quite a lot
      of people outside, I didn't see it from start to end,
      I didn't see the numbers coming in from start to end.
0,    That is right.  The message that came at that time,
      before that first opening of the gate, however it
      opened, when it came from Mr. Marshall, can you
      remember whether it made any reference to life or not,
      or was just a request for the gate to beopened?  - A.’
      That I cannot say, sir, I don't know.

      Very well, but then I think you have told us it was a
      matter of minutes until you say the third request
      came, and that request was couched in the words of a
      demand? - A. That was a demand, yes.

      This time you have no doubt, I am sure,that   the risk
      to life was vary clearly mentioned? - A. That was most
      definite, yes sir.

Q.    "People are going to hi             killed"? - A. "People are
      going to be killed".
                                             M. GODDARD

 IJould it be fair to say that the atmosphere at that
 time in the Control Room was electric? - A. It would
 oe, yes sir.

 rrorn your point of view — I am not speaking about
 anybody else - having regard to Mr. Marshall's demand,
 nis tone of voice, the urgency of his tone of voice,
 diu you feel that there was any time for delay9 - A.
 No, none at all.

Up to that time, insofar as anybody had nad a view of
tie terraces at Leppings Lane, and"insofar as anybody
nad lad ^a view of what was happening at the turnstiles
at ^eppings Lane, you were in as good a position as
anybody else, would that be fair? - A. That would be
fair, yes sir.

r
.’e cnov, H r . Goddard, that no order was given by
anybody, u'r. Duckenfield, Hr. Murray and you have said
yourself, to send a serial of men to divert fans away
from the central tunnel.     Had you thought that was
necessary, would you (a) have suggested it to
somebody? - A. Yes, most definitely.

;iad you tnought - and I am not suggesting for a moment
you T3d the duty to do this but I want to investigate
what you as an experienced and competent Control iloom
Officer thought at the time, do you follow me? - A.
Yes.

Ha-’ you thought there was any risk to anybody in Pens
3 aid i as a result of people being allowed in through
tie gate, would you have done something about it? - A.
les sir.   Had I believed there would have been risk,
ov/io.isiy i would have done something about it.

Is . ie position this, that everybody's concentration
was focused on the need, voiced oy Mr. Marshall, to
save the lives of those outside the Leppings Lane
turnstiles? - A. Yes, concentration was'total on that
aspect, yes sir.

As I understand your evidence, after the order was
gi^en to open the gates, people could be seen to come
into the concourse area and the situation outside Gate
C seemed to be relieved? - A. From the camera there is
only part of the area outside the ground that you can
see.   Up to the turnstiles, an area between the
turnstiles and the gates at the start of the ground,
you cannot see that because of the turnstiles coming
in., Beyond that obviously you can see.   So when you
talk about relieving injuries you cannot really see
tnat at all because it is totally obscured from your
vision.
                                               II.   GODDARD

 You could see them coming into the concourse area? -
 A. Yes, you could see them coming into the concourse
 wnen Gate C was opened, yes.

 Of course, your view on the monitor - and it is only a
 monitor view that you have got - does not show any
 more of the concourse than just that area just behind
 the turnstiles and next to Gate C? - A. Yas, that is
 correct.

 fou '.live told us that you, of all those in the Control
 Room, had the greatest experience of the ground since
 19.>j ? - A. That is correct, yes sir.

You knew what the state of the terraces was.  Do I
tace it that you did not tie in in your mind the lin'c
between Gate C and the tunnel? - A. That is correct, I
didn't.

After people had started to come in, it could be said,
"'Jell, they had to go somewhere those people".  Did
you feel tney were going to make their way onto the
terraces where there was space? - A. TJhen they came
onto the concourse, obviously they had the option of
wnere they wanted to go and they could have taken any
option that they wished, yes.   So they would go into
t.ie areas where there was space, yes sir.

 >ith your knowledge of the ground, with your
experience, had you considered that they would, or the
majority of them would, go down the central tunnel and
had you considered that the area in the terraces in
-    central pens was too full, if those things had
.’
 .one^ through your mind would you have done something
about it, told somebody or done something? - A. If
tbose things had gone through my mind, there is no way
would anyone have gone down the central tunnel.

But I am putting these things to you in hindsight, of
course? - A. Exactly, yes.

At the time your attention, and so far as you could
tell the attention of those in the Control Box, was
focused on the saving of lives outside? - A. Yes.

Then, of course, everybody's attention was diverted to
Gate A and the opening there? - A. That is correct,
yes.

Is it also right to say that whilst this was going on
you had some concern for what may be happening on°the
Spion iCop where there had bean some difficulty in the
previous year? - A. Yes, that is quite correct, but
tne I;op was totally secondary.  The Xop was totally
                                                           103
                                                   M. GODDARD

     secondary, yes.  Tiiere had been problems the year
     before but in relation to the tine spent between ends
     the Kop was hardly touched, sir.                      *

Q.   I just want to ask you about one or two other matters,
     just about, first of all, delaying the kick-off.   You*
     said to the Coroner that you recollect, though not on
     that day, conversations as to why kick-off would be
     delayed - road accidents, weather conditions, nothing
     specific as to matters happening around the ground.
     That, I assume, was conversation that you had heard
     when Hr. Mole was in charge? - A. That is correct, yes
     sir.

Q.   But as I understand the position - and could you help
     us as to your view of this - appreciating that, of
     course, you would not be the one to make such a
     decision, if safety were a consideration in the
     context of tne delay of the kick-off, then obviously
     delay would not be ruled out merely because, for
     example, there had bean no road accidents, the weather
     was good, or anything like that? - A. That is correct.

Q.   Just one final matter.  You have talked about the team
     work in the Control Box and we know from other
     witnesses something of the chain of command in the
     Control Box, but so far as command of the Control Box
     on that day was concerned, I think Hr. Murray was in
     command and Mr. Duckenfield was in overall control of
     the whole event? - A. That is correct, yes.

          MR. ISAACS:  I am very grateful,   thank you very
     much indeed, Sergeant.

               Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

Q.   Sergeant Goddard, your knowledge, of course, of the
     Control Box goes back far more than most other
     people's because of your length of service there, but
     you have talked about there being a team within the
     Control Box.  It is also right to say that the ability
     of the Control Box team to work efficiently depends
     upon the team that is generally available around the
     ground as well? - A. Yes, that is right.

3.   Is it right to say that in the same way that you do
     your duty on a week-in-week-out basis, so do the
     colleagues that you had in the Control Box at that
     time? - A. Yes, that is correct.

     Particularly the four of you, starting with
     Superintendent Murray but going through PC Ryan and PC
     Bichard? - A. That is right, yes.
                                                               104
                                                       M. GODDARD

     It is right as well that that community spirit was
     extended into other key areas of the ground, so that
     if, for example, you looked down onto the Leppings
     Lane perimeter track on an ordinary day you would
     expect to see the same face? - A. Yes, exactly, that
     is correct, sir.                               ’

Q.   The Officers down there would be th*      same Officers on
     a waek-in-week-out basis? - A. Yes.

Q.   Tell me this Sergeant.        It may be a statement of the
     obvious, but why did you not actually go to the
     briefing by the Chief Superintendent? - A. Because I
     had read the briefing notes, sir, prior to that and if
     I was going to be required, what I neaded to know was
     discussed with me by Mr. .Murray, by the
     Superintendent, and the briefing by the Chief
     Superintendent, Mr. Duckenfield, was a total briefing
     in relation to duties for everyone.         Now I had already
     read the Order and I knew what Mr. Murray wanted of me
     and expected of me, and that is one of the reasons why
                  /-* *-
     I didn't go to   the ubriefing.
                             — ~ -c ~ ~ at .
                                         It  was not■_ required.
                                                       ___ .   i




Q.   Was the briefing superfluous so far as you were
     concerned, Sergeant, because you knew what you had to
     do?   A. I knew what the briefing would contain, sir,
     yes.

Q.   Youu ,cnew what you had to do because you we re doing it
     we ek-in week-out, match-in match-out? - A. Yes sir.

     The only difference was that this was a semi-final
     with a very much larger crowd than you would
     ordinarily get at a League match? - A. Yes sir.




                                 /Q.   So far as the pi an
                                                              105
                                                      M. GODDARD

0. So far as the plan was concerned, you have said you read
   it through, did you recognise the contents of it? - A.
   Yes, the content did not really vary from the first semi­
   final I did in 1987.

Q. That was the Mole plan? - A. The Mole plan, yes.

0. The Mole plan had been adopted and re-adopted with some
   modifications, but the ethos of it was the same? - A.
   Yes.

0. So far as the Sector Commanders were concerned, the
   Superintendents who had jobs to do, they were
   Superintendent Murray in the Control Box, Superintendent
   Marshall outside the ground - a man known to you? - A.
   Yes, sir.

Q. A man who worked regularly outside the ground, great
   experience in policing football matches, knowing what was
   to be done outside the ground and a man who was, when the
   Chief Superintendent w a s n ’t there, the
   second-in-command and took over? - A. That is correct,
   sir.

0. Inside the ground Superintendent Greenwood, a man who I
   think in the twelve months previously had not worked the
   Division but who had in previous years had a lot of
   experience? - A. Very much so, yes, sir.

0. At the other end of the ground, Superintendent Chapman,
   also a very experienced man? - A. Yes, sir.

0. You knew all of them? -   A. I knew all of them.

0. You knew what   they were to do, and they knew what they
   were to do, so far as you were aware? - A. That is
   correct, sir.

0. Then down theranks, Chief    Inspectors, Inspectors,
   Sergeants and   including the PCs on the community PC
   basis, men all known to you for the most part - obviously
   extra men drafted in from other parts of South Yorkshire,
   but in the key positions men who were known to you, who
   had done their jobs and knew what their jobs were? - A.
   That is correct, sir.

0. Your job was to link all of that together? - A. Yes,
   collate all that.

0. Collate that, receive messages from them and give
   messages out in other places.   The key to all that, the
   vital part of your being able to do your job was to have
   a radio working? -A. That is correct, sir.
                                                        '    106

                                                    M. GODDARD


Q.   Without the radio your particular job was almost
     impossible, wasn't it, unless you got semaphore flags
     out? - A. Yes.

0. You have been described, and I hope you will accept it,
   Sergeant, that you are a very reactive person.   Do you
   understand what that means? - A. I understand what that
   means.

0. Something happens, Sergeant Goddard reacts to it straight
   away, and that is born out of years of experience, of
   reacting to those situations? - A. I believe so, yes,
   sir.

0. We have talked about the team, but we are also aware of
   the hierarchy of Police Officers.   You are a Sergeant,
   but there is a Constable a rank below you, but a
   Superintendent, of course, is considerably above you.
   Would it be right to say that so far as the team in the
   Control Box is concerned it is very much a team and for
   the most part does not depend upon rank as such? - A. I
   would agree to an extent on that.   Obviously there is a
   certain part where rank does come in.   Someone has got
   to be a Commander.   You have got to have a Commander.

0. There comes a time when a decision has got to be made? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Those decisions for the most part in Control are taken by
   the Control Commander, Superintendent Murray in this
   instance? - A. That is right, sir.

Q. But there are those decisions which need to be made by
   the overall Commander, whether it is Mr. Mole around
   wherever he was, or on this occasion, Mr. Duckenfield who
   was actually standing there? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. What I am establishing if you like is the finesse beyond
   the question asked of Mr. Isaacs.   In other words, you
   would not have felt that if there was a point to make,
   "Hang on a minute, I am only a Sergeant and the fellow to
   my left is a Superintendent, I had better not stick my
   oar in."    It would not be like that, Sergeant? - A. It
   is not like that, sir.

Q. So, for example, if we can take a specific point, you
   heard Superintendent Murray and Chief Superintendent
   Duckenfield looking at the monitor and the crowd outside,
   which you had looked at yourself at around 2.30.    You
   had reached a decision that those people could get into
   the ground on time? - A. That is correct, yes, sir.
                                                    M. GODDARD

When you heard them talking Mr. Murray said to
Mr. Duckenfield, "I think we will get them in all right
for three o'clock"? - A. Yes.

If you had thought they were wrong, notwithstanding      you
being a Sergeant and they being Superintendents and      Chief
Superintendents, you would have said to Mr. Murray,      "You
know, Mr. Murray, I am not so sure we will get them      in"?
- A. I would have given my impression.

You would have given your impression.  Again I am not
suggesting you could have made that order, not at all,
but as a Sergeant who had been there far longer than
anybody else, your comments, your views, would have been
weighed in the balance of things? - A. I certainly hope
so.

That was the sort of relationship you had with the senior
Officers in Control? - A. Yes.

      MR. MANNING:     Sir, I am not towards the end of my
cro ss-examination.

     THE CORONER:     But you have reached a break?

     MR. MANNING:     I have reached a convenient point.

      THE CORONER:   Ok.  In that case, in view of the
time, we will stop.    Ladies and gentlemen, tomorrow at
9.30.    I have already warned you that we are going to
take tomorrow as a full day, but no Saturday.

     MR. MANNING:  I may be making a plea for more than
myself, sir, but if it is 9.30 and a full day it becomes
a very full day.  In other words, if it is a full day it
would ordinarily have been a ten o'clock start.    I am
very happy to start at 9.30 with the hope and prospect
that we will get something of a reduction at the other
end, but I think it would be an impossible burden...

     THE CORONER:      Maybe, we will see how we do.

     MR. MANNING:      But you want a 9.30 start?

     THE CORONER:    I want a 9.30 start, please.   I did
tell you that if need be next week we will be doing 9.30
starts as a matter  of routine, but I will tell you
exactly what time we are staring on Monday tomorrow.
                                                M. GODDARD

     Sergeant Goddard, please be here at 9.30.    You are
in the witness and you are on oath.   You must not
discuss the evidence.   You know that, obviously.

     THE WITNESS:   Yes, sir.

          (The Inquests were adjourned until
              9.30 the following morning)
