                                                                                        MIR.15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and tim e raised      Q 5 ~           .______   Number

■%    j x   ^      ■           _
                                                        ^   (£><EL                        t^A                   2 ~ ^    l Qo _

(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es/N o   ____
                                                                                                                   Receiver




                                                                                                                   Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                               Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                   Indexer
Indexed as indicated                 NW          ~TM?ig$> Qrs^
No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth er action to be taken



                                                                                                           A8
                                                                                                                   Indexer
Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Num ber Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                  STADIUM DISASTER

              ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



              INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


                      JOHN McBRIEN




                         Before

DR. S.L.    POPPER,   LL.B, B.MED.Sci,     B M , BS, MRCGP

               (Her Majesty's C o r o n e r )




                           At

              The Medico-Legal Centre,
                   Watery Street,
                     Sheffield.

                            On

                  23rd April,     1990




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                                    INDEX

                                                                   Page


                        OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER              1
                    B
                        PROF. JOHN STEPHEN PHILLIPS JONES Called

                           By The Coroner


                        GILLIAN PARKES Called

                           By The Coroner                             3
                           Cross-examined by Mr. Fraser               8


                        MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                           By The Coroner                            11
                    D
                        GILLIAN PARKES Recalled

                           Further by The Coroner                    14


                    E




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        23_d April, 1989

                                  INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF JOHN McBRIEN

                               THE CORONER:    Before you address me, Mr. Fraser,
                          I understand that on the previous inquest (GARY PHILIP
                          JONES) there is still some concern about Mr. Ward rope
                          and Dr. Marsh, so could you, as soon as you can, make
                          sure they stay.   If we can get Mr. Wardrope we will try
                          and deal with it.   I didn't call him, I knew why I
                          wasn't calling him, I have got a reason, but we will
                    B     allow the family to hear what he has to say, if
                          anything.  Yes, Mr. Fraser.

                               MR FRASER:   Sir, the next summary that will be
                          presented to you is in relation to John^McBrien. I
                          appear as a member of the Steering Committee before
                          you, and I also appear as the solicitor representing
                          the family on a personal basis.

                               THE CORONER:    Thank you, and I take it Mr. and
                          Mrs, McBrien are  in Court?

                               MR FRASER:   I am sorry, sir, Mr. and Mrs. McBrien
                          are present with their family in Court.

                    D          THE CORONER:   Yes, I have seen Mrs. McBrien - I
                          think I have seen you on earlier occasions.  In fact, I
                          think I may have seen you too, Mr. McBrien.  I am not
                          very good at recognising faces but I think I recognise
                          you.

                               In the circumstances, do you wish me to explain
                          the format or have you understood how we are doing it?
                    E     Basically what we are doing is we are listening to the
                          opening of the inquest, which I opened right at the
                          beginning last year.   I am reading it warts and all, if
                          there are any that is.   If any amendments or
                          corrections need to be made we will make them next.
                          Then I listen - I deal with the alcohol level - then we
                          listen to the pathologist who gives us his evidence,
                          then we listen to the summary and then we conclude.

                                This Inquest was opened on 18th April, 1989, and
                           on that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin, Acting Coroner's
                           Officer, said:

                                "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has
                                been identified to PC 2503 Kelly of the South
                                Yorkshire Police as that of John McBrien by Alan
                                Roy McBrien, his father.   He was 18 years of age,
                                having been born on 15th February, 1971, at Clwyd.
                                u        einffl     and lie 1 iv p H at
                                                                     Clwyd. He was a



                H
                                                -   l   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                :’:0F. J.S.P. J   vES


                                student by occupation.  He died at Hillsborough
                                Football Ground following an incident there on
                                Saturday 15th April, 198(J. PC 2503 Kelly caused
                                the body to be removed to the Medico-Legal Centre
                                and there he identified it to Detective Constable
                                Simon Weigold, who subsequently identified the
                                same body to Prof. Jones.   It is the family wish
                                that the body should be buried".

                          and then the Inquest was adjourned.  Now it is my
                    B     normal practice, I circulated the details, and Alan Roy
                          McBrien, in fact, signed them as correct and we have
                          given the place of birth not as Clwyd but as
                          Bromborough, which I believe is correct isn't it, and
                          we had initially described John as a schoolboy but we
                          have altered that to student because we think that that
                          is more correct taking his age into account.  I hope
                    C     you agree with that.  The alcohol levels were estimated
                          by DrJ Forrest, the details of which he gave us on the
                          opening day, and in the case of John the result was
                          negative.

                                We will now turn to Prof. Stephen Jones. Prof.
                          Jones has already been sworn as you will, of course,
                          know.
                    D
                                PROF. JOHN STEPHEN PHILLIPS JONES Called:

                                             By THE CORONER:

                        Q. If you would be kind enough just to give us your full
                           names again for the sake of the record? - A. Yes, John
                           Stephen Phillips Jones.
                    E
                        Q. You dealt with the body of John McBrien, who was
                           identified to you by label number 68 by, I think, Simon
                           Weigold? - A. That is correct, yes.

                        Q. Prof. Jones, in the conventional way would you please
                           tell me the cause of death and your relevant findings?
                           - A. Yes.  The cause of death was traumatic asphyxia.
                    F      Examination of the body showed that there were several
                           minor bruises and abrasions on the face, and there was
                           also a very minor abrasion on the body, adjacent to the
                           armpit, on the left side.  There were no severe
                           external injuries at all.  The injuries that were
                           present were of a very minor nature.

                                On further examination there were changes
                    G      associated with traumatic asphyxia and these were
                           mainly manifested by a blue cyanotic discolouration,
                           particularly of the head and the upper chest, and there
                           were also multiple little haemorrhages, petechial



                H
                                                -   2   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                            J.S.P. JPIIES
                                                                               G. PARKES


                          haemorrhages which were present onthe surface   of the^
                          heart and the lungs.  There was a small amount of vomit
                          which had been regurgitated terminally but I don't
                          think that this was relevant to death so that the
                          changes of traumatic asphyxia were well established,
                          and in my opinion that is the cause of his death.

                        Q. And there was no natural disease which contributed? -
                           A. There was no natural disease at all.
                    B
                                THE CORONER:      Mr. Fraser?

                                MR FRASER:      The family have no questions, sir,
                           thank you.

                                 THE CORONER:     Any questions from any of you?       (No
                           respo use)

                        Q. Prof. Jones, I think the family would very much
                           appreciate it if they had an opportunity to talk to
                           you.  That does mean that you have got to stay, but if
                           you would be kind enough? - A. Not at all.  I would be
                           very happy to talk to the family if there is anything
                           they would like to ask me on matters which they don't
                    D      wish to raise in Court.

                                THE CORONER:      You   are   happy with that?

                                MR FRASER:      Thank   you   for   that, sir.

                                THE CORONER:      Can   we turn     to thepresenting
                           Officer, please?
                    E
                                             GILLIAN PARKES Called:

                                                By THE CORONER:

                        Q . Now you have been sworn as well, but if you would tell
                           us your full names again for* the writer? - A. Gillian
                           Parkes, Police Constable of the West Midlands Police
                           Force.

                        Q. Now then, if you would take me through the relevant
                           summary? - A. At about 1045 hours on Saturday 15th
                           april, 1989, Mrs. Joan McBrien saw her son John McBrien
                           leave the family home with the intention of travelling
                           to Sheffield to watch the semi final football match to
                           be held at the Hillsborough Stadium that day.  John was
                           an official member of the Deeside Supporters Club and
                           had a ticket for the match.




                H
                                                   - 3 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                          G.   PARK.'SS

                             " At about 1100 hours Colin Edward Griffiths boarded
                           the Liverpool supporters bus in Flint and saw a number
                           of his friends, including John McBrien.  They travelled
                           to Sheffield arriving at approximately 1440 hours,
                           having experienced delays on the motorway.

                               Colin Griffiths and John McBrien made their way on
                          foot to the Lepp.ings Lane turnstiles where they joined
                          the mass of people waiting to enter the ground.    Within
                          a short time Gate C was opened and John McBrien and
                          Colin Griffiths were allowed entry through Gate C.
                    B     They went down the tunnel and into enclosure 3. They
                          ended up approximately seven or eight rows of people
                          away from the front perimeter fence, behind the
                          barrier, to the right of the goal.   John McBrien stood
                          in front of the barrier and CoLin Griffiths stood
                          behind it.  there was a tremendous sur;.;e and the
                          barrier gave way.   John McBrien was pusiied to the right
                    C     of the barrier and Colin Griffiths lost sight of him.

                                Shortly after 1507 hours following the severe
                        crushing in the West Stand Terracing, Police Constable
                        Barron entered the Hillsborough football ground and made
                        his way along the tunnel under the West Stand and into
                        enclosure 3.   He saw several bodies lying on the terrace
                        towards the front of the pen and assisted to carry a
                    D   number of these people from the enclosure to the concourse
                        at the rear of the West Stand.   Each person that he
                        carried out he attempted to resuscitate.   In two cases the
                        resuscitation was taken over by a nurse who, as yet, has
                        not been identified.   Police Constable Barron believes
                        that John McBrien was one of the persons he carried from
                        the enclosure.   The Officer returned to the enclosure and
                        assisted other people.
                    E
                                Stuart McArthur Davies Gray attended the semi
                           final football match as a Liverpool supporter.
                           Following the severe crushing in the Leppings Lane
                           terracing he found himself in the concourse atthe rear
                           of the West Stand.  He saw a number of people lying on
                           the floor and attempted to resuscitate a male and a
                           female.  Having viewed visual evidence Mr. Gray thinks
                    F      that the person that most resembles the body he
                           attempted to resuscitate was John McBrien.

                                Police Inspector Grace was in charge of a number
                           of officers who attended the stadium at about 1525
                           hours and went to the rear of the West Stand.
                           Inspector Grace saw a number of bodies in that area and
                           on his instructions they were carried to an area just
                    G      outside the stadium near to Gate C.  A number of
                           officers remained near to these bodies.

                                Police Constable Kelly attended the rear of the
                           West Stand and was given responsibility for John


                H
                                                -   4   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                         G.   P A R K IS



                          McBrien by Detective Inspector Webster,

                               At 1629 hours Dr. Joan Richard Ashton examined
                          John McBrien at the rear of the West Stand and
                          certified LIFE EXTINCT.

                               Police Constable Kelly later escorted John McBrien
                          by ambulance to the gymnasium where a temporary
                          mortuary had been set up.
                    B          At about 2330 hours Mr. Roger Parry who is the
                          ticket secretary of the official Deeside Liverpool
                          supporters club, attended at the gymnasium where the
                          temporary mortuary had been set up.  Initially iie
                          positively identified the body of John McBrien to
                          Police Constable Kelly  but then stated that having
                          spoken to Mr. alan Roy McBrien, John's father, prior to
                          seeing the body he could not be 100% sure.

                               Mr. Alan Roy McBrien was contacted by Police
                          Constable Kelly and arrangements were made for him to
                          attend Sheffield.

                               Police Constable Kelly later escorted the body of
                          John McBrien to the Medico-Legal Centre where he
                    D     identified it by reference number, provisionally
                          identified as John McBrien, to Detective Constable
                          Weigold.

                               At 0430 hours on Sunday 16th April, 1989, Mr. Alan
                          Roy McBrien attended at the Medico-Legal Centre,
                          Sheffield, where he confirmed the identification of his
                          son, John, to Detective Constable Monfredi.
                    E
                               On 16th April, 1989, following identification from
                          Detective Constable Weigold, Prof. Stephen Jones
                          carried out an autopsy and submitted a report giving
                          cause of death.

                                Found in the personal effects of John McBrien was
                           a part ticket for the semi final football match.

                        Q. If we can just turn back for a moment, and if you look
                           at paragraph 2, Colin Edward Griffiths, I think there
                           is no doubt, is there, that in his evidence on page 3
                           at the bottom, he says that they arrived at the coach
                           park in Sheffield at 2.45 p.m? - A. That is correct,
                           sir.

                        Q. And then they had to walk to the ground? - A. That is
                           right.

                        Q. But it is true, is it not, that of course these two
                           lads weren't the only ones who were on that coach? - A.
                           It was a large coach.

                    H
                                                -   5 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                             G.   PARK'KS



                        Q«   It was a large coach, and in fact you have got what,
                             about ...? - A. Seven in total.

                        Q-   But I have got five, I think --    that is right, six
                             plus ....   A. Colin.

                        Q.   Yes, and there is some variation in the timings at
                             which people arrive at the coach park, is that right?
                             A. That is right.
                    B   Q. And in fact, perhaps you could just summarise what you
                           have picked out as the timings when people say that
                           they arrived at the coach park, other than Colin
                           Griffiths? - A. The times, there were six other
                           passengers that statements were taken from who
                           travelled in company with John McBrien.    Their times of
                           arrival in Sheffield do vary.    As we have already said,
                           Colin stated 2.45 p.m.   The otrier times, the six times,
                           range from shortly after 2 p.m. to 2.20 p.m., and
                           obviously CoLin Griffiths is the 2.4 .

                        Q.   Yes, and one of them actually does not  say a time,
                             Christopher Jones ...? - A. Christopher Jones does not
                             state a time, so of the five they vary.

                    D   Q.   And then these are the times when they say they arrived
                             in Sheffield or at the car park? - A. That is correct,
                             sir.

                        Q. And that varies because some, Nicholas I think says
                           arrived at the car park, the others say arrived at
                           Sheffield? - A. That is correct, sir.

                    E   Q. And we don't know whether arrived in Sheffield means at
                           the point when we get off the coach or at the time when
                           they .... - A. That is right.

                        Q. That is right, is it, as far as you know,     that is? - A.
                           It is .

                        Q. And then their statements also make reference to
                           getting to Leppings Lane, is that right? - A. That is.
                           All of them refer to it.

                        Q.   All of them, and I think I am right in saying that the
                             earliest that any of them claims to have arrived at
                             Leppings Lane is 2.30, is that right? - A. Five of them
                             state 2.30.

                        Q.   And one of them says 2.45?   - A. That is correct, sir.

                        Q.   And then of course Colin Griffiths would be somewhere
                             after that? - A. He doesn't specify a time outside,
                             just inside, sir.


                H
                                                  - 6 -
J, L, Harpham Ltd
                                                                              G.   PA.HKf.1S


                        Q. And I think - were these all friends of John's, just
                           remind me? - A. Two of them knew him very well, the
                           others were just friends from the supporters club.

                        Q. And there were three openings, I think, of the gate.
                           One is irrelevant because it was 2.5‘
                                                               j.  I think there
                           was one at 2.48, if I am right.  Can you remember
                           whether that is ...? - A. 14.48, the gate was opened
                           partially and in Colin Griffiths' statement he clearly
                           states the gate was only opened three to four feet
                    B      which could tie the two in.

                        Q. Yes, and then the other opening was at 1452, four
                           minutes later in fact? - A. That is right.

                        Q.    And there is no doubt that they all support the
                             situation that John went through the gate, Gate       C? - A.
                    C        With Colin.

                        Q. Those who were with him,    that is? - A. Yes,   that is
                           eight.

                        Q. And Colin certainly says that, doesn't he? - A. That is
                           correct.

                    D   Q. So we can say that they arrived in Sheffield, depending
                           upon whose statement you used and whatever that might
                           mean, between 2 and 2.45? - A. That is right.

                        Q.    That they arrived outside Leppings Lane between 2.30
                             and 2.45, or perhaps 2.50, depending on what we  make of
                             Mr. Griffiths, and that they entered a gate which could
                             not have been before 2.48? - A. Mr. Griffiths does
                    E        state in his statement that they entered the ground, or
                             were in the ground, at 1450.

                        Q. So that might support the 1448 entry, wouldn't it? - A.
                           I believe so, sir.

                        Q. Yes.  I just want to turn now for a moment to Police
                           Constable Barron, that is the summary, paragraph 4.  I
                    F      think that the evidence of Mr. Barron is that he dealt
                           with about four people, I believe? - A. That is
                           correct.

                        Q. And of those two he relates,    there is some connection
                           with a nurse, that is right,    isn't it? - A. Two of the
                           four, yes.
                    G   Q. Yes, two of the four, and the other two, the nurse does
                           not feature? - A. That is correct, sir.

                        Q. That is right, and in fact if one looks at the
                           statement carefully, it was Constable Barron who formed
                           the opinion that the people he dealt with were dead.

                H
                                                   - 7 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                           G. PAHKES


                             In two cases he left them with the nurse to continue,
                             but he thought that they were dead at that point? - A.
                             He had formed the opinion.

                        Q. Yes, and I can't remember but I do not think it is
                           possible to work out from his statement which one of
                           the four was, in fact, John McBrien? - A. Of the four,
                           three were taken back through the tunnel and
                           resuscitated on the concourse.  One of them was taken
                           through the front perimeter fence, but of the three PC
                    B      Barron is unable to say in what order he dealt with the
                           deceased and, in fact, cannot identify which of the
                           three is Joan McBrien.

                        Q. Yes, he has identified John from photographs and he
                           says this is one of them? - a. He is definite that John
                           McBrien is one of the three, he is unable to say which
                           one.

                        Q. Which one, so he can t say that John was one of the
                           ones that he left with the nurse, or not? - A. No, not
                           from his statements.

                                        Cross-examined by MR. FRASER:

                    D   Q. Thank you, Officer.  Just for the sake of clarity for
                           the background, I understand that on the day of this
                           game there was quite a considerable delay in traffic on
                           the motorway approaches to Nottingham --- to Sheffield,
                           and that consequently the time of arrival of vehicles,
                           although expected at a particular time, was
                           substantially delayed in many cases.  Do you know from
                           your own enquiries whether that is the case? - A. On
                    E      the statements taken from the travel companions of John



                             obviously a delay.

                        Q. The family understand that the arrival in Sheffield in
                           general terms was at about 2 p.m., and you would not
                           strongly disagree with that? - A. No.

                        Q . The family also believe that the time of arrival within
                             the precinct of the ground was about 2.40 and again
                             from the evidence that you have got you would not
                             strongly disagree with that? - A. That is correct.

                        0,   In terms of the actual entry of John through Gate C,
                    G        the family are keen that it should be established that
                             that was an entry by invitation.  There is no
                             suggestion, I understand, from the evidence that you
                             have got, that John forced his way in, or that Lnere
                             was any attempt by him to get in unlawfully, as it
                             were?

                H
                                                  - 8 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                           G.   P.RKES


                                  THE CORONER:   Can I just stop you on that? That
                             is a rather difficult question for this witness to
                             answer because without Ginning the whole question of
                             the reasons for opening the gates, it is difficult for
                             her to answer this, because if the entry, as you know,
                             was at 2.52, then I think one can say the answer would
                             have been yes, probably, because the gate was then
                             opened for that purpose.  If the entry was at 2.43,
                             that opening was for the purposes of ejecting so ’body,
                             as I understand it, so I don't think it is a point
                    B        which we can explore today.  I don't think you should
                             answer that question.  I have tried to point out the
                             reasons for it, so in a sense I have given you the
                             answer, but I don't think the witness should do so.

                        Q.        MR FRASER:   But certainly it is your
                             understanding from the witnesses that John had a valid
                             ticket for that particular part of the ground that he
                             ultimately entered? - A. That is correct, sir.

                        0. I am grateful for that.

                                  THE CORONER:   I am not drawing any inferences,
                             please don't let either you or the family think that I
                             am making any suggestions about improper conduct, it is
                    D        just that I think it is not the right place, not the
                             right time, to explore this particular point,

                                   MR FRASER:   I understand that, sir.  Sir, I have
                             no direct further questions for the Officer but since
                             taey lost their son Mr. and Mrs. McBrien have
                             themselves made some very extensive enquiries as to his
                             movements on the day.   As a member of a recognised
                    E        supporters' club there is a certain amount of
                             information to them locally, as it were, and they have
                             spoken to people and they have asked me specifically to
                             put some matters to you by way of record, rather an
                             unusual format, I appreciate.   I have a short note from
                             them, sir, which they specifically want me to have
                             pla ced on the record.  Might I show you a copy of what
                             they ask me to say to you, sir.   Some of the matters
                             that are dealt with in it you have in fact already
                             dealt with, or the Officer has dealt with.

                                  THE CORONER:   Just give me a moment, would you?
                             (There was a short pause while the Coroner read the
                             note passed to him by Mr. Fraser.) M r . Fraser, I am
                             very reluctant to allow you to read this statement, for
                             various reasons, because it seems to me that this is a
                    G        compilation, not from a witness - as I understand it I
                             think this is written by Mrs. McBrien, is that right?

                                  MR FRASER:   It is indeed, sir.



                H
                                                  -   9   -
J, L, Harpham Ltd
                               THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, of course, was not
                          there, although of course I quite understand that sue
                          has probably the most personal interest in the matter
                          than anybody here, but she is not strictly speaking a
                          witness, so that is the first thing.  She was not
                          there, so she can't tell us from her own ’
                                                                   K nowledge what
                          went on.  Secondly, having looked at it, I think we
                          have certainly dealt with the preliminary parts, about
                          the timings as to when he arrived and when he did not.
                          I do not think that we can draw conclusions from it
                    B     other than what we have already done, because the
                          object of these proceedings is to establish the facts,
                          not to draw the conclusions, and in principle, as I
                          say, I am not in favour of statements being read to me,
                          so I am going to reject your request.

                               MR FRASER:   Sir, will you allow me to simply read
                          the very last paragraph.

                               THE CORONER:    Yes, I was going to say ....

                               MR FRASER:     It is important to Mrs. McBrien,   sir.

                               THE CORONER:    Yes,   this is to do with Mr ....

                    D          MR FRASER:     It relates to Mr. Gray, sir.

                               THE CORONER:   Yes, I was going, in fact --- yes,
                          I would be very happy indeed if you would read that.

                                MR FRASER:   This is a statement which is recently
                           prepared by Mrs. McBrien and the last paragraph reads -
                           it is written on behalf of herself and her husband I
                    E      should, of course, explain - and it says:

                                "We would like to place on record our sincere
                                thanks to Mr. Gray for his efforts in trying to
                                resuscitate John, particularly as we know now Mr.
                                Gray himself had been injured."

                           and that is signed by Mrs. McBrien,   sir.

                                THE CORONER:   I atn very happy indeed that that
                        should be said because obviously, firstly it is right that
                        people should know that their efforts have been
                        appreciated, and secondly I am very grateful to Mrs.
                        McBrien for feeling able to make that point.   Thank you.

                                MR FRASER:    Thank you, sir.

                                THE CORONER:   Any other questions of this lady?
                           (No response)  We will turn to the Inspector,




                H
                                                 - 10 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                            M.   LA' TON


                                  DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LA iON Called:

                                                By THE CORONER:

                                  THE WITNESS:    Michael Layton, Detective
                             Inspector, West Midlands Police.   Sir, an examination
                             has been made of video and photographic and John has
                             been identified ....

                        Q.        THE CORONER:   Just one minute, we will allow
                    B        these people to walk in.  Yes, carry on.

                        Q. Yes, sir.  An examination has been made of the visual
                           evidence and John has been identified alive in Pen 3.
                           Mr. Alan McBrien, John's father, has viewed visual
                           evidence and has identified a person who he believes to
                           be his son, although he cannot be 100 per cent certain.
                    C      This identification, sir, refers amongst others to a
                           photograph which has been given the reference number
                           PR1/10A.

                                  Additionally, sir, since that initial visit where
                             Mr. McBrien made the possible identification I have, in
                             fact, seen the family again and Mrs. McBrien, John's
                             mother, feels in fact that she can say that it
                    D        positively is John on that particular photograph and so
                             as such I would say to you that it is a positive
                             identification.

                        Q. Yes. - A. Sir, Colin Griffiths has viewed visual
                           evidence but he was unable to identify John.   He has
                           signed a plan of the enclosures indicating the
                           approximate location at which he last saw John.   That
                    E      has been given the reference number CGI.

                                  Police Constable Barron has viewed visual evidence
                             and from photographs he is quite certain that John is
                             one of the persons he removed from enclosure 3 and
                             subsequently attempted to resuscitate.  The Officer
                             signed a plan of the enclosure indicating the
                             approximate position at which he found John and a
                    F        further plan indicating the approximate position at
                             which he placed him, having carried him through the
                             tunnel.  Those two plans are referenced DJB1 and DJB3.

                                   Stuart Gray has viewed visual evidence and
                             pho tographs of John and clothing and as a result he
                             states that John most likely resembles the person he
                             attempted to resuscitate at the rear of the West Stand.
                    G        I do understand, sir, that perhaps since that statement
                             was taken that Mr. Gray feels that he is much more
                             definite that in fact it probably was John that he was
                             involved with.



                H
                                                  - 11 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                             M.   LAVTON


                        Q.   But as far as the evidence was concerned .... - A. As
                             far as the record states, yes.

                        Q. ... there was a bit of a doubt? - A. At that stage,
                           sir, yes.

                        Q.   That of course is not surprising because, we have
                             already gone over this with other people, to try and
                             remember later on and look at photographs of people
                             when you have been in a stress situation is not very
                    B        easy. - A. Very difficult, sir.

                        Q.   So that is no criticism of Mr. Gray in any sense?     - A.
                             No, sir.

                        Q. Shall we turn to our plans? - A. Sir, I wonder if I
                           could refer to the photograph PR1/10A?
                    C   Q. Yes. - A. It is, in fact timed and it is timed at 1503.

                        Q. 1503? - A. 03, yes sir.

                        Q. And that is a photograph where we now say he was alive?
                           - A. That is correct, sir, yes.  Sir, would you wish to
                           refer to the plan made by Colin Griffiths, CGI?
                    D
                        Q.   I think so, yes, please.  C48 - that is CGI,   C48. - A.
                             And PC Barron has made two plans, DJ31, sir, and in
                             fact there is a further plan which you may not have,
                             sir.

                        Q. I have not got it.   Is it relevant? - A. It is a plan
                           of the enclosure area, sir.   I beg your pardon, sir, a
                    E      plan of trie concourse area, which has been referred to
                           in the summary as the area in which John was ....

                        Q. Have you got a copy of it in front of you? - A. I have
                           got a copy, sir.

                        Q. Just let me look at it and I will tell you.  (The
                           witness passed a copy of the plan to the Coroner) It
                    F      does not help us very much but let us use it as well.
                           We will make DJBl, C49, and DJB3, C50.  Was there
                           anything else you wanted to draw to my attention? - A.
                           No, sir.

                        Q. Can you then show us in the usual way?

                                  (The witness referred to the large scale plan.)
                    G
                                  THE WITNESS:   Sir, if I can refer you first of
                             all to the plan reference CGI, and if we look at the
                             large scale terrace plan, this is enclosure number 3,
                             and this refers to the plan by Colin Griffiths, and the


                H
                                                   - 12 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                M. LAVTON


                             point at which he believes that he saw John was at this
                             point here, alive at that stage.  I think I have
                             explained before, sir, that the dotted line signifies
                             the barrier that ....

                        Q. That was broken. - A. Yes.     In respect of the plan
                           DJ B 1 , which is a plan submitted by PC Barron, t h e point
                           at which he identifies and locates John on this plan
                           again, is at this point »ere.
                    B   Q. That is within yards, in fact, of the live
                           identification? - A. That is right, sir, yes.  I
                           wonder, sir, perhaps I should refer to the photograph
                           PR1/10A, which is the identification made by the
                           family, and I believe that that identification would
                           place John somewhere in this position here - again that
                           is alive.
                    C
                        Q.   Yes. - A. Sir, in respect of  the plan by PC Barron,
                             DJB3, if we can go to the plan above, and go to the
                             concourse area, the area which is this area here, the
                             point at which PC Barron felt that he placed John was
                             roughly this area here.

                        Q. Yes.  The plan which we are actually looking at isn't
                    D      that plan, is it, it is a free-hand sketch? - A. It is
                           a free-hand sketch, yes, but ....

                        Q.   I wonder whether it might be  sensible if you could
                             prepare, for the record, a further plan using that
                             format and transfer the location onto it, so that we
                             have it in standard form as far as one can get it, and
                             we will obviously have to give it another number, which
                    E        will be C51.  That plan is not available at the moment
                             but if you would prepare it for me? - A. Yes.

                        Q. And it will locate it as you have indicated. - A. That
                           is right, this area here, sir.

                                  THE CORONER:     Any questions, Mr. Fraser?
                    F             MR FRASER:     No, sir,    thank you.

                                  THE WITNESS:   Sir, if I can assist with a
                             reference number in relation to that plan, it will be
                             MWJL/140.

                        Q. 140,   thank you very much.
                    G             MR FRASER:    I have no questions for the Officer,
                             sir, but Mrs. McBrien has just handed me a short note
                             which, if its contents go on the record, may ease her
                             mind a little bit.



                H
                                                    - 13 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                               G.   PA'UCES


                                  THE    CORONER: May I see what it  says before you
                             read it?I am not going to allow it,     as a matter of
                             principle, if I may say so, unless it is strictly
                             relevant.   (Mr. Fraser passed a note to the Coroner.)
                             I think what we will do, we can put this as a question,
                             I think, to the presenting Officer in a moment, and I
                             think it will help Mrs. McBrien, so no questions of
                             this Officer?

                                  MR FRASER:    No, sir.
                    B
                                  THE    CORONER:   Ms. Norcliffe?

                                  MS.  NORCLIFFE:   I apologise, sir, the point      I
                             wished to raise has been clarified.

                                            GILLIAN PARKES Recalled:
                    C                       Further by THE CORONER:

                        Q. Mrs. McBrien is worried about Mr. Gray and in
                           particular whether or not he helped John, and what I am
                           putting to you is this, although on the evidence which
                           we have in our files there is some --- Mr. Gray was not
                           as positive as perhaps Mrs. McBrien would like, there
                    D      is nothing to say --- if it were put to you that Mr.
                           Gray assisted John and helped to resuscitate him, is
                           there anything which would make you feel that you would
                           have to deny that on the basis of the statements? - A.
                           No, from Mr. Gray's statement, he made a statement in
                           relation to resuscitating a male and a female, just the
                           two persons no others, and since the’ incident he has
                           viewed visual evidence, and he is certain from the
                    E      visual evidence, the scarf and the clothing et cetera,
                           that the male person he did resuscitate was, in fact,
                           John McBrien.  There is no doubt about that at all.

                        Q.        MR FRASER:   I think, in fact, the scarf was a
                             fairly distinctive one? - A. It was.

                        Q. Thank you for that.
                    F
                                  THE CORONER:   As you know, Mr. Fraser, one of the
                             problems with the way we are doing it is that as we are
                             not having the people here I am very anxious that we
                             should not overstate the evidence.  We don't want to
                             understate it either, of course, if we can avoid it,
                             and that is the reason why, if you like, I am a little
                             bit fussy but I hope Mrs. McBrien, and her husband, of
                    G        course, are content with what they have now heard.

                                   MR FRASER:   I trust so, sir.     Thank you for your
                             assis tance.



                H
                                                    - 14 -
J. L, Harpham Ltd
     THE CORONER:   I take it you did not have any
questions on that?   (No response) Now, that completes
the evidence which we ace taking in this case.

     Mr. and Mrs. McBrien, I know that this loss has
struck you exceedingly hard and I don't want to say
that other people have not been hurt as well but it has
been a very bitter blow to you, and I realise this from
both correspondence which I have seen, and also the way
we have been talking today.   I wish I could get your
lad back for you but of course that is something I
can't do, and nobody can, and in that sense we have to
accept the inevitable.   It is unfortunately a fact
which has happened, but that does not mean to say that
you did not love him, that you do not love him, and
that you want to continue to love him, and it does not
mean to say that people do not feel for you in the loss
which you have sustained.

     Thank you very much everybody for coming.  We are
now going to adjourn.  A cup of tea or coffee I think
is needed and then we will resume as soon as we
reasonably can.  I think we are running a bit behind
schedule - that is nobody's fault.  I said right at the
beginning that each Inquest would take as long as it
needed, but what suffers are the coffee breaks.  Shall
we try for 11.30, or 11.35 - let's make it quarter-of-
an-hour.  All right.

     (The Inquest into the death of JOHN McBRIEN
        was adjourned to a date to be fixed)
