Cheshire Constabulary




r                                                                                                 Chief Constable's Office
                                                                                                  Constabulary Headquarters
 Dr S L Popper LLB BMedSci BM BS MRCGP                                                            Chester CHI 2FP
 HM Coroner                                                                                       Tfeiephone Chester (0244) 350000
 South Yorkshire (West District)                                                                  Tdex 61261
 Medico-Legal Centre                                                                              Fax (0244) 351050

 Watery Street                                                                                    If you telephone please ask for
 SHEFFIELD S3 7ET


Our reference                   TeL Extension                     Your reference                   Date


  CC/GP                               2090                            SLP/JT                         30 July 1990




 HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS - MR JOHN MERVYN JONES

 Thank you for your letter of 27 July 1990,

  1 confirm that Mr Mervyn Jones will be made available to assist you in
  the Inquests and such other enquiries as might be appropriate stemming
  from the work he has already undertaken into the deaths at Hillsborough
  in April 1989,

 Yours sincerely




 Thief Constable



                A il correspondence {quoting our reform er shown abovt x hottid be ad drv^ed to the C h ie f Constable
                                         27th September      90


SLP/FAD                            PRIVATE ON CONFIDENTIAL

Hr. G. J. Dear, QPM., DL., LL.B.
Home Office,
Block A,
Spur 12,
Government Buildings,
Whittington Road,
Worcester,
WR5 2PA.

Dear Mr. Dear,
Thank you very much for your letter of 23rd September. I very
much appreciate the trouble that you have taken over thia matter.
You tire quite correct in assuming that 1 am hap#y^that you felt
able to use the approach which you have outlined.




Yours sincerely,



S. L. POPPER
H. M. CORONER
                                                       HOME OFFICE
                                                 OFFICEOFHM INSPECTOR OPCONSTABUtARY
             & J. Dear, QPM., DL., LL.B.
                                             Block A Spur 12 Government Buildings
                                             Whittington Road Worcester WR5 2PA
                                                        Telephone: (0SX8) 3595W5




Stefan L. Popper, LLJB., B.MED.Scit) BM., BS., MRCGP.,
H.M. Coroner for South Yorkshire,
Medico-Legal Centre,
Watery Street,
Sheffield,
S3 7ET                                            23 September 1990




      I was grateful to you for meeting me a t Nottingham Constabulary
Headquarters last month and for the opportunity to discuss the difficult
problem with which you had been posed.

       1 gave the m atter much thought and also passed the relevant
correspondence to Sir John Woodcock, H.M. Chief Inspector of
Constabulary, and subsequently discussed the m atter with him too, and he
reflected your concern and mine about the incident.

        On balance, we decided that we should let the m atter lie where it
is a t present. All the correspondence will be filed appropriately in the
Inspectorate records at the Home Office and will be available for
reference should a reoccurrence of the problem, or anything like it,
resurrect itself.

       We reached that decision largely having regard to your own
feelings on the m atter and, not least, because any direct approach now to
Mr. Sharpe would only call into question the future standing of Mervyn
Jones. He, of course, still has to work from tim e to time with Mr. Sharpe
and, on balance, we felt that relations may well be impaired without any
real benefit accruing from the current exercise.
       Overall, of course, we noted that the incident had been resolved in
practical terms with Mr. Sharpe and further difficulties have, apparently,
been avoided.

       I think you will probably be happy with the course of action that
we have proposed^ It perhaps goes without saying that we should like to
he advised immediately should anything arise which gives you any cause
for concern. A t our end, the circumstances in this difficult incident have
been fully noted and will continue to be borne in mind in the future.

       With my very best regards.
                                                       23rd August      90


SLP/JT.




G,J. Dear Esq.T QPM DL LLB,
H.M. Inspector of Constabulary,
Block A,
Spur 12t
Government Buildings,
Whittington Road,
Worcester. WR5 2FA*

Dear Mr, Dear,

I am most grateful to you for the time you gave me on the 21st of August and
for the helpful discussion which we were able to have on that occasion,

As requested,    I enclose copies of the following letters

          1.   Letter from Mr* Sharp dated   18th of. May 1990.

          2,   Letter from Mr* Sharp dated   17th of July 1990,

          3-   My letter to Mr. Sharp dated 24th of July 1990 (the
               correct date should have been the 27th of July in fact),

          4.   Letter from Mr, Sharp dated the 2nd of August together
               with enclosure of 26*7*90 from C*P.S«

Although not particularly relevant by way of completeness, Ienclose    copy of
my   letter to Mr- Hadfield dated 27th of July 1990, copy of my letter dated
27th of July to Mr* Graham, copy letter from Mr* Graham dated the 30th of
July and copy letter from Mr* Leopold dated the 9th of August 1990,

I understand that Mervyn Jones will be sending you direct, copies of the two
letters which he sent to me*

As I tried to make clear during our discussions, I have no desire whatsoever
to make any formal complaint, or indeed to cause difficulty or harm to Mr,
Sharp*

I am also very conscious that Mr* Jones is now a close neighbour of Mr. Sharp
and I would not wish to create difficulties for either of them as a result of
the matter which I raised with you*

I also want to confirm that I quite understand that an able, and an ambitious
man would want quite naturally to be where the action is, and I do not see
anything particularly wrong with that. As you know my main concern centered

                                               t
on the correspondence from Mervyn Jones and indeed if there had been nothing
else other than the above mentioned letters X would not have been
particularly concerned* I understand that you may wish to discuss the
                                             2



             ues which we talked about with the Chief Inspector of Constabulary so that
         J^bu can consider what steps or actions, if any, should be taken.

         It occurs to me that one possible way of dealing with this is to merely note
         the information and so to speak use it to ‘highten awareness*« The advantage

^        of that would be that if this is a one off incident, nothing more will come
         of it.

         Having said that, I am sure you will appreciate that the decision on how you
         want to handle the matter is of course entirely for you and your colleagues.

         Once again, may I thank you for your kindness and courtesy at our meeting.


         Yours sincerely,




         S.L.Popper,
         H *M.Coroner.




    c.
FILE NOTE - DATED 21.8.90.     MEETING WITH MR. DEAR AT
NOTTINGHAM POLICE HEADQUARTERS AT ABOUT 4.15._______


I met with Mr. Dear to discuss the issues raised by the
correspondence which I have had with Mr. Jones and Mr.
Sharp regarding the           of the Coroners Officer.
I explained to Mr. Dear that I was in a difficult dilema
with this matter. I did not want to get anybody into
trouble or cause any particular difficulties, but I was a
little concerned over the situation.     I explained to Mr.
Dear that Mr. Sharp had confirmed in May that the position
                      I'i-
of Mr. Jones was th^Coroners Officer whilst he dealt with
the D.P.P. and Police Complaints Authority.     I then
recounted to him that I had had a letter from Mr. Jones
which I found on my return from holiday, telling me that he
had heard that Mr. Sharp was intending to take over the
coronal activity.     I then received a further letter from
Mr. Jones dated the 19th of July in which he recounted tke
conversation with Mr. Sharp, the int     r claiming that he
                                   it)
was taking over the coronal acti^y because this had been
agreed with me.     I also received a letter from Mr. Sharp
dated the 17th of July which indicated that he was taking
over the coronal side of things.     Mr. Dear read th
letter.
I then went on to explain that I had replied to Mr. Sharp
and also written to one or two other people setting out my
understanding of the position i.e., that Mr. Jones was the
Coroners Officer and that I wished it to continue. I had a
reply from Mr. Sharp on the 2nd of August saying that as
far as he was concerned there had never been any
misunderstanding and that I should disregard his letter of
the 17th of July.
I explained to Mr. Dear that if there had been nothing
other than the correspondence between myself and Mr. Sharp
and indeed the comment of Mr. Jones in his letter of the
9th of Julyr I would not have thought that much about it as
it would have seemed to me that all that was happening
was that Mr.Sharp was anxious to be involved on the coronal
side and was perhaps trying to edge Mervyn Jones out of
that.           In ifasclf tha-fe- io -something whieh Ms would in my
view have merely been jockeying for position and I would
not have thought any more about it.              What concerned me was
the combination of the ma^togs, together with the . .
conversation recounted by Mr. Jones/ bearing in mind that I
had never had the conversation which Mr. Sharp apparently
claimed had taken place.
                                                                        jz~
Whilst I was anxious not to create any problems o-t causing
trouble, I did feel that had gone a little bit further than
it ought to have done and I felt that it was right that I
should mention it to someone so that others might be aware
of the position and take appropriate action if necessary.
| fy a -A lA~
tfe was clear that I was not making any formal complaint of
any sort.
Mr. Dear saw the point entirely and felt that he ought to
take it up with the Chief Inspector of Constabulary to
decide what action,if any, were required.    He felt that
perhaps a word in Mr, Sharp's ear might be the appropriate
step.

He asked whether it would be possible to have copies of the
relevant correspondence.   I said that I had no objection to
this except that I was a bit worried about Mervyn's letter
of the J9th of July, particularly as I did not want to
create a -tiea-h if I could avoid it. Mr* Dear thought it
might be useful to have the letter but he felt that if the
points were going to be taken up with Mr. Sharp, it might
be possible to do this without any reference to Mervyn at
all.

I said that I would arrange to let him have copies in due
course, and that we would check with Mervyn whether he had
any objection to the letter being copied and forwarded.
When we concluded this meeting, Mr. Dear took me in to see
the Chief Constable of Nottingham, Mr. Cummings.   We spent
five or ten minutes having a drink and generally chatting
about        matters.   Thife issue was not discussed at all.
    From:   P G LEOPOLD
            DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE


                                                                   Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                                   Telephone: 021-626 5000




            Dr Stefan I., Popper LLB B MED Scl BM BS MRCGP         PGL/DMB
            H M Coroner
            South Yorkshire (West)
            Medico Legal Centre
            Watery Street                                          9 August 1990
            Sheffield
            S3 7ET




o

            Dear Dr Popper

            I write on behalf of Mr Hadfield who is on leave*

            I am now aware that any confusion which existed as to who was your
            officer in regard to Hillsborough 1989 is resolved and that unequivocally
            Mervyn Jones fills that role. Equally clearly, I confirm that such
            assistance that Mervyn will need in the future by way of staff, etc, to
            carry out that responsibility will continue to be provided from this
            Force j Sim/kT5<Ly^ Mr Sharp will be supported in respect of his
            responsibilitytM e , DPB and PCA aspects.

            Youj




            Acting Chief Gonstable
FILE NOTE DATED 9.8,90. TELEPHONE CONVERSATION WITH MERVYN
JONES ON 8.8.90.              __________________________


I acquainted him with the fact that I have now heard from
Mr. Sharp and also from Mr. Graham, and as far as I can
see, the position with regard to the Coroner's Officer had
been satisfactorily sorted out.
Mervyn was meeting with his colleagues at Nechells on the
20th of August and he suggested that he would then arrange
to meet with me after that to discuss matters further.
I mentioned to him that although the matter had now been
satisfactorily resolved, I was a little disturbed by the
situation which had arisen.
                                                  7th August        90


5LP/JT.




Mr* Hadfield,
Chief Constable,
West Midlands Police,
Headquarters,
P,0, Box 52,
Lloyd House,
Culmore Circus Queensway,
Birmingham. B4 6NQ.

Dear Mr* Hadfield,

I enclose a copy of a letter which I have written to Mr* Sharp*  I have also
heard from Mr, Graham, and in case you have not seen his letter, I enclose a
copy of it.

It looks as if the issue has been very satisfactorily resolved*

Yours sincerely,




S.L*Popper,
H .M.Coroner_
                                                     7th August        90




SLP/JT.
LS/SA.




Mr, L. Sharp,
Chief Constable,
Cumbria Constabulary Investigating Officer,
Police Headquarters *
Carleton Hall,
Penrith t
Cumbria * CA10 2AU.


Dear Hr. Sharp,

Thank you very much    for your letter of the 2nd of August,   I have read with
interest the letter    from the Crown Prosecution Service addressed to Hammond
Suddards dated the    26th of July*   I assume that in fact they have by now
received the final    police report *

I have noted what you say regarding the Coronal side of things and am pleased
that the situation is now resolved, I will, as you say, disregard your letter
of the 17th of July 1990.


Yours sincerely,




S *L-HopperT
H.M.Coroner


c,c« Chief Constable,
     West Midlands Police.
                                                  7th August        90


SLP/JT.


Mr. M, Jones,
Deputy Chief Constable,
Cheshire Constabulary,
Police Headquarters,
Chester. CHI ZFF,




Dear Mervyn,

I hope that you have had a good holiday and that both you and Doreen are
refreshed,

You will of course know that I have had a very nice letter from your Chief
Constable confirming your availability.  I have also just received a letter
from Mr. Sharp dated the 2nd of August, copy of which I enclose.  It seems
me that taking these two letters together, the problem which had arisen has
been satisfactorily resolved.


Yours sincerely,



S,L.Popper,
H,M. Coroner,
                                                  3rd August        90


SLP/JT*
CC/GP.


Hr* D. Graham,
Chief Constablet
Cheshire Constabulary,
Chief Constable fs Office t
Constabulary Headquarters,
Chester, CHI 2PF.

Dear Mr. Graham,

I am very grateful to you for the very prompt and helpful reply to my letter
of the 27th of July*


Yours sincerely,




S,L,Popper,
H.M,Coroner,
                                                                           FURNIVAL HOUSE
                UGH INQUIRY TEAM                                           Furnival Gate
                                                                           Sheffield SI 4QN
           1LANDS POLICE HO                                                Telephone: 0 7 4 2 73 1 5 4 6
        £2, Lloyd House                                                    Fax:        07 4 2 73 1 4 8 3
   J p e Circus Queensway
                                                                           M edico Legal Centra
 Jingham B4 6NQ                                                            Telephone: 07 4 2 72 6 1 0 5
 Rephone: 021-626 5000. extn. 2025
                                                                           Fax:       0742 726247
^NECHELLS GHEEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street                                                              Your Ref:
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2 extn. 69 12                                 Our Ref:        LS/SA

                                                                            Date:           2 August 1990

                      ,, «, B.
  Dr Stefan L Popper, LL.B; Tj MED
                               m FTI Sci- BM; BS; MRCGP
                                     m i , « i,
  H M Coroner
  South Yorkshire (West)
  Medico Legal Centre
  Watery Street-
  Sheffield
  ,53 7ET



    Dear Doctor Popper
    Many th a n k s f o r y o u , l e t t e r o f 2* Jan u ary 1990 - h i c h c o n cern s Hillsborough
    1989.

    I enclose a copy                            ore c a s t ^ S   waer^LcLiolfis             likely to be

              i r     i t   i s                    i- ^ -£
    Director of Public Prosecutions office has cleared
     letter *

     Le t »         say a t once t h a t in so f a r j j W .                                               been
     any iBlsunderstanding o                  oy^ro «■       g undl,rt.taIld that the Coroner’s Officer

     i r a " ^ t e r for you to resolve and I note that ^                   "       ^   i     n     refpect of
    ,lhi«£ Constable of Cheshire about the m t t e r ^                                       M a t s lts
     the Coronal                                         “hortly trom West Midlands back to my o»n


                                              C ^ r ^ i ir r e L lo ^ e tS          co uld c o g e n c e .

      However, I note that you have copied T O - ^ e r                     to tte Chief Constable of

                              ^please^isre^ard ni^letter of 17 - y                  X990.

       tours s l n c ^ e i ^           ^___________




       CHIEF CONSTABLE
       CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY
       INVESTIGATING OFFICER



        Enc
                       Directorof Public Prosecutions                 Deputy Director and ChiefExecutive
                                     Allan Green Q-C.                 D.S. Gandy CBOBE




                                             Director ofHeadquarters Casework
                                                       C. W. P. Newell



                                                                           Crown Prosecution Service
           Messrs Hammond Suddards
           Solicitors                                                      Headquarters Casework
           Bradford
                                                                           10 Fumival Street
                                                                           London
           DX 117Z0                                                        EC4A1PE
                                                                           Telephone 071 -831 -3038
                                                                                     Ext.




YourRef:                                   Our Re/-                                  Dote:
   f       PCM/PAB                                 PGK.3341.89                         26 July 1990


           Dear Sirs
           HILLSBOROUGH
           Thank you for your letter of 25th July 1990 the contents of which I note.
       1 anticipte receiving the final police report very shortly. In consequence
       I expect the Director will reach a decision before the civil trial
       commences on 2nd October 1990.
       However, I cannot rule out entirely the possibility of the time for
       decision being extended by a need for further enquiries. In these
       circumstances I cannot give a firm date for the decision.
       Yours fa ith fu lly




  l( C J Cleugh
  • Head of Police Complaints Division
    Cheshire Constabulary

#
 r                                                                                              Chief Constable’s Office
                                                                                                Constabulary Headquarters
    Dr S L Popper LLB BHedScl BM BS MRCGP                                                       Chester CHI 2PP
    HH Coroner                                                                                  Telephone Chester {0244) 350000
    South Yorkshire (West District)                                                             Telex 61261
    Medico-Legal Centre                                                                         Fax (0244) 351050
    Watery Street                                                                               If you telephone please ask for
    SHEFFIELD S3 7ET

 Our reference                   TfeL Extension                 Your reference                   Date


    CC/GP                             2090                          SLP/JT                        30 July 1990




    HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS - HR JOHN MERVYN JONES

    Thank you for your letter of 27 July 1990.

    I confirm that Mr Mervyn Jones will be made available to assist you in
    the Inquests and such other enquiries as might be appropriate stemming
    from the work he has already undertaken into the deaths at Hillsborough
    in April 1989.

    Yours sincerely




— TJKief Constable



                 Ail correspondence (quoting our reference shown ahovt,   hould he addressed to the Chiqf Constable
                                                                                 GO ^     CoP"-|

                                 OFFICE OF H.M CORONER FOR               MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                         WATERY STREET
                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                              (West District)
                                                                         SHEFFIELD
                                                                         S3 7ET
    STEFAN L, POPPER, LLB-, B.MOXSci., 0.M.. B.S,. M.fl,C.G,P.
                                                CORONER


                             Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 73A721                             19.90...


SLP/JT *


M r . R. Hadfield, Q.P.M,
Chief Cons table ,
West Midlands Police,
Headquarters t
Lloyd House,
Colmore Circus,
Queensway,
Birmingham* B4 6HQ»

Dear Mr. Hadfield,

I refer to our telephone conversation on the 26th of July and as agreed, I
enclose copy letters to Mr. Sharp as well as to Mr. Graham,

As I made it clear to you on the phone, I am anxious that Mr, Jones should
continue his role in connection with the Inquests and no doubt (but subject
of course to your ultimate decision) this would have been the case had he not
been promoted to Deputy in Cheshire.  As Mr* Jones has indicated to me that
his new Chief Constable has no objection to him retaining this interest until
the Inquests are concluded, the position as far as I am concerned therefore
essentially remains unchanged*

The odd thing is that Mr. Sharp and Mr- Jones both have had connections with
the West Midlands Police, and neither are at present members of that force.
Looked at from the West Midlands Police point of view, then it makes no
practical difference which person heads up the Coronal Team, but it does make
quite a big difference to me and to the way I think we should proceed.

I must confess that I had assumed that the arrangements which I had come to
with Mr* Dear regarding the West Midlands Police force’s involvement in the
coronal aspects would continue until the coronal aspects of this Disaster
have been concluded, but nevertheless I am conscious that this is now your
force and I would not wish you to feel that I was taking liberties with It or
indeed with your authority in respect of it.

Basically what I am saying is                           that I want the status quo tocontinue with
Mervyn Jones leading the West                           Midlands PoliceCoronal Inquiry Team,not­
withstanding that he has been                           promoted to another force*

As far as the Inquests are concerned, these are at present adjourned pending
the outcome of the D .P -P *s decision. M r . Sharp is of course the investigating
officer as far as the D.P.P- and I believe the Police Complaints Authority
are concerned*


Yours sincerely,


S.L.Popper,
H.M.Coroner.
                                                  27th July         90


SLP/JT *


Mr* R* Hadfield, Q.P.M.
Chief Constable,
West Midlands Police,
Headquarters,
Lloyd House,
Colmore Circus,
Queensway,
Birmingham* B4 6NQ*

Dear Mr, Hadfield,

I refer to our telephone conversation on the 26th of July and as agreed, I
enclose copy letters to Mr* Sharp as well as to Mr* Graham*

As I made it clear to you on the phone, I am anxious that Mr. Jones should
continue his role in connection with the Inquests and no doubt (but subject
of course to your ultimate decision) this would have been the case had he not
been promoted to Deputy in Cheshire* As Mr* Jones has indicated to me that
his new Chief Constable has no objection to him retaining this interest until
the Inquests are concluded, the position as far as I am concerned therefore
essentially remains unchanged*

The odd thing is that Mr* Sharp and Mr* Jones both have had connections with
the West Midlands Police, and neither are at present members of that force.
Looked at from the West Midlands Police point of view, then it makes no
practical difference which person heads up the CoronalTeam, but it does make
quite a big difference to me and to the way I think we should proceed*

I must confess that I had assumed that the arrangements which I had come to
with Mr* Dear regarding the West Midlands Police force’s involvement in the
coronal aspects would continue until the coronal aspects of this Disaster
have been concluded, but nevertheless I am conscious that this is now your
force and I would not wish you to feel that I was taking liberties with it or
indeed with your authority in respect of it.

Basically what I am saying is that I want the status quo tocontinue with
Mervyn Jones leading the West Midlands Police Coronal Inquiry Team,not­
withstanding that he has been promoted to another force-

As far as the Inquests are concerned* these are at present adjourned pending
the outcome of the D*P*P’s decision* Mr* Sharp is of course the investigating
officer as far as the D.P.P. and I believe the Police Complaints Authority
are concerned*


Yours sincerely,


b^Popper ,
H,tTCoroner«
                           OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR                   MEDICOLEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                        WATERY STREET
                                   SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                        (West District)
                                                                        SHEFFIELD
                                                                        S3 7ET
    STEFAN L POPPER,      B.MED.Sd., B.M., 0rS„ MJIOG.P,
                                              CORONER


                       T***phon«: SHEFFIELD (Q742> 73B721                  •2 7 -th -J u ly ........... 19.SO-


SLP/JT*


Mr, D ■J , Graham Q,P*M* F*B*I,M,
Chief Constable,
Cheshire Cons tabulary,
Police Headquarters,
Chester * CHI 2PP.

Dear M r . Graham,

HILLSBOROUGH INQUESTS - MR. MERVYN JONES.

As you are of course aware, Mr* Jones was charged by his then Chief Constable
Mr. Geoffrey Dear with the task of investigating and organising the West
Midlands Police Team including as far as I am concerned, the coronal aspects
relating to the death of the 95 people who unfortunately lost their lives*
The present position with regard to these Inquests is that they all stand
adjourned, awaiting the D.P.P’s decision on what action he intends to take*

On Mr* Dear relinquising his appointment in the West Midlands, Mr, Leslie
Sharp, the Chief Constable of Cumbria was appointed to take over the Inquiry
as far as the Director of Public Prosecutions and the Police Complaints
Authority were concerned, but it was expressly agreed that Mr,Jones would
retain and continue to act as Coroner ’s Officer. Since then, as you are of
course fully aware, Mr,Jones has joined your force as your Deputy,


I understand that Mr, Jones is both willing and able to continue to act as
Coroner’s Officer, and to head up the appropriate police team until my work
in relation to these Inquests is concluded,  I also understand that his
continued involvement is acceptable to you.

You will I am sure be aware that there are many reasons and advantages in
Mervyn retaining his connection with the Inquests and his involvement as
Coroner’s Officer*  I would therefore like to take this opportunity of
saying that I am very grateful to you for your support and co-operation, not
only to Mervyn but also to me in connection with these Inquests*

In order to avoid misunderstanding,                         I summarise below my understanding of the
position;-

   1,     Mr* Mervyn Jones continues to head up and to lead the West
          Midlands Police Coronal Inquiry Team,  It Is at this point
          impossible to put a time scale on this as the timing of the
          resumed Inquest and the extent and scope thereof depends to
          a large extent upon the decision of the D,P«P* which has
          not yet been made.  Similarly it is not possible at this stage
          to state the extent and number of West Midlands Police
          officers and support staff who will or may be involved
          with the Inquests, but I anticipate that there will be some
                                  2


            fluctuation in numbers to take account of varying
            factors applicable from time to time.  I would anticipate
            and hope that the West Midlands Police Team would as
            far as possible, consist of officers and support staff
            who already have been involved in the Inquiry, many of
            whom have made a very substantial professional as well as
            personal investment in thelnquiry.
       2,   I have not been involved in the financial aspects of the
            Inquiry, but my understanding is that the cost has fallen
            to South Yorkshire Police. I can see no reason why the financial
            aspects should be affected in any way merely because
            Mr, Jones has been promoted*


            Those aspects of the inquiry relating to the Director of Public
            Prosecutions and Police Complaints Authority are headed up
            by Mr* Sharp.

            From the inception, the Hillsborough Inquiry has been a complex
            matter, and has necessitated a measure of co-operation in order
            to avoid for example unnecessary duplication of statements and so
            on*  This degree of co-operation will of course have to be
            maintained, and I trust that we will all seek to make what is an
            an arduous job manageable.

    I am circulating a copy of this letter as shown, in order to ensure that the
    parties are fully aware of the arrangements applicable to the Inquests.

    In closing, I would like to say that I hope that I may have the opportunity
    at some point of meeting you and making your personal acquaintance.

    Yours sincerely,




    S.L ^Popper,
    H.M,Coroner.
G
    c*c, Mr. R, Hadfield.
         M r . L . Sharp.
         Mr. M. Jones.
                                 OFFICE OF H,M. CORONER FOR       MEDICOLEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                  WATERY STREET
                                         SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                  SHEFFIELD
                                              (West District)
                                                                  S3 7ET
    STEFAN L POPPEFIf LL.S., B.MED.Sck. B.M., 3.3., M.R.C.Q.P.
                                                   CORONER        i .l•>--
                             Tatephnrw- SHEFFIELD (0742) 73ST21    ■2+th-J-u-ly...... 19..-9.0..



SLP/JT.


Mr * L . Sharp, Q P A ,LLB.F* B *I
Chief Constable ,
Cumbria Constabulary,
Police Headquarters *
Carleton Hall,
Penrith,
Cumbria. CA1Q 2AU.

Dear Mr* Sharp,

Thank you for your letter of the 17th of July.

I note that the criminal investigation is progressing well.     Please let me
know when your final report was submitted to the D*F.P. and also let me have
your estimate when you think the D .F *P . is likely to reach a decision
regarding the matter submitted to him by you.     I would of course also be
pleased to meet with you to discuss the D* P *P.aspects of the Inquiry,
particularly as it impinges or relates to my Inquest.


You are quite right that I am aware of Mervyn's promotion.                       I am indeed very
pleased that he succeeded in obtaining the appointment*

With regard to the remainder of your letter there seems to be some
misunderstanding, as it seems to imply that you see yourself as Coroner’s
Officer for me in the remainder of the Inquests-

This is not* nor ever has been my understanding of the position*  I do not
think it necessary to reiterate the whole of the history-  Suffice it so say
that when Mr, Geoffrey Dear left his appointment as Chief Constable in the
West Midlands, you took over the Director of Public Prosecution and Police
Complaint Authority aspects of the Inquiry, whilst Mervyn Jones continued to
be Coroner’s Officer and to handle the Coronal Inquiry Team, which he had
done from the middle of April 1989*  Indeed you expressly confirmed this
arrangement in your letter of the 13th of May 1990.  As this aspect has not
been further discussed either orally or in writing between us, the position
as far as I am concerned with regard to Mr. Jones has not changed in any way.

There are of course very many reasons and advantages which I am sure you must
be aware of for Mr, Jones continuing in this capacity.  These would include
continuity, not only as far as I am concerned, but also and more importantly,
as far as the parties and in particular the bereaved families are concerned.
Furthermore, in the event of the Inquests resuming, assuming Section 16 (1)
Coroners Act 1988 does not apply, I think that there would be a very major
disadvantage if it appeared that the new investigating officer had been
substituted for Mr. Jones.  One also has to remember that Mr* Jones was
present for all practical purposes throughout the interim hearings, and that
I think is a very important factor which must not be overlooked.
In addition* it is not possible to predict the detail of the evidence which
may be given at the Inquests.   Similarly the verdict of the Jury can not be
anticipated, and it may be that further reference of the D.F.P* might be
called for.  I think if that eventuality were to arise, then they are very
real benefits if such further reference or involvement were then to be
handled by presumably yourself.   This split if it can be achieved, has I
believe much to commend it.

There are no doubt additional points, but I do not think that it
is necessary that I should list them*

I am of course aware, as mentioned above, that Mr. Jones has been promoted,
but as far as I am concerned, this makes no difference to the situation and I
understand that Mervyn Jones is both willing and able to continue in his role
as Coroner’s Officer.

In order to avoid any possible misunderstanding therefore

    1.   It is my wish that Mervyn Jones should remain and continue as the
         Coroner's Officer, heading up an appropriate team from the West
         Midlands Police until the conclusion of the coronal involvement with
         the Hillsborough Disaster*

    2.   His and my support should remain and continue to be the
         West Midlands Police,

    3.   The retention, extension or reconstitution of the West
         Midlands Police Coroner's Team will of course depend on
         the decision of the D.F.P. the stage at which a particular
         activity has been reached and the timing for the resumed
         Inquests.  I would expect, as far as possible, those officers
         who have already been involved in the Inquiry would continue to
         be engaged in the Hillsborough Inquest, for as you know, a
         great many of them have made a great professional as well as a
         personal investment in the Inquiry-  I would expect to discuss
         and agree the constitution of the Team from time to time with
         Mr* Jones-

    4.   The Hillsborough Inquiry has been a complex investigation
         from it’s inception with multiple parties involved right from the
         word go e.g., myself and Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry
         Team,  There has of necessity been an absolute
         requirement for co-operation and sharing of information and
         I believe that this has up to now taken place most successfully.
         I fully expect that this will continue up to the end, and I
         am sure that I and/or Mr* Jones will wish to keep in close
         touch with you particularly in respect of the impingement of the
         D.P.P's involvement with my Inquests-  The extent of this
         will depend to a large extent upon the D.P.P’s decision.

I am sending a copy of this letter to Mr, Hadfield in order that he may be
fully informed of my views on this matter, particularly as it involves the
West Midlands Police force,

I am also enclosing a copy of a letter which I have written to the Chief
                              -   3   -




    Constable in Cheshire with circulation as stated thereon.  It is obviously
    important that we should all be speaking with the same voice and pulling in
    the same direction on this matter.

    Yours sincerely f




    5 .L.Popper,
         Coroner,




W
FILE NOTE DATED 26.7.90.
FILE UNDER HILLSBOROUGH/CONFIDENTIAL



I decided to speak to Mr. Hadfield on the phone before
sending him a letter.   I thought it might be better if I
explained to him what was happening and why I was ringing
him.   I contacted him and he was in a meeting and he rang
back after a little while.   This was about 9-0-clock in the
morning-
After initial introductions, I explained to him that I had
heard from Mervyn that he was able and willing to continue
ae Coroner Officer, though I had also heard from Mr. Sharp
that although he had previously indicated that Mervyn would
continue as Coroner's Officer, he had now written me a
letter implying that he wanted to take over the role.       I

said that I was proposing to write to sort the situation
out so to speak, but that I wanted to be in touch with him
because whatever happened, it was the West Midlands Police
Officers who would of course continue with the Coronal
Inquiry and that I did not want him to feel either left out
or that we were trying to take decisions relating to his
force without his knowledge or consent so to speak.
I asked him whether he had any comments.     He responded
cautiously and pointed out that this was a rather delicate
situation between Mervyn and Leslie Sharp.    He wondered
whether, apart from my high regard for Mervyn, whether
there were any other reasons why I thought that Mervyn
wou]d be suitable, or suitable to retain the position.             I
replied there were in (act many advantages, not least
                           1   ^   anH ^i=to for the   families and
continuity both for     myself and also for
other parties, the fact that if we were proceeding then by

definition the D.P.P. had decided not to proceed, then xt
might therefore be better that the investigating officer
who had dealt with that side was not .so closely involved
with the inquest and in addition, if the Inquest verdicts
 were of a nature which might necessitate the D.P.P.             having

 another look at the matter, then again having somebody

 separate might well be a good idea.
 Mr     Hadfield saw the point.      He had noted that of course

 from his point of view it made very little difference
 because both Mervyn and Leslie Sharp were non-West Mi
  people now and if     it hadnot been of course for the fact

  that he was at the Match and had put in a statement, when

  he took over Geoffrey Dear's position, he would no doubt
  have been the investigating officer himself.             That po m t I

  of course knew and acknowledged.
  ! repeated that what X was particularly anxious about was
  to ensure that he should not feel that I was trying to take

   any liberties either with his force or with his authority
   and that I wanted to be quite sure that this was clearly
   understood.    He confirmed that this was so.          He said in
                                         Kant nn to normal duties
      fact the officers were coming back on to
      quite fast, which he was pleased about.
      „e then went on to say that he could see the point that I




      asaaba
                              3     -

was making and that he sympathised with my view.       He could

also see the advantage of having the split.       In fact he

suggested that this had been so right from the beginning

that Geoffrey Dear had dealt with the criminal side and

Mervyn, with other matters.       He thought it might be a good

idea if when I wrote to Mr, Sharp I pointed out the

operational advantages of retaining Mervyn in the coronal

position.

I asked him if I ^ ^ u l d write to him first but he said that

if I sent him copies of the letter to Mr. Sharp with a

short covering memo, that would be quite sufficient.

We finished off the conversation by saying that we hoped

that we would meet at some point in the future.
FILE NOTE DATED 25.7.90.
FILE UNDER HILLSBOROUGH/CONFIDENTIAL FILE.
Telephone call from Mervyn.     He was on holiday but he asked
me to ring him back in Scotland,     which I did. I thanked
him for his two letters, explained that I was amazed by his
second one which he had recounted the conversation with Mr.
Sharp,   That that conversation of the type described by Mr.
Sharp had not taken place as far as I was concerned.


I discussed with him the draft letters which I had written
to Mr. Sharp and to Mr. Graham.    Apart from a few minor
suggestions Mervyn did not have any particular comments.
We did discuss whether I should      refer to thefinancial
aspects and in the end, decided      that perhaps Iwould make a
slight reference to it in the letter to Mr. Graham.
Mervyn confirmed to me that he had discussed his
involvement with Mr. Graham and that the latter had in fact
agreed that this would     be satisfactory.   Mervyn explained
that what he had in mind was that Stan Beechey would be the
main leader so to speak, and that he would participate from
time to time and be available towards the end in a more
ac tive capac ity.
Mervyn suggested that it would perhaps be a good idea if I
also wrote to Mr. Hadfield, bearing in mind that it was the
West Midlands Police force which was involved and that it
was important that Mr. Hadfield should not feel that his
force was "being taken over".
I also discussed with Mervyn whether we should circulate the letter

to the South Yorkshire Police,   I explained that I was

reluctant to do this and Mervyn in fact agreed that perhaps

on reflection, it was better that this was not done,

Mervyn suggested that it might be a good idea in the letter

to Mr. Sharp to point out to him that should the Inquests

proceed and should something be said or a verdict be

reached which might indicate a referral back to the D.P.P,

that his independence from the Inquiry might well be a good

thing.
File under Intog-lm Inquoat-3

-   -




Dated 23.7.90. Telephone conversation call from Sue Harper.




She mentioned a private matter and then asked if I had
received a letter from Mervyn recently.    I said I had not
but I was trying to get in touch with him.    I said the
latest letter I had from him was dated the 9th of July. She
said "no there was another one" in which he apparently said
that he had heard from Mr. Sharpe that he, Mr. Sharpe, had
spoken to me.   That I had agreed that Mervyn should have no
further part to play in the Inquests and that he, Mr.
Sharpe would be responsible for coronal activities.


I said to Sue that I had not had any such conversation with
Mr. Sharpe, in fact I had had no conversation with him
about this but as far as I could recollect, the last
time I had seen him was at the Inquests.


I said as far as I was concerned, I would like to have

Mervyn to continue, my only reservation would be if his
Chief Constable would not allow him to, in which case of
course I would not have any choice in the matter.     I asked

Sue to ask him to get in touch with me should he ring her
at any time.
J MERVYN JONE8 MSc                                          HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM
DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                           NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
CHESHIRE CONSTABULARY                                      Fowler Street
Police Headquarters                                        Birmingham B7 5DA
C hester CH1 2PP                                           Telephone: 021-359 3332
Telephone: 0244-350000 Ext 2091                            Fax: 021-359 6735

 PRIVATE AHD CONFIDENTIAL                                  Your Ref:

 Dr S L Popper

                                                           Date:       19 July 1990




 If you open this letter first. please refer to my earlier letter dated 9 July
 1990 before reading this one.

 Once again I hope you have enjoyed your holiday-

 On Thursday, 12 and 13 July, X attended an ACP0 Conference at Hutton Hall,
 Preston-  On the evening of Thursday, 12th, I met Hr Les Sharp and we had a
 drink together.  This is a report of the conversation which took place which
 you may care to know confidentially_

        LS     "ITm taking you off the Hillsborough Enquiry".

        JMJ    "Gh really, where's that come from?"

        LS     "I've discussed this with the Coroner,    I Tm going to see it
                through now” .

        JM   3 "You do surprise me, I thought that you would have afforded me
                the courtesy to discuss the matter with me before youapproached
                the Coroner11.

        LS     "You've got a new job now as Deputy Chief Constable and it isn't
                convenient for you11-

        JMJ   "Funnily enough I   discussed this future involvement with the
               Inquests with my   new Chief Constable yesterday and he and the
               Police Authority   are quite happy for me to conclude it",

        LS     "Be that as it may, I'm going to take charge now".

        JMJ    "Well I think the Coroner ought to decide what he wants to do
                at the end of the day"-

        LS    "Well I W e already seen the   Coroner and this is what he wants".

 That is the gist of the conversation which I was a little bit disappointed in,
 albeit quite frankly I did not believe what Mr Sharp was saying.




   PI FAFSF RFPI Y TO THF OFFIPF AT            Chester
                                      - 2 -


However, if you feel that it is appropriate for Mr Sharp to take on
responsibility as C oroners Officer I will respect your decision and certainly I
will not feel affronted by it- Such is the strength of both our professional
and social relationship, there certainly will be no ill feeling on my part.

The matter does need to be resolved early and if Mr Sharp has not already
approached you, he will do so in the not too distant future.

 Once a decision is announced as to any further action by the Direction of Public
 Prosecutions, if it is no further action, then I am ready and willing to give
 you all the assistance you require completely with the blessing of my new Chief
 Constable and my new Police Authority. That was always the understanding I had
 and certainly that was understood by Mr Sharp as he intimated in his letter of
 18 May, a copy of which is attached,  1 still believe that it would be
 inappropriate to mix the Investigating Officer for the Criminal and Police
 disciplinary matters with your independent Coroner’s Enquiry. However, you may
kfeel differently and once again may I say I will respect your decision at the
 end of the day.

I am sorry to have to be writing this letter, I have tried to make contact by
telephone and have assumed in the absence of a reply that you are still away on
holiday.  I go on holiday tonight and do not return until 6 August. At that
time I will be contactable in my Chester Office-

There is a little urgency in resolving this issue in that Sue Harper has
telephoned me and has advised me that decisions are being made to dispose of the
investigation assets which really needs a review by the Coroner's Officer before
too long. Once you have made your decision as to what you wish to do, perhaps
it would be appropriate, if I could suggest, that we formalise the arrangements
with a letter to my Chief Constable and copied to the Chief Constables of West
Midlands and South Yorkshire. On receipt of that letter if I am still to be
involved then I can grasp the issues on ray return from leave. If not, then I
assume you will take it up with Mr Sharp.

I am sorry that this matter is turning out to be rather complicated but I can
\ssure you it is not of my making,  I also wish to further re-assure youthat 1
will not in any way allow this to become a major problem.


                                ,
Whatever the outcome it will not stop me (and for that matter Doreen) continuing
to enjoy our social relationship not forgetting we are due to get together for
a meal in the not too distant future. As far as I am concerned our relationship
will be without termination.

Best wishes to you, Wendy and the family.
CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY
CHIEF CONSTABLE:           L. Sharp   Q.P.M., LL.B., F.B.I.M.
ALL COMMUNICATIONS SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO “THE CHIEF CONSTABLE"

M y Reference:    CC/IHG
                                                                        POLICE HEADQUARTERS
Your Reference:                                                               CARLETON HALL
                                                                                       PENRITH
                                                                            CUMBRIA CA10 2AL‘
           J M Jones Esq MSc                                             TELEPHONE: 0768 - 64411
           Assistant Chief Constable                                               TELEX: 64340
           Directing Staff                                                       FAX: 0768 66IOt
           Police Staff College
           Bramshill House
           Nr BASINGSTOKE
           Hants
           RG27 O JV


                                                                           18 May 1990




          Many thanks for your recent letters and progress report on the Hillsborough
          investigation.   I have taken the appropriate steps to ensure that the
          Nechell s Team; Police Complaints Authority; Chief Constable, West Midlands
          Police; and the Coroner; are all aware that your position is now that of
          Coroner s Officer for the investigation.    It may be that Chief Constable,
          West Midlands Police, will speak to you about that and he is aware of the
          value which I have placed upon the excellent work you have undertaken over
          the past year or so .

          I am currently dealing with the appraisal by David Phillips so you may now
          leave It for me to progress*

          You may now throw yourself full-time into the course at Bramshill. Should
          the need arise to re-open the inquests, both you and the Coroner will be
          given early notice,

          Many thanks for all your help and advice, I am sure from time to time we
          W1   *3   about the various issues which continue to arise, but for now you
          can be rest assured that the investigation is firmly in my hands and is
          gathering momentum towards a conclusion.




          Chief Constable
      H I L L SB OR OU GH I N Q U I R Y T E A M
                                                             FURNIVAL HOUSE
                                                             Furnival Gate
    WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                  Sheffield SI 4QN
    PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                   Telephone: 0 7 4 2 73 1 5 4 6
    Colmore Circus Queen sw ay                               Fax:        0742 731483
    Birmingham B4 6NQ
    Telephone: 0 2 1 -6 2 6 5000, extn. 202 5                Madico Legal Centra
                                                             Telephone: 074 2 72 6 1 0 5
    NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                            Fax:       07 4 2 72 6 2 4 7
    Fowler Street
    Birmingham B7 5DA                                        Your Ref:
    Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2 extn. 6 912
                                                             Our Ref:
                                                                            L S /S A
                                                             Date:
                                                                            17   J u ly   1990




    Dr Stephan Popper
    H M Coroner
    Medico-Legal Centre
    Watery Street
r •>Sheffield
^     S3 7ET




              t0 lat y°U      that the crime investigation arising out of the
      Hillsborough Disaster is progressing well. In the near future I shall be
      making contact again to arrange to come and see you so that we can discuss one
      or two matters of mutual concern.

      You will know by now that Mervyn Jones has been promoted and he is the new
      ■ePu i.      Constable of Cheshire,
      inch the part.*
                                           I saw him recently and he looks "every
                                                                                                 *
  Although I cannot even start to predict what the Director of Public
   Prosecutions will decide once he has received all of the papers from me, I have
^jrecommen     my thoughts about the inquests.

            I P^°P°3e to employ Detective Superintendent Stanley Beechey as
     Coroner’s tftflceFTreTtETrecommenced inquests, and I shall be pleased to hear
     your reaction to that. Although the investigating and support team in West
                          rer Cea “ WK n**r aie entl of Che criminal investigation, the
             team o£ Coroner*9 support will be available for the inquests.

I S^ ° ^ d ' 7 0 U “ y Wi8h t0 di3Cuse with me the nature and extent of the evidence
' we                  £ eq? lrI! t0 be Call0d at the ^quests, and that is a matter which
  we could talk about when we meet.

     Third      if the DPP decides that there should be no prosecution arising out of
     S                       that moment y°u may care to have one of my team, in
     Sheffield to act as liaison officer. If not full-time then for a number of
     days each week: As the           draw nearer, he would be supplemented b y
     additional officers until the full team i s built up.


                                                              Continued...
                                           2   .

    I am sure there are other matters you would wish to raise so I shall be in
    touch shortly so that we can meet in Sheffield.
                           a




    CHIEF CONSTABLE    T
    CUMSRIA CONSTABULARY
    INVESTIGATING OFFICER




Q
J MERVYN JONES MSc                                           HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM
DEPUTY CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                            NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
CHESHIRE CONSTABULARY                                       Fowler Street
Police Headquarters                                         Birmingham B7 5DA
Chester CHI 2PP                                             Telephone: 021-359 3332
Telephone: 0244 350000 Ext 2091                             Fax: 021-359 6735

                                                            Your Ref:
    PRIVATE AND CONFIDENTIAL
    Dr S L Popper                                           Our Ref:    JMJ/HJ/35

                                                            Date:       9 July 1990




c   I trust you've enjoyed your well deserved holiday in Scotland-       Welcome back!

    I understand from Mick Foster that Hr Sharp and he have now concluded the
    interviews of the relevant parties-  Probably by the time you read this
    letter the transcripts will have been typed and submitted to the Director
    of Pubiic Prosecutions,  I believe from Mick that nothing significant has
    been contributed to alter my previous "best guess"!

    When talking to Mick he said that Mr Sharp had said on more than one
    occasion he intended to "take over" the inquests.  Indeed Mick said that
    Mr Sharp had attempted to see you one Friday afternoon!  Not surprising
    perhaps Mr Sharp has not mentioned anything to me about his proposal-

    I obviously wish to continue to be involved albeit precisely what
    commitment it will entail will have to be debated-  Consequently if you feel
    that Mr Sharp can offer more, you quite rightly should take it; I will not be
    offended.

■however, there are a number of considerations of varying weight;           you
 will have probably have more.


        {1)     ConLinuiLy from the Apr!1/May Inquests.
        (2)     Knowledge of the public inquiry,
        (3)     Perceptions of various parties in that Mr Sharp investigated:
                (a)   Mr Wright                              - Ho Further Action
                (b)   South Yorkshire Police Senior Officers - No Further Action

                Is that likely to taint the objectivity of the Inquests some may
                ask?




     pi pace   ncDt v i n m e nccirc   at   Chester
                                     2


(4)   Mr Sharp and Mr Foster could be material witnesses - should thev
      retain a distance?

(5)   If your jury return a certain verdict it could mean that
      investigation has to be re-opened.  Should both Mr Sharp and Mr
      Foster retain an objectivity to deal with that?

I thought you would like early notice at what was coming at you.   if I
can help in any way, as always you only have to ask.
        y-f-

CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY
CHIEF CONSTABLE:            L. Sharp   Q.P.M., LL.B., F.B.I.M.
ALL COMMUNICATIONS SHOULD BE ADDRESSED TO "THE CHIEF CONSTABLE”

My Reference:     CC/LMG                                                POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                                                              CARLETON HALL
Your Reference:   SLP/PAD                                                             PENRITH
                                                                            CUMBRIA CAtO 2AU
                                                                         TELEPHONE: 0768 - 64411
            Stefan L Popper Esq LLB BMEDScI BM BS MRCGP                            TELEX; 64240
            H.M. Coroner                                                         FAX: 0768 66106
            South Yorkshire (West District)
            Medico -Legal Centre
            Watery Street
            SHEFFIELD
            S3 7ET

                                                                            18 May 1990




            Dear Doctor Popper

            Thank you for your letter of 15 May 1990 which concerns the Hillsborough
            Disaster.

            I saw it as a necessary and important part of my duty as Investigating
            Officer to spend as much time as possible at the inquests and I am
            extremely grateful for the way you received me in Sheffield,

            You are quite correct when you say that I am the Investigating Officer in
            respect   of criminal and disciplinary matters which arise out of the
            disaster. I am under the supervision of the Police Complaints Authority
            and I replaced Mr Geoffrey Dear, who has retired from the Police Service to
            become an, Inspector of Constabulary.      Mr Jones remains as Coronerrs
            Officer   for you in respect of the 95 deaths which arose out of the
            disaster.    He is presently attached to the Police Staff College at
            Bramshill in Hampshire as part of the directing staff there.       He will
            remain available to you for all coronal matters in connection with those 95
            deaths.

            The last act of Geoffrey Dear before his retirement was to send an interim
            report to the Director of Public Prosecutions * Since then I have received
            the Director's advice on that report and I am progressing the necessary
            actions   which arise from that advice.     Very soon we will conduct the
            required interviews but at this stage there is no way that Ican estimate
            how long that process will take, All I can say is that I am fully awar eof
            the need to proceed without delay.      I shall keep you informed as to
            progress from time to time.    When all of the interviews are complete it
            should not take too long to report to the DPP with my recommendations, but
            after that the matter is out of my control as to how long it will take to
            make the decisions necessary in respect of prosecutions.

           I agree with you that we should meet again in the near future and my staff
           will be in touch with your office to find a mutually convenient date.
Insofar as the police report and recommendations are concerned,   X shall
discuss the matter with the PCA and let you know the outcome,

You may care to note that my base for the time being is at Nechell's Green
Police Station in West Midlands, and it is there that I can most easily be
contacted through Detective Chief Superintendent Michael Foster,

Yours sincerely




Chief Constable
