                                                                                           MIR.15


 OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and tim e raised             P-tG               Number

 ~X<Z2^~
 Title                                                                                         V_A=_      2 x > Q < L f- ^ Q
 <■»“
^ jn d u d e source and any document number i f relevant)
                                                                          £ x   czrz^   ^b>7^)
 Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Y es/N o   ___
                                                                                                                       Receiver




                                                                                                                       Indexer
 Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

 No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                  Statement Reader
 Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                       Indexer
 Indexed as indicated
                                                            7TT    VM
 No(s) o f actions raised

 Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                       S IO




                                                                                                                       Indexer
 Further action No(s)


 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master N um ber Form
   HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

              DAVID WILLIAM BIRTLE




                     Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , B S , MRCGP

             (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                       At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                       On

                20th April,   1990.




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                                      INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                                            Page No.



                        Opening Remarks                        1.
                    B
                        DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER Called
                           By THE CORONER                      2.


                        POL. SGT. JOHN KILLOCK Called
                           By THE CORONER                       4.


                        DET. INSP . MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                           By THE CORONER                       5.


                                                                7.
                    D   Closing Remarks




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        20th April, 1990
                               INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF DAVID WILLIAM BIRTLE

                             THE CORONER:   Good morning.     Yes, Mr. Fraser.

                              MR. FRASER:  Sir, in relation to the Inquest relating
                        to David Birtle, I appear as a member of the Steering
                        Committee.  I act directly for David Birtle's natural
                        father but his step-father is in fact present in Court and
                    B   is behind me sir.
                              THE CORONER: Were you here on the first day?       Mo.
                        I will very briefly tell you what we are going to do     so
                        that you can understand, more or less.

                              I am going to read what was said at the opening when
                        I first dealt with David's death.  Then if there are
                    C   any corrections to be made on that we will deal with that
                        later on as we go through the evidence.  Then we are going
                        to listen to the Pathologist. Following that we are going
                        to hear the Officers who prepare the summaries and then
                        we are going to conclude the Inquest at this stage.   I won t
                        actually adjourn it formally today, I am going to do all
                        that right at the end but for practical purposes we are
                        terminating at that point.
                    D
                              You will hear at some point Officers will be giving
                        reference numbers and plan numbers. Don't worry about that.
                        It is necessary to have it for the records so that we can
                        understand it when we next look at it, but it does not have
                        to worry you.  I don't suppose it would, but just in case.

                              This then is the resumed Inquest which was opened
                    E   on the 19th April 1989. On that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin,
                        my Acting Coroner's Officer said:

                              "The body which is the subject of this Inquest
                              has been identified to P.C. 2348 Hanson of the
                              South Yorkshire Police as that of David William
                              Birtle by James William Saunders, his father.
                    F         He was 22 years of age having been born on the
                              6th May 1966 at West Bromwich.   He was a single
                              man and he lived at                           1
                              Stoke-on-Trent, Staffordshire.   He was a Heavy
                              Goods Vehicle driver by occupation.   He died
                              at Hillsborough Football Ground following an
                              incident there on Saturday, 15th April 1989.
                              P.C. Hanson caused the body to be removed to
                    G         the Medico-Legal Centre and there he identified
                              it to Detective Constable Simon Weigold who
                              subsequently identified the same body to
                              Dr. Slater.   It is the family wish that the body
                              should be cremated."

                         And then I adjourned the Inquest at that     point in time.

                    H
                                                  -   1   -



J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                DR. D .N . SLATER



                                The openings were intended to enable the funerals
                          to take place and so that the bodies could be returned to
                          the families as quickly as possible.

                                We sent a form to somebody who we thought would be
                          able to confirm or otherwise whether the facts were right
                          and in fact James William Saunders, Mr. Birtle s father,
                          confirmed all the facts except for the address which in
                    B     fact should have been
                                      Cannock, Staffordshire, but the date of birth
                          6.5.66 and name David William Birtle he conrirmed and the
                          place of birth was West Bromwich he confirmed.  You are
                          happy with that, aren't you?
                                MR. FRASER:   Those facts are correct, sir.
                    C           THE CORONER: The blood alcohols are measured on every
                          one of the cases and the evidence regarding those was given
                          on the first day by Dr. Forrest and in the case of David
                          William Birtle the level was 42 mgsAOO mis.

                                Dr. Slater, before you take the oath we have modified
                          it slightly in order to cover all the cases which we are
                          going to deal with over the next few days so be prepared
                    D     for a slight variation when my Officer swears you.


                                DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER was called and took the oath:

                                "I swear by Almighty God that the evidence I
                                shall give shall be the truth, the whole truth
                                and nothing but the truth in respect of each of
                    E           the bodies on which I performed a post-mortem
                                examination as a result of an incident which
                                occurred at the Hillsborough Football Stadium on
                                the 15th April 1989."


                                                  By THE CORONER:
                    F
                        Q. Dr. Slater, would you be good enough to give us your full
                           names and your qualifications and your present location
                           and job description? - A. My full name is Dr. David Neil
                           Slater. I am a Bachelor of Medical Science; a Doctor of
                           Medicine; Bachelor of Surgery and a Fellow of the Royal
                           College of Pathologists.  I am currently Consultant Histo-
                           pathologist and Cytopathologist at the Rotherham District
                    G      Hospital and Honorary Lecturer at Sheffield University
                           Medical School.
                        Q. Dr. Slater, you I think undertook a post-mortem on David
                           William Birtle.  Is that right? - A. That is correct sir.

                        Q. I have to tell you this because we have not yet had the
                           evidence, but in fact the evidence as I have it is that
                H          in the morning Simon Weigold identified the bodies to a

                                                    -   2   -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                   D R . D .N. SLATER


group of Pathologists of which I think you formed one?
A. That is correct sir.
I notice that in your p.m. report you have tended to refer
to Detective Inspector Tims.  Is it because he happened to
be there at the time as well? - A. Yes sir. In normal
circumstances I always ask:  "Who is Identifying Oificer?
and that morning the Police informed me that D.I. Tims
was the Identifying'Officer to me sir, but he was there
that morning and he was the one who was nominated to me
on that day sir, but I understand another Officer was also
involved to a large group of Pathologists.

Would I be right in saying that in addition to this you
also satisfied yourself by examining the body or the tags
that you were dealing with the person in respect, or whom
we are now talking? - A. That is correct sir.

And did you do that in respect of all the bodies? - A. That
is normal practice.
And I think they nearly all had names or numbers written
on, usually the leg, isn't it? - A. And documented in the
photographic albums sir.
 Dr. Slater, if you could now just tell me what the cause of
 death was in this case? - A. My examination of Mr. Birtle
 showed blueness of the face with pallor around the mouth
 and nose.  In addition there were five scratches on the
 face at the front.
       Internal examination showed suffusion of the lungs
 and in addition there was a fracture to the voice box on
 one side.
       My conclusions were that this was Qlearly an asphy^ial
 death and my findings were indicative of severe intensive blunt
 compression to the lower front part of the iace, neck and
 upper chest.
        My examination showed that Mr. Birtle was apparently
 normally developed with no evidence of any natural disease
 and j_n my opinion he would have had a normal life expectancy.

       My submitted cause of death, sir, was la. traumatic
 asphyxia.
. The fracture of the voice box, that is the hyoid bone,
  isn't it? - A. Yes.
. In fact it is a small bone, relatively speaking, but you
  nevertheless have to compress it to break it. That is
  right, isn't it? - A. It needs force to break it sir, yes.

. And that would indicate that there must have been some
  compression of the neck structures at some point? - A.
  Absolutely sir.
                                                                     DR. D.N. SLATER


                        0. You could not tell whether this was ante or post-mortem?
                           - A. That is a difficult question sir. There was haemorrhage
                           around the area of fracture which indicates it was either
                           ante-mortem or peri-mortem, i.e. virtually at the point
                           of death.  It certainly v/as not post-mortem.

                                    THE CORONER: We heard, you were not here nor was ....
                              I don't know your name.
                    B
                                     MR. RYE:   Rye.
                                    THE CORONER:  Thank you. We heard on the opening
                        Q.
                              day from Professor Usher that in the cases of traumatic
                              asphyxia loss of consciousness usually occurs very very
                              quickly, seconds rather than anything else. Would you go
                              along with that? - A. Absolutely sir, yes.

                        Q. That does not necessarily mean within seconds all is lost
                           but the perception of the disaster? - A. Yes, I agree
                           entirely with that statement sir.

                        Q. And he also said it was difficult depending on size and
                           weight but between four and six minutes hypoxia was usually,
                           irretrievable damage. Would you go along with that as well
                D          or would you wish to modify that in any way? - A. No, I v/ould
                           agree with it entirely sir.

                                     THE CORONER:      Mr. Fraser.
                                     MR. FRASER:       David's family have no questions, thank
                              you.
                                     THE CORONER:       Any questions?   Clear?   Thank you.


                                                POL. SGT. JOHN KILLOCK Called
                                                         Bv THE CORONER:

                              Now you have been sworn. Nearly all the witnesses h a v e already
                         Q.
                              taken the oath.  Dr. Slater this v/as his first presentation
                              so we had to do it. You are quite happy with that, aren t
                              you, but tell us your name? - A. Sergeant John Killock o~
                              the West Midlands Police sir.

                         Q. Thank you. Can you take me through the summary please? -
                            A. At about 1000 hours on Saturday, 15th April 1989, James
                            William Saunders saw his son, David William Birtle, lea/e
                    G       the family home with the intention of travelling to
                            Sheffield. He travelled alone by car to watch the F.A.
                            Cup Semi-Final match to be played at Hillsborough.

                                     Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
                               terracing Police Constable Steven Thompson went into
                               Enclosure 3 and attempted to resuscitate a man that he now
                               knows to be David William Birtle. He found David lying
                H
                                                             - 4 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                    POL. SGT. J. KILLOCK


on the terraces. His attempts at resuscitation were u n - _
successful. He left David on the terraces whilst he assisted
other persons.
      Police Constable Kevin Hanson and Police Constable
Andrew Brookes were at the Spion Kop end of the ground when
they saw David lying on the pitch. They also attempted
resuscitation and were assisted by a nurse who unfortunately
has not been identified.  The Officers carried David into the
gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had been set up.

And in fact they were unsuccessful as well, weren't they?
- A. They also were unsuccessful.

      At 1605 hours Dr. Andrew Byrne examined David in the
temporary mortuary and he certified life extinct.

      At 0035 hours on Sunday, 16th April 1989, Mr. James
William Saunders identified the body of his- son to Police
Constable Hanson at the temporary mortuary.

      Police Constable Hanson later escorted David's body
to the Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the identification
to Detective Constable Weigold.

      On Sunday, 16th April 1989, following identification
by Detective Constable Weigold, Dr. David Slater carried out
an autopsy and submitted a report giving cause of death.

      Evidence is included regarding the analysis of a
blood sample taken from David where the presence of ethanol
was detected. The witnesses, sir, providing continuity for
that blood sample are Detective Constable David Michael Green,
Detective Sergeant John Albert Turner and Detective Sergeant
James Norman Fletcher.. The analysis was carried out by
Dr. Alexander Robert Forrest.
      Found in David's personaleffects was a ticket counterfoil
for the match, but in the circumstances it cannot be
established exactly how or when he entered the stadium.

      That concludes my evidence, sir, but there is visual
evidence.
      THE CORONER:    Any questions Mr. Fraser?

      MR. FRASER:     No thank you sir.

       THE CORONER: Any questions from any of you.
 (No response)  It is clear to you, isn't it. Thank you very
 much indeed.

               PET. INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called
                          By THE CORONER:
       THE WITNESS:    Sir, Michael Layton, Detective Inspector,
                                                               D.I. M. LAYTON


                          West Midlands Police.

                                Sir, an examination of visual material has been made
                          and David has been identified apparently alive in Enclosure
                          number 3.

                                Police Constable Thompson has signed a plan of the
                          enclosure indicating where he believes he treated David.
                    B     That plan has been referenced ST/1.

                                Police Constable Hanson and Police Constable Brookes
                          have signed a plan of the pitch showing where they found
                          David and that plan has been referenced KMH/1.

                                Mrs. Valerie Saunders has viewed visual evidence
                          and she has identified a person that she believes to be her
                          step-son on a photograph and this photograph is in enclosure
                          number 3. The photograph is referenced DB16/29.

                        Q. The photograph shows him in enclosure number 3? - A. That
                           is right sir.  I should perhaps say that the photograph in
                           question is indeed a partial facial photograph and with that
                           proviso in mind Mrs. Saunders believes to the best of her
                    D      knowledge that it does show David.

                        Q. In other words it is another one of these very very difficult
                           - A. It is not absolute but to the best of her belief it is
                           David.

                                 Sir, if I can assist in relation   :o that photograph
                           it is actually timed at 14.45.
                    E
                        Q. 14.45? - A. That is correct sir, yes.

                        Q. So that helps a little bit - assuming for the moment that
                           the identification is right - it helps a little bit pinning
                           him as to when he was on the terraces? - A. Yes sir, indeed.

                                 Sir, perhaps I could refer you to a plan which has
                           been referenced MWJL/69.

                        Q. That is one of yours and we are going to give that our
                           reference of C27? - A. Yes sir, that plan in fact seeks to
                           identify the location on the terraces of the photograph
                           that I have just referred to.

                        Q. I think there is another paragraph which perhaps should
                    G      have been read by the other Officer, number 14. Perhaps
                           you could just deal with it? - A. Yes sir.  I should say
                           it has not been possible to identify the persons who
                           removed David from the terraces or who carried him actually
                           to the Spion Kop end of the ground, the other end of the
                           ground.

                        Q. I said right at the beginning that the evidence for some
                H          people there was an awful lot and for others it was a little

                                                   -   6   -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                          D.I. M. LAYTON


     bit less.   It just depended on what there is.

           Could you help us then. We have already labelled
     MWJL/69? - A. Yes sir. Would you wish sir to refer to
     KMH/1 which is a plan of the pitch?

Q.    Yes, I would.  Can we make that 28 please? Can you just bear
     with me for a moment. We have got another plan which I think
     is ST/1? - A. That is correct sir, yes.   It is a plan sub­
     mitted by P.C. Thompson.
Q. This would show David within the terraces as well, wouldn’t
   it? - A. Enclosure number 3 sir, yes.

Q. The problem is he has done his best but he is not 100-s sure?
   - A. Again he is not absolutely sure, no.

Q. Vie will exhibit it, I think, as 29.
            (The Officer moves to a visual display board)

     A. Sir, if I can refer you to the terrace plan, if we can
     deal first of all with the plan referenced MWJL/69.   The
     location of the photograph that I have referred to is
     actually shown approximately in this position here in
     Enclosure number 3.
Q. Yes. - A. Sir, if we can go to the plan referenced ST/1,
   which is a plan submitted by P.C. Thompson, that actually
   shows again Enclosure number 3 but a position which he
   believes to be David in that location there.

           Then referring to plan KMH/1, if we can go to the
     plan of the pitch.  The location identified there is at
     the Spion Kop end of the ground actually in approximately
     that position there.
Q. And in fact Leppings Lane is up at the top? - A. That is
   right sir, yes.
 Q. Opposite end of the ground? - A. The opposite end of the
    ground sir, yes.

            THE CORONER:   Mr. Fraser.

            MR. FRASER:    I have no questions sir, thank you.

            THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen?   (No response)

            Thank you for being here this morning.  Both to you
      but obviously also to Mr. Saunders, would you say that we are
      very sorry that this tragedy has struck the family.
      Mr. Saunders is not feeling very well today, I believe, and
      I am sorry about that.  I hope he feels better soon.

            That is all the evidence then we are going to take
                                                           THE CORONER


                        in this instance. We are going to rise for a moment or
                        two, as we usually do and then we move on to the next.

                                       (The Inquest into the death of
                                            DAVID WILLIAM BIRTLE
                                    was adjourned to a date to be fixed)

                    B




                    C




                    D




                    E




                    F




                    G




                    H
                                                - 8


J. L. Harpham Ltd
