               ' 3vipplefrQiitjairt.J5tounda on which B e lie f Sought


 Leave will be.sought before the fu-11 court to argue the following
 additional grounds.


 8       Bias.      The Coroner failed to disqualify. _himself as
         Coroner, and to invite another coroner to preside over
         the inquest in accordance with, section 14 (1) of the
         Coroners     Act   1988,      on- t±ie ground that he was so
         closely associated with -an interested party before
         him; namely, Sheffield City Council, that there was a
         real danger of bias in the discharge of his duties
         accbrdiiig to '.the principles in R v. Gough [1993] 2
         W.L.R 883 (HI*}.            The verdicts should bo quashed on
         t h i s g ro u n d alOH®•

 S *1    It appears from section -1 of the Coroners Act 1988,
         and    the   corresponding          section     1    of        the   Coroners
        - (Amendment) Act 1926 Act; which the 1988 Act replaced,
         that     the - coroner was          appointed       by    Sheffield City
         Council, or its precedessdir. By virtue of paragraph
         l. of Schedule i ta the Coroners Act 1988/ the
                                         i

         coroner's;salary 1» the subject of annual agreement
        • between the council and' himself.


^8.2     Sheffield City council appeared before the coroner and
         the jury -as an interested party within the meaning of
         paragraph      20 of the coroners Rules                   1984.       It was
         represented by "Mr Gregory,               Solicitor for Sheffield
         City Council” at the interim inquests in May 1990, and
         by solicitor and leading counsel at the main -f
         (Affidavit of Stefan Popper, paragraph 10, page 9, and
         paragraph 16, page 14).


 8.3     The     conduct .of the        City     Council          was    called   into
         question at the inquest.              It wa£ the body r e s p o n s ib le
                                                      S3T-t?9I3TS0                                  £b6T °T
TO'd                                                    ■•> K.WMOMi BU>S                                      ^"00




              for safety at sports grounds.’ In his summing-up, the
              ..Coroner gave strong encouragement to the jury to find
              that the City Council could not be guilty of, unlawful
              ki lling (22nd Karcli 1991, pagcss 31-37).


       8 ;4   Both       the      Sheffield      City      Council         and    the     South
              Yorkshire Police Authority,                   to which, the Sheffield
              City Council made a precept from its community taxes,
              had, a diirect financial interest in establishing- that
              deaths were followed very soon after the fatal crush.
              A writ-was •issued by the joint administrators of the
              estate of two victims ,of the Hillsborough disaster on
               4th May 1990, in respect of injuries caused prior to
               death;         judgment was given by Hidden «T on 31st July
               1990, holding that no damages. are recoverable for pain
               and fear when unconsciousness and death follow shortly
               after the onset of such" .pain and fear.     fHicks, v.
               Chief Constable of the south Yorkshire Police [1992]
              ;i   a :;e ;r   . 690 (c a )).


       8 .5    The     Council,        and.1 the    South     Yorkshire          Pol tea,    had
               therefore          a- potential- financial              interest         in   the-
               decision          of    the   Coroner,      made      on    or     about      19th
               November 1990, that, evidence relating to events after
               3.15pm was not to be admitted, even, where there was
               evidence that victims were alive after that time and
               might have suffered prolonged, pain before death.                             (See
               Coroner's affidavit, paragraph 17, page 15).


       8. 6    The appearance of bias is supported by the fact that
               the Coroner's solicitor in the present applications is
               Sarah. Fimlott, employed by tha Sheffield City Council,
               who-submits an affidavit asserting that it is against
               the     public         interest     to hold "fresh inquests.                   The
               identity of interest betweenv the Coroner and                                   an
               ijrfc«i:'fteifcect yctiLy lu Uuus» Openly acicnowiedgedv


          7    The Applicants will seek to rely upon grounds 1 to. 6
               to     demonstrate         the    appearance       of      bias    wi t h i n 'the
principles in            Go\igh   [1953] 2   W .L.R. 683 (HE.).



Unlawful -killing-  The Coroner's directions to the
jury upon the elements o f the offence of manslaughter
were wrong,     .He directed them in accordance with'the
-judgment of Watkins LJ in R v. West London coroner .- ex
narteLQrav and. others £1987] 2 W.L.R 1020 by directing .
them • on • •thfe:   application       of     the    concept      of
recklessness. "'This is a misdirection; the offence of
involuntary mahfilaughter is established if there is
proof of a grossly negligent’act or omission causing
death; R v.-Andrews T19371 &.C; )R v. Bateman C192S) 19
CAR 8*    This {principle had been re-affimed by the
.Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) in R v. Holloway;
R ~y.l MomajCQ; R^v_._ Brent ice and Sullivan (Unrapor-fced)
 20th May 1$93.      ■


 In particular,; the Coroner ought to have directed’the
 jury to apply 'the tests Set out at page 10 of the
 transcript of that judgment?1 any of four states, of
 mind in on® or more individual' might lead a ’jury to
 the binding of vgiross negligence;


      ^ OQ     Indifference to an obvious risk of '
      injury to-health;


      (b) Actua-l foresight of the risk coupled
      with the determination'nevertheless to run
      it; ,/


      (c) Ah appreciation of the risk coupled with
      an intention to avoid it but also coupled
      with such a high degree, of negligence in the
      attempted      avoidance as the         jury consider
      justify conviction;


      (d) Inattention or failure to advert to a
      serious     risk      which    goes     beyond '"mare
          inadvertence11 in respect of an obvious and
          important matter which- the defendant's duty
                                               •:   i

          demanded he should.address."




                                        R. 2*.lun Jonos §C




                                         Edward Fitzgerald ■


26til October 1993.
                                                                   1st November 1993




J TOOQUgnO H


1.1   Leave was .granted' by Macphersoa J on 6& April 1993 txj move, out of time,
       for Judicial lla^iew.. Agpliq^oiis sue. mads to quash Inqmsitk>D- and verdict
       of accidental deash, recorded by a cetcrosr’s joiy at Sheffield oa 28th March
       1991,     zecocded opcti six persons, relatives of fee Applicants* They died, •
       together with. 89, ether persons; fa the disaster at Hillsborough stadium,- the
       ground o f Sheffield Wedasscky t Football. Club, on 15th Apol 1959.
       Application 1$ mad«, ferfcer, fer tha bolding of fresh, iaqnssts and for such
      . .other deelaiatoFf relief as may be appropriate.




2     All the Applicants, and their deceased relatives, are iroiri'IjaverpooL They
       arc, m alphabetical order:


               Sajadra Stringer and Donna OwiSe, who are ibe laotoer aa4
               sister ofiPael Carlile, who4ie4 at the aae of 19;

               John and Theresa Glover, who are me paxaaif of liae Glover,
       'Leslie and Doreen Jones, who are the parents of Richard Jones,
       who died at the age of 25;                          •

       Joan Sinclair, who is the sister of Michael Killy, who died it
       the age of 3S;             .

       Peter and Joan Tootle, who are the parents of Peter Tootle,
       who died at.the age of 21;:

       James       Anna Williams, who are the parents of Kevin
       "Williams, who died at the age of 15.            ' . •


The Attorney-General declined in August 1992 (Applicants’ bundle p 455) to
give his authority for an application under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988
("the Act”).




The Coroner's inquests into the death, of all 95 -victims were opened formally
by Her Majesty’s Coroner for South Yorkshire (West District) on 18th April
1989 and adjourned. On 17th April 1989, the'Secretary of State for the Home
Department had orderd an enquiry into the disaster, conducted by Lord Justice
Taylor, with the help of two assessors. His interim report was presented to
Padiament in August 1989.       :


Qe l§th April 1990 a jury was empanelled in Sheffield to hear the adjourned
inquests. By that time the Coroner knew that there were live and important
issues as to the conduct of the police and emergency services. The interim
report of Taylor U (exhibit AP/1 to the affidavit of Albert I^ge, on behalf of
a Respondent) had made the following findings;


       (A)     There had been serious fanjt on the part of
               officers of the Sooth Yorkshire Police, "although
               there were others causes" (See Chapter IS, page
                       49, paragraph 273) ;


              B)       The emergency services (who the report said
                       were not to blame) should have been, called
                       earlier than they were (although it was
                       "improbable" that lives would have been saved
                   ■ v bM they been called earlier) (Report, page 53,
                       paragraph 310).


3.3   The Coroner also knew that, in addition to possible fcrimiqal proceedings,
      there were court proceedings on foot against (lie South Yorkshire Police for
      negligence. Section 4 of the exhibit SLP/1 to the Coroner’s affidavit contains
      transcripts of meetings with interested parties on 26th February and 6th March
      1990, at which the inter-relation of the civil proceedings and the inquest was
      discussed-




3.4   Summaries of the facts in relation to all 6 Applicants, and the other victims,
      were presented, between 18th April and 4th May 1990. These proceedings
      are referred to as the "interim inquests".


3.5   In September 1990, it was announced that tie Director of Public Prosecutions
      would not bring criminal proceedings in respect of the disaster.


                                     The Main Inquest


3-6   The same jury heard the foil inquest into the deaths of all victims between
      19th November 1990 and 28th March 1991, when the majority verdicts of
      ’'accidental death" were recorded, with findings that the deceased had died of
      multiple crush injuries, in respect of all the deceased.



                                              1
The facts are liirffrer surornarised in |he Memorial subinittsd .to.the Attorney*
General, and, in relation to the individual cases, m tlie appendices to the
Memorials;


                               I^gsUyssm eni        .    ;


Judicial Review - The Attorney-GeneraTs powers


The refusal of the Attomey-Geiaeral not to grant his fiat under section 13 of
the Act does not prevent the court from granting relief by way of Judicial
Review. The common law remedy is independent of statutory remedies. (Is
Rc_R3pier ^Deceased) [19S8). QB 26. In both R y,
parte Bticldey (Unreported) llfh November 1992 and R v..Poplar Coroner,
ex parte Thomas [1992] 3 V.L.R 435, the Divisional Court granled relief,
despite the.refosal of a fiat of the Attorney-General. Hie High Court has a
greater range of powers at cpmmon law than under section 13 of die Act; £
v. Inner South Xondnrt Coroner, ex parte Kendall [1988] 1 W I,H 1186,
118SA. It has the power to Order a fresh inquest (R v. West London Coroner.
ex parte. Grav [198811 Q.B. 467), -aod, in addition, the power to strike down
the verdict, without necessarily ordering a fresh inquest fR v. St, Pancras
CsiOBer, fix pacte Higgles (Unreported) €0/1285/87).


Issafiicignoy of 5pqsity.» Oramds 1 ilq4 > , The Inm m Ingug£&


When the Coroner empanelled lusjury on 18th April 1990, at a time when tbs
Director of Public Prosecutions was still considering whether to institute
criminal proceedings, he announced that he would hold a series of interim
inquests (sometimes known in the proceedings as "mini-inquests"), the scope
of wMch would be confined to investigating the question of "who" the
deceased was, in each case, and "when and where” he met Ms death.


The question "how" would be deferred until after the conclusion of the
criiniiial investigation. Ho coaabroTcisial, critical or hostile fjuestioslsg.'would'
be e m itte d at the infertm fcwpests.




The questions "who", "when*, ’'where*' and "how*, ("the statutory questions")
fall to be answered by ■virtue, of section 11 (5) (b) of the A ct The Coroner’s
decision to postpone the substance of the inquest was no doubt m^de in the
light of Rule 26, 27 or 2$ of the Coroners Rules 1984, which remain in force
after the passing of the 1988. Act by virtue of the Interpretation Act 1973.
The questions of "who” "when* ami "wjhefe'' would fall to be answered in the
light of "summaries" read oiit by :presenting oSlcers of the West Midlands
police; by the evidence of police officer who had seen video-tape evidence;
and-by the evidence of pathologists. Tbs Coroner admitted that bis decision
so to proceed was in breach of Rule 37 of the Coroners Rules, which lays
down the procedure to be followed before the admission into evidence of ,
documentary, as opposed to oral, evidence. The Coroner justified this unusual
course on the ground of practicality.



                             Undisclosed Evidence


£a allr.cases, the. evidence .given ..or summarised' at -the ’interim, inquests
suggested that the deceased had sustained fetal crush injuries, followed by
rapid unconsciousness and death. .However, in four eases, there is other
evidence, not given or summarised,, in the possession of the coroner or Ms
officers (from die West Midlands Police Force), that the deceased in question
was alive for a considerable time after sustaining injuries in the crush. It was
not possible for this evidence to be adduced at the main incpest because the
Coroner declined to hear evidence as to events after 3.15 pm.


Paul CarKle The evidence relating to Paul Carlile;is sumarised in the
                                                      3 P T ^ 9 S:cTS3 ';.':;"                    . 5c




 memorial and the Appendix to the memorial, (Applicants' bundle p 49 ff) The
; foRowpjg evidcBce was Bot disclosed;.                                                       •


 (a) toH ollinghsrst, m off-dtdy nurse, had said in his statement that Paul
 CarMe had been trying to climb Tiphis legs;'


 (b) that HoBInglirast had beea cold to abandon his attempts to resuscitate him;


 (b) that Paul CadJle, who was not taken to hospital, was £he first casually to
 be taken fi&m the pea;
                                         •,       >                                       •



       "    S'              ■    -   V    .           _   .-i .   s ■            i    .



 Ian. Glover. Although the remarks of Joseph Glover that he was told “by a
 doctor in the temporary mortaaiy timt a pulse was detected in Ian Glover were
 reported in the interim inquest, Joseph. Glover was not called, althongh he
           . •                                •                                      -i


 could have given important evidence in relation to the statutory questions. (See
 Memorial Appendix; Applicants’ "bundle pp 92-116)). He carried his brother
 with others across the pitch; his statement to this effect was changed to "may
 have camed”.


Jropoitant evidence was not disclosed, and has become know to the family
 only in Sepembcr 1593 after the Coroner has supplied his contromfy charts.
 (Respondent’s btmdle p 1149 fO The chart discloses that a P.C Fojut, who was
not called at the inquest, made a statement saying that he assisted in carrying
 Ian Glover into the temporary mortnary and "I thoughy he was still alive at
 that stage as he was, vormtMg as we cassied h is i\


 This evidence was known at the time of the interim inquest to the police and
 the coroner ; it was highly relevant to the statutory questions. Ian Glover’s
 father has sworn an affidavit in October. 1993, indicating that'he had never
 been told of this. (Applicants'bundle page 515)


                            AppcmuA, Applicants’ bundle, pages 177-209) Mr
        Kelly's case was notable because the signs of asphpda upon his body were
        mild. The evidence summarised referred to attempts by a P.C Maugham to
        resuscitate -Mr Kelly before lie was left with an St John' ambulanceman.
       . However, atthenmuinquest, P.CMaughaingave ^ddei^lhU M tK& lly,was
        still breathing when he was handed over, significantly alter fee 3.15 time
        imposed by the Coroner, a matter omitted at the interim inquest.                    P.C
        Maugham has spoken to the Applicant Joan Sinclair and told her that shortly
        after leaving .Mr Kelly, conditions were chaotic and "nobody knew what they
       .were doing". The failure to adduce this evidence at the interim mquest,
        before the cut-off time was, imposed, has prevented an answering of .tbs
         statutory questions in Michael Kelly’s case.


.5*2    Kevin ’Williams. (Applicants’ bundle, pages 224-317) The evidence is this
        case is .complicated. The two interim inquests in this case had the effect of
        disparaging and dismissing the evidence of P.C Bruder, a Merseyside Police
         Officer, and WPG Martin, a spccial constable from the South Yorkshire
        Police. Neither of these witnesses-,was ever called; yet evidence is,available
        from statements and the evidence of Mrs Williams that both of them were
        induced to change fheir evidence in favour of the sudden death theory. Justice
        demanded that they be called. The effect of presenting summaries bias,
        therefore Md the effect of suppressing answers to the statutory questions in the
        case of Kevin Williams.             -


5.10    These omissions prove the utier inadequacy of the summarising procedure, and
        demonstrate not simply procedural inadequacies, but a systematic fetlnre to
        address the statutory questions.        They indicate an apparent desire m the
        Coroner to establish rapid death, a matter further developed under "Bias’*,
  '*                       '


        below.


5.11    The fact that evidence was available, but not called, to demonstrate that the
        above four died some time after the crush urpiriss, in circumstances not
        explained, or required to be justified, has increased the sense of injustice and


         'l '■ •
                   '
                   «   ‘       t                ‘'
                                                     2
                                                     '                       >        ■ I’ . *   '• '
                                                                                                        '
• •                t" '               ' '            : • '           :'C'"       ; V -r:'
         anguish felt by. the other Applicants, the parents of Richard Jones'and Peter
       ' Tootle, whose summaries (Applicants’ bundle pages 116 and 20) gave similar
         accounts of early death. They had no opportunity to investigate matters which
         might have shown that their sons died later, in different circumstances, than
         the hearsay sranmaxies indicated, matters which will remain unknown to them
         in      absence of a proper faignest


5.12     Although it is suggested below, under "Bias”, that the ‘decision tahen by the
         Coroner has had, or may have bad, favourable financial consequences for the
         South Yorkshire authorities, it is emphasised (hat nooe of the Applicants in the
         present cases has been moved by a desire for financial compensation. Their
      .. desire has.been to satisfy the b^ichnman need to discover die pircnmstances
         of the last.momenls of their relatives* lives, a function the Coroner’s inquest
         is designed to discharge.


6                                               cut-off pQint-


6.1      The effect of imposing this limitation at the main inquest was to prevent any
         further enqofry into the individual czrramstances of the 95 deaths; whereas the
         Coroner had assured the families at the time of the interim inquests that the
         question "how" would he dealt with later. The inquest thsreafer became singly
         a general enquiry into the circumstances of the disaster,


6*2      Since none of the facts after 3.15 pm might be investigated, the families were'
         denied the opportunity to investigate the matters which had, as they now
        inow; been withheld from them io the summarising procedure. In particular*
         the Coroner irrationally failed to comply with the reasonable requests for the
        calling'of the evidence requested by Mr and Mrs Jones and Mr and Mrs
         Glover. (See letters Applicants' bundle.pages 344)*


63      It   follows that the statutory question ’'how* was never properly Considered, in
        the cases of the six Applicants and the other 95 victnns. Fo^example, the
c o ' d       ■■■                                                                               b   z   -’
                                                                                                         U - - '   £ s s




                     name of Peter Tootle was not mentioned throughout the main invest until Ms
                     name was read out in a formal list by the Coroner at the end of the summing-
                     up. It is submitted that In reality there has been no proper inquest into any' of
                     tie six deaths in this case; only a flawed hearsay summary and a general, but
                     seriously incomplete, enqoiry into the disaster.


          7         Insufffciencyjof Enquiry - Failure to cell relevant witnesses.


          7.1       The following witnesses should have been called to describe the general
                     circumstances of the incident, in addition to the numerous South Yorkshire
                     police who gave general descriptions. Phillips (Applicants1bundle page 317)
                     , Ashton (page 329), Eccleston (337), P.C Bmder, WPG Martin, Joseph.
                     fflover (about rplp.vant gyp.trtc after 3.15pBJ)7 P,C FojuL Their eVldSBCS WES
                     KBportant to all the. statutory questions, and, in each case, was controversial,
                     and therefore relevant, in that it contained express or implied criticisms of the
                     South Yorkshire authorities,      :                              ;r    ,   .. -


          7.2       There was no sufficient investigation into the failure to implement the Major
                     Disaster Plan promptly, the failure to evacuate casualties promptly, the failure
                    to call ambulances promptly, the M ure to request help from the Fire Brigade
                    "before 3.13pm, and the M ure to broadcast for the help of doctors and nnrses
                    hefbre 3.29pm, when, according to the Taylor report, "it was too late".
                                                      i




          7.3       As a matter of first principle, it is wrong to impose a rigid test In any judicial
                    proceedings as to the relevance of evidence. Where 95 separate deaths were
                    under investigation, lie only test, for each potential witness,"should have been,
                     "Does this witness assist in resolving the statutory questions?'
          *                                                        '



      :8            TheJklMrg to allow the iurv to answer the question "How?".


          8.1       Submission.    Hie Coroner was wrong to leave only the^conclusions of

      . ■             >
                      ' . ■             ■   ■               2
unlay,fill Mlling, accidental death, and an open verdict to the jury. .He should,
.have permitted or required a narrative verdict in the circumstances of the case.
He should have enabled the jury to record m the conclusion to their verdict
any findings as to the preventability of the deaths, that Is, airy findings of
failure by act of omission which contributed causally to the deaths. The
Bbqiiiry of Taylor U had found that there, was more than one cause (See
paragraph 33., above); a reasonable conclusion which ought to have been left
to the jury.;    ' ■'                                     '


Ahemadvely, he ought to have left the verdict of "lack of care" or "accidental
death aggravated by lack of care*,(or, better, "accidental death attended by
lack of care”) to the jnjy.


To direct the jury that the only answers to the statutory questions were
"unlawful lollingn, "accidental death” and ’open verdict” was a failure to
comply with the. scheme of the Coroners Act 1988, a scheme winch, in respect
of the issues involved in these applications, has remained essentially unaltered
since 1SS7.


In particular, the verdict of "accidental death" in the circumstances of the
case, given the Corona's directions shout it, rendered the entire inquest empty
and meaningless. It covered the entire spectrum of causation and contributory
causation from simple accident to widespread negligence falling short, in any
one case, of manslaughter. (See suammg-np, section 6 of exhibit SUP/1 to the
coroner1S-affidavit, Day 15, page 62). It cannot be discovered whether the jury
found that no-one was to blame, whether one individual v^Ss a t fault, or
Whether a variety of persons and institulions were ai fault. Although the
modem Coroners’ Roles dictate that no-one may formally be held civilly or
criminally liable fig jj Tnawer of form m the Inquisition, it is clear from the
schedule to the Coroners Act 1887 that the question "how" (which remains the
same in the 1988 Act) may be answered by a concise narrative. Primary and
contributory causes may be given.
                                                  ■•••. v:-.c!<3l'rS£Z%£8'                       T-c   2bbf~dV
'T l'd                           /




         .8.3   ‘ Sebdpa 3 (2) o f the Coroners’Act 1887 contained essential!? the same test as -
                 section 11 (5) of the 198S Act; the'statutory questions are identical; Section
                 18 of the 1887 Act provided for the use of forms as set’out in flic Schedules
                 to the Act, or snch other forms as the Lord Chancellor might prescribe, and
                 *ths statements therein may be toade in concise and ordinary language", By
                viijue of section 37, the forms , <

                 .        f ..   .   '        ■           t            *     •   .   .       •


                        " ifiay bft tiscd in all matters to wMch they apply»and when so
                        used, shall be sufficient ia law."


                 The Second Schedule to that Ac* prescribes an acceptable form of Inquisition
                 which, afer the foxmal part, reads,


                 "Here set out the aramstcmcss of the death asfor example:"


         8.4     There then follows suggestions for, short narrative findings, many but not aB
                 of which axe concerned with the attribution of fault..


         8.5    The 1887 Act provided that aU inquests be held by a Coroner and jury; section
                4 (5) contemplated that only a majority might agree on the verdict.


         8.6    The Coroners Rules 1916, replacing the terms of the Second Schedule adopt
                a very similar approach. They were amended so as;to provided for the
                inchttion of the offence of infanticide by the Coroners Inquisition Order 1923
                SX No 1365,


         8.7    The Coroners (Amendmenf) Act 1926 provided* inter alia, for the holding of
                inquests in certain cases without a.jury. The Coroners Rules 1927 SJ. No ‘
                344 provided pennissively for the use ofiiujirisitions in the saine form (Rifle
                6i Schedule, Paragraph 3) as before.                                     :

                                                              IX
                                         '>                   ;K;
3.8     The Coroners Rules 1953 S,I 205 embodied a change of approach* -Rules.26
        and 27 prevented the jury frora going beyond their statutory function to
        express opmions. Rule 33. provided that


                "co verdict shall be framed in such a way asj to appear to
           '    determine any question of civil liability."


        By Rule 42, •


                "The forms set out in the Third Schedule hereto, with such
               modifications as circumsanees may require, may beusedfor the
               purposes for which they are expressed to be applicable."


        The notes to that schedule suggest a tighter form of answering the question
        ’’How". It is submitted that this schedule is the origin of the modern practice
        of limiting fmdsngstoone of the suggested general descriptions; an advantage
        for statistical purposes.


8.9     The Coroners Rules 1956 S J. 1691 provided for the Coroners Court to take
        cognisance of the new crime of causing death by dangerous driving.


8.10    Hie Coroners Rules 1984 preserved the scheme of the 1953 Roles. An
        important amnendrnent is made by Rule 42, which prohibits the Coroners
        Court from1framing a verdict is snch a way as to appear to determine any
        question of "criminal liability on the part of a name person"; (Section 56 of
        the Criminal Law Act 1977 had abolished the doty and power of a coroner's
        court to commit for trial for any offence of homicide.) Rale*60 and the form
        of inquisition 4 are substantially the same as Rule 42 and the prescribed form
        of the 1953 Rules.


E .ll   It. is submitted therefore that Parliament, by preserving the 18S7 statutory
        questions in the 1988 Act, preserves the duty of the coroners court to answer
       the question "how” in any way that Is appropriate in a given case. - Normally,
       it may be sufficient to record a verdict of "suicide” Of "misadventure0; in-'
       other cases, a narrative may be required, recording, if necessary, primary and
       contributory causes in short, ordinary sentences.


8*12   Rule 42 cannot, and does cot purport to, limit the words of the Act; it is
       concerned with form alone. It prohibits the use of the words '’manslaughter by
       Jottn Smith" and "the death, was caused by the actionable ne|$gence . of the
       South Yorkshire Police". A conclusion that death was caused by "Unlawfully
       killed by the grossly negligent opening of the outer gates by the South
       Yorkshire police, causing a fatal crash to build up; a contributory cause was
       the failure of the emergency services to be summoned promptly to the
       deceased XY after he was injured by the crush. * is within the Act, and might-
       if the facts warrant it, be the only way in which the question “how8 might
       properly be answered. A less inculpatory verdict might be, "Accidental death,
       resulting from the negligent decision by officers of the South Yorkshire Police
       to open .... [as above]*                                 .


                                  He-sm:

S.12   E X .SBgg^..Cor<m§r. ex parte Campbell [1982] 1 Q.B. 661. Wa&ins LJheld,
       obiter, that "lack of care by another or others" did not contravene Rule 33 of
       the 1953 Rules (now Role 42).                             ’


              "Such conflict as may in any given circumstances, appear to
              arise between fflle 33 and tins' duty to enquire "how'* must be
  4           resolved in Savour of the statutory duty to inquire whatev* -r the
              consequences of this may be” ( p 672E-F)


8.13   R v-        to d o n r.Qrsa^ .gx part e j ^ ; [1988] 1 Q.B. 467        The jury
       foreman announced the conclusion as "unlawfully JdVsd stir1- ; 11:! to the
       degree after he was overpowered." However, the c>                  j o n ly
rimlawftilly. killed ", It was held that the M l words should have been recorded,.
and that there was no confict between Role 42 and the statutory questions, (per1
Waddas LI, applying ex parte Campbell, at page 479).



R v. S.Qgfevar1c Coroner^_ex_parte Hfcks 11987} 1 WX.R, 1624,                  The
Divisional Court reviewed the history of the 1S87 Act and regulations. It field
that there was no confict between Rule 42 and the stawbry enquiry; "lack of
care" might therefore t?e an appropriate verdict. Croom-Johnson LJ eontimied,
at page 1633F;


       ‘’The history of the verdict "lack of care" indicates that it is
       appropriate only to the physical condition of the deceased of
       causing death and should not. be.used to indicate a breach of
       dnty by some other person"


Lack of care "should generally be regarded as the obverse of self-neglect, "A
verdict of "accident, aggravated by lade of care is illogical".


        "The word Tbow" is wide and it is not possible to foresee every
       way; in which someone may meet his death. Nevertheless
       common sense dictates that if the death is caused by accideni it
       is unlikely in the extreme that it will also have beemcaiised by
       lack of care. In those cases where it is thought to be a possible   '
       veidict or part of a verdict, the jury should recdvT a very
       caieftil direction as to its meaadng amd the rvxd for a dear
       causal connection between the feck of care and the death."
       (1634 G-B)


R.v- PortsmpgtkToroner. cx parte Anderson. The Divisional Court followed
the approach of ax paiftjCampbefl asd ex p&fte             Per Mann U , page
1643A .
i-dv ■ ■ ■■'                                 -T'.-       '..zsii’szc im   ■ r   ;c                £6st--ot-oc'




                 " I <jo not understand how.death can be aggravated by.lack of
                car©, but I do understand low a cause of death can be
                aggravated and I proceed on the basis that this is what the
                 applicant intended by bis application. .             I add that J do not
                 decide that aggravation by lack of care is never appropriate in
                 a case of accidental death, but like Croam-Johnson 0 ,;lf in d :
                 feat such a case is nniikely in the extreme."



8.15      R v. Inner Sooth Coroner. ex paite.Ksndall [1988] 1 W.L.R. 1186. Simon
          Brown J emphasised at page 119QD-F that the conclusions in the Roles were
          only suggestions winch “may" be used. Verdicts of "abuse of volatile
          substances", "accidental death resulting from tbs inhalation of Uppex
          thinners", or "solvent abase; inhalation of Tippex thinnere" were lawful.


.8.16                                        for
          of State <OT-gjfeJHnmfi-P eparln^          ',CDC) (Unreported) 31st M y 1590.
          Hntchison J, wife whom Watkins-LJ agreed* considered that the wonPhow",


                 "must mean "by what means", rather than embodying some
                 vague concept as "in what broad circumstances.** (Page 16E-

               ■ F*>'          .                                           :             •

          He cited                 and                              corcludjngshat,


  ’"*•           "if on the particular facts lie coroner takes the view that there
                 is evidence which could justify a jury in concluding that lack of
                 care aggravated the cause of death, then it would, in my
                 j udgment, be appropriate to leave such a verdict."

                                         '           '                     "      *i         ■■
          Watkins 14 conairred-                                                        • .
8.17 , R v.                                                    (PQ (Urcrepoitcd) 20t3i
         November 1992. The Divisional Court, in an application for Jndicial Review;
         quashed a verdict aid ordered a ftesh ihquesi where a schizophrenic had died
        in Broadmoor after receiving'sedative injections, where the Coroner refused
        to leave, “lack of care" to the jury. Citing ex parte Hicks and Whittmgton.
        Laws J, with whom WatJdns U agreed, held (1) that lack of care, whether
        free-stacding ot adjectival, was. wholly different from a finding of civil
        negligence, (2) that it was concerned with circumstances mash narrower than
        tiiose in a trial of civil liability for negligcoce, and (3) that such a verdict
        , arises only where there was lack of care in the events or‘circnmstances
         immediately sorroimding thft death. There must be a close causal connection.,


8. IS    R v. Poplar ■Coroner, ex parte Thomas 11993] 2 W.L.R, 547 (CA), This was
        an appeal from the grant of Jndidal Review, ordering the coroner to hold an
            1■
        inquest. On the facts it was held, on appeal, that the coroner was justified in
        holding that there was no need p hold an inquest. In the Divisional Court
         Tndors Evans J had cited ([1992] 3 W.L.R 485, 492-3) with approval, and
        followed, the dicta of Watkins U in ex parrs Campbell, at 8.12, above*
         emphasising that a verdict of Tack of care" can be free-standing.


        la the Court of Appeal, Dillon U said,, after an analysis of g3Lpart£.Htcfcs;


                "Other verdicts could easily be devised, if it were appropriate
                to hold an inquest, since forms of inquisition set out ia form 22
                in Schedule 4 to the Coroners Rules 1984 (S i, 1984 No 552)
                are merely suggestions and not mandatory, * (at 553G)


        FarqnhHrsoa L J . agreed.


        Simon Brown.LJ. spoke of contributory.causes:


                "As in litigation, why should lie not sometimes find a^teath to
           ;       be the result of two causes,; cither one of which could serve to
           -       m aia it-imriatnraL1* Cut 554f5), ax$                    ;           ,


               .. " merely because the coroner’s inquest may nowadays be
                   thought lacking any veryclearor cogent role is no sufficient
                   reason for adapting too nairowanapproach to section 8*
'•         ■               - r                   :.    ,              ■     ‘   .   •            "




         He proceeded to refer to his own words in ex parte Kendall.
                                             *,■'     ■'              1

8.19 , ConchistoEL The Coroner ought to have.allowed the jury to reflect their findings in
         a concise jHna.ti.ve. Alternatively, although it is acknowledged that there are logical
         difficulties in the Strict words "lack of care* or ’'accidental death aggravated by lack
         of care", these could have been avoided by some such formula as 'accidental death
         attended by lack of care *, provided that tfiat lack of care had a causal link with the
         deaths.


8-20     It is no answer to these arguments to contend that the lawyers appearing at the inquest
         put forward no contrary argnmeE&i


                   "la an inquest it should not be forgotten that there are no parties, there is no
           .       indictment, there is no defence, there is no trial, simply an attempt to establish
                   lacts. It is an inqnisitorial process, a process of investigaQon'’ Per Lane C3
                   in R v. Sontli London Coroner, ex pane Thompson. Unseported, July 1982,
                   cited in ex parte Gray [1988} Q.B 467, 473E0


9        IJn lsw M Jg lte        .


     *               -                       ,




         The Coroner’s directions, to thb jwy upon the elements of the offence of.
         manslaughter were wrong. He directed them, in accordance with risejudgment
         of Watkins LJ in R v. West LondonCononer. ex parte Gray and others f19881
         1 Q.B. 467;by directing them on the application of the concept- of                     -j
         recklessness. (Sec, for example, Exhibit SUP/1. Section 6, Day 75, 21st
March, pages 45-4S). This .is a misdirection; the offence of involuntary
manslaughter is .established if .there is proof of a grossly negligent act or
omission causing death; S J ^ n d r e g s £1937}.A-C; S_v_Eai6fflin (1925) 19
CAR S. Thkprinciple had beeniS'afBmed by the Court of Appeal (Crhnioal
Division) in R v. Holloway: RjiA jp g g fa ;                      isiKji Salim a
(Unreported) 20th May 1993.


InpaiticulAiythe Cdroner ought to have directed the jury to apply the tests set
out at page 10 of the tran sact of tlM judgment any of four states of mind
in on? or more individual might lead a jury to the finding-of gross negligence;


       ■ ■ (a) Indifference to an obvious, risk of injury to health;


       (b) Actual foresight of the risk coupled with the determination
     , nevertheless -to ran it;


       (c) Ad appreciation of the risk conpled with aa intention to
       avoid it lint also coupled with such a high degree of negligence
     ; in. the attempted avoidance as the jury consider justify
       collection;


       (d) Inattention or fidluxe to advert a serious risk winch goes
       beyond "mere inadvertence" in respect of an obvious and
       important matter which the defendant's duty demanded he
    • should address."


The third of these states of mind was particularly worthy of close
consideration i% the present case.
The Coroner directed the jury on the question of opening the gates. SLP/1 to
the Coroner's affidavit, Section 6, Day 77, 25th March, pages 24-25). He
directed them that the decision to opn the gates was taken in the "pretty
-• ’ ■ " - j       ii                  or tfin ■fTTTTiCfHw! wtiwrfc A CTUSh had
    'io/d    ■                ■
                                                             '• c     -- '         '         ' i£:£T-' £&S»v:'
                                                                                                             :
                                                                                                           "£■ '"'bS'-.
                                                                                                                        ■,
2$r1i> '91   15; 50        00712424270..        ”      *Y Ra'VMOND'" BIDS "'                                 Si003 ■




                 built-up. He continued (page 25, E£*C),


                         wWe know that 95. people died on fee terraces aad we know
                        also that not a single person died outside the turnstile areas. It
                        is very easy to say, well, there yon are, that must have been a
                        wrong decision because nobody died there and 95 died inside,
                        but you cannot do that because you do not actually know what
                        would have happened if fee gates bad not been opened.......AH
                                                         :      ;                      >


                        the evidence wouJd seem - not all but virtually all the evidence
                        would seem to point to that direction, feat the decision Id open
                        the gates was a reasonable one ia the circumstances.'’


     93          The jury may have disagreed, preferring, as a matter of fact, the interpretation
                 Ofthe Taylor Enquiry (AS/1, chapter 10, chapter 11 ("The blunder oa opening
                 the gates"), and. chapter 16. Had the,jury reached these factual conclusions,
                 state- of mind (c) in 9.1, above, which the Ex parte Grav approach docs not
                 include, should have been considered in relation to this central event in the
                 HiBsboitragft disaster.


     10.     Bias. The Coroner failed to disqualify himself as Coroner* and to invite
                 another coroner to preside over the inquest in accordance with section 14 (1)
             Of the Coroners Act 1988, on the ground feat he was so closely associated
             witfa an interested party before bim, namely, Sheffield City Council, that there
             was a real danger of bias in the discharge of his duties according to die
             principles in R v. ,Gough [1993] 2 W.L.R 883 (HL), The -verdicts should be
      ;      quashed oa this ground alone.


     10.1    It appears from section 1 of the Coroners Act 1988, and the corresponding
             section 1 of the Coroners (Amendment) Act 1926 Act, which the 1988 Act
             replaced, that the coroner was appointed by Sheffield City Council, or its
             precedessor. By virtue of paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 to the^ Coroners Act
             1988. the coroner's salary is fee subject of ammal agreement between the


                                  .   •
                                      :          \     12 ^               ; . . ;'l,           ;
       Coiincfl.'apd Mmself,
         ;.   •   *                     :                           ■




10.2 Sheffield City OouneU appeared before the coroiKr aid the jufy as an
       interested party within the meaning of paragraph 20 of the Gorqpers Rules
       1984. It was represented by "Mr Gregory, Solicitor tor Sheffield City
       Council" at the interixa inquests iaM ay 1990, and by coansel and leading
       counsel at tb® main inquest (Affidavit of Stcfen Popper, paragraph 10, page
       9, and paragraph 16, page 14). .


10.3 Tbe conduct of tie City Council was called into question at the inquest. It
       was the body responsible for safety at sports grounds. Inhis summing-up, the
       Coroner gave strong encouragement to the jury to find that the City Council
       could ROt be guilty Of tmlawftil Killing (22nd March 1991, p^ges 31-37).


10.4 Both the Sheffield City Council and theSomh Yorkshire Police Authority, to
       which the Sheffield City Council paid a precept from its c^immmity taxes, had
       a direct financial interest in establishing that deaths were followed very soon
       after the fatal crash. A writ “was issued by the joint admitdstrttors of the
       estate of two victims of the Hillsborough disaster on 4th May 1990, in respect
       of injuries caused prior to death; judgment was given by HiddeaJ on 31st M y
       1990, holding that no damages are recoverable for pain aod fear when
       uncoiisciou$Qess and death follow shortly after the onset of such pain and fear.
       (Hicks v. Chief Constable of the Sostfa Yoricsfrfre Police7199211 A ,E X 690
       <CA».          .   ;


10.5   The; Council, aid the South Yorkshire Police, had therefore a potential
       financial interest in die decision of the Coroner, made On"or about 19th
       November 1990, that evidence relating to events after 3.15pm was not to be
       admitted, even where there was evidence that Victims were alive after that time
       and might:have suffered prolonged pais before death.             (See Coroner's
       affidavit, paragraph 17, page 15)*:                      -
  10.6      The appearance of bias in supported by the feet that the Coroner 's solicitor m
  ■ ■ : the present applications is.Sarah Pimlott, employed by the Sheffield .City
         . Conocil, who sobmits an affidavit Asserting that it is against tie public Merest
            to hold fcesii inquests. Tbs identity of interest between the Coroner and an
            interested party is thus openly. acknowledged.                ■


  10.7      The AppHcaots m il seek to relyupon the arguments presented earlier in this
            Argument to demonstrate the appearance of bias within the principles in R v.
            Gfiogil [19SB] 2'W.L.K. S83 (HL):                                 :   '


^ 0 .8      Further, reliance is placed on the following indications «f apparent bias.


  10.9      Provision of witness statements, th e Coroner decided feat he would not
            distribute statements in advance to, interested parties. (Coroner’s affidavit,
            paragraph 14, page 15; Exhibit SLP/1; section 4, 30/10/90, pages 10-11), It
            appeared, however, to parties at the inquest that toe police officers had access
           to numerous statements, (Affidavit of Sandra Stringer of 19/10/93, Applicants'
            bundle pages 513-4). The relatives werepennltted only to read through their
            statements very shortly before giving evidence.        This matter has to be
           regarded against the backgound that only one barrister appeared for the
           families at the, main iajuest, .whereas several appeared for the varions
           Yorkshire authorities and individuals.



  10.10 The selective use of the Taylor reportThe Coroner excluded the evidence of
           Ashiom Philips and £cclcston (see paragraph 7.1, above). *Be did so, as
           appears from Ms affidavit at pages 23-25), on the groond that the findings of
           the Taylor report, inter alia, suggested their evidence woold not be helpful.
           However, a different attitude was taken to the Taylor Enquiry's findings
           effects of alcohol on the disaster. Taylor U effectively ruled out the
                      •                       ' '                       ”
           consumption of alcohol as a canse of the disaster; however, the question of
           drink occupied a disproprotionately large place in the interim and main
       Inquests.


10.11 At die interim inquest icio the deatfa of;Richard Jones, for example, ■ the ‘
       Applicant Leslie Jones was moved to complain about the emphasis upon drink.
       Inthe smmning~up, tbs Coroner devoted 17 pages to dealing with the subject
    , (SUP/1, Day 76, 22nd March, pages 39-56)


10.12 Hie Taylor, Report suggested a. succession of blunders on tie pait of the
       police, ineludiog failures after 3.15 pm. (See paragraph 7.2, above)


10.13 Hie Taylor report should have been eonsBlted in order to foresee the issues
       at,tbs inquest Itshouldnot have been used as a means of sifting issues so as
       apparently to exclude those areas ofenqniiy where criticisms of the Yorkshire
       authorities might be placed before the jury,


10.14 The treatment of bereaved witnesses. It is submitted: that expressions of
       sjir^jafhy on the part of the Coroner and the South Yorkshire anthorites
       became so freqnent. and condescending that they appear to have been expressed
       as a substitute for serions enquiry. In some cases this became oSfeosive. For
       example, Stephanie Jones (Applicants’ bundle 115-177), who, as the daughter
       of the Applicants Leslie and Doreen Jones, lost her brother and a friend in the
       disaster, after receiving several expressions of sympathy, was told,


               "You have already been compliineEied up hill anddowB
             : dale,.-Xthink yon have qttifted yourself well. You were a
               credit to your Mum and Dad. I-an sure they weraproud of
               you iWs afternoon."


10.15 It is reasonable for the families to feel that this treatment was a substitute for
       enquiry, effectively an apology for the empty character of the main inquest,
       'With, its artificial 3.15pm cut-off.        •
10,16 It is submitted that fee Corotter ought not to have conducted the la te s t, or at •
 ... •    file, very least to have drawn Ms sensitive position to ' the attendant of all
     ’■ interested parties. The relatives cannot be said to have ’’waived", any rights in
          relation to apparent bias. In any event, it Is clear from the Coroner's Affidavit   ;
          that, at least at the Jnain inquest, only 44 of the bereaved families were
          represented.; (Coroner's affidavit, pagel4).




11        Delay. The Divisional Court is asked to order fresh iaqneste in the 6 cases.
          It is submitted that the fmilies are not to blame in m y way for the delay, acd
          that, in the circuxnstances of this case, it is in the public interest that fresh
          inquests be held before a Coroner outside South Yorkshire. Proposals will be
         . made, if appropriate, at the hearing as to how the evidence necessary at such
          fresh inquests might sensibly be limited,•




3 Raymond BuHdiqgs
Gray's- Inn
■London WC1


29fh Oc&jber 1993;                                             Alan Jones ,QC


                                                                   A_________
                                                               Edward Fitzgerald.
                                           l\,




TN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                                   £ « S CQZlflff/32
QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
CROWN OFFICELIST


TN THE MATTER of AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW



BETWEEN:


                                      REGINA
                                       - and -
                       HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR
                            SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                Ex parte
                          STRINGER and OTHERS




              SKELETON ARGUMENT ON BEHALF OF CORONER



                                       INDEX

                         A. INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS:                       p. 2

               B. LACK OF CARE; THE LAW AND GROUND 6                      p. 6

      C. THE REMAINING GRQUNPS_RELIED UPON fl.E, 1 - S._AND 7)p. 26

                                 D. DISCRETION                            p. 45




      Note:    for convenience references to the Applicants' bundle of evidence,
and page number, are given thus:      "App p. [21]"; to the Coroner's: "Cor. p.
[21]"; and to Albert Page’s affidavit and exhibits: "Page p. [21]."
29 10   93   17:24       F A I 071 797 7550               R.SEABROOK QC,
                                                                                                    yjoo3




                               SECTION A:      INITIAL CONSIDERATIONS


                         L   Can. any useful purposehe achieved bv this application?


              At the heart of this application would appear to be a belief on the part
        of the applicants that the lives of their loved ones, the 6 deceased, would, or
        might, have been spared, had the police called the emergency services earlier,
        or those services responded more promptly and competently.                  Whether well
        founded or not that is an understandable belief;                   but it is necessary to
        consider at the outset whether these present proceedings can serve to further
        their concerns.


        The relief sought appears to be to obtain either:


        A. fresh inquests into the deaths of all 6 deceased in order to obtain:


              (i)    a verdict reflecting criticism of the police;


              (ii) a verdict reflecting criticism of the emergency services;


               (iii) (perhaps) a yet further examination of the last minutes of life of
                     all 6 deceased in ;


        alternatively,


        B.     the quashing of the verdict, so that there is no verdict at all.



                                                      2
                                                                                        -fcy v   -*




     Item (i):     the South Yorkshire Police have long since admitted that their
     negligence was responsible for the injuries and deaths which occurred and paid
     out compensation to those entitled in law to compensation flowing from that
     negligence.   Further;   their management of the relevant events was examined in
     great detail by the Taylor Inquiry, and findings highly critical of them were




     Item (ii):     the quality of the response of the emergency services was also
     fully investigated by the Taylor Inquiry, which found that there was no cause
     for criticism, and that the various allegations which are raised by the present
     applicants were wrong.


     Item (iii):      the dying minutes of each of the Deceased were fully examined
     by the coroner in much more detail than would usually be the case;     in every
     case there was unchallenged pathological evidence that each would have lapsed
4)   into unconsciousness within less than a minute of sustaining the crushing
     (which would have occurred before 1505 hours), and that brain-stem death would
     have followed in about 5 minutes.     Subsequent evidence obtained on behalf of
     the Applicants themselves from a Dr West (whatever its evidential status in
     these proceedings) confirms the conclusion that none would, in any event have
     survived.




                                             3
                                                  i\ .        i. u v    ,




(iv)   It is submitted that it is out of the question that a fresh inquest would
be ordered by this court:
             die above points are repeated; moreover:
             the events concerned occurred cm the 15th April, 1989, some 4.5
             years ago;       the value to be placed on independent recollections
             after this period of time will be minimal;
             the coroner sat for over 90 days.
             his inquests had already been preceded by the Taylor Inquiry into
            the disaster; this too took evidence for many days,
            during these inquests numerous eye witnesses (loved ones. Maids,
             young police officers, ambulance staff, and so on) were put through
            giving evidence about profoundly harrowing events which are likely
            to have caused very great distress to them (see the affidavit of
            Albert Page paragraph 18);            many, presumably, had already given
            similar evidence to the Taylor Inquiry;                    by seeking fresh inquests
            the applicants propose to put those witnesses through these events
            yet again.
            it is over 2.5 years since the verdict was given.


(v)    The matter was succinctly and accurately put on behalf of the Attorney
       General    in     the letter   of   18th          August,       1992,   refusing   his   fiat
       (Applicants’ evidence page 455):        "the Law Officers ... have come to the
       conclusion that there is nothing which would justify authorising an
       application to the High Court for a new inquest... They have reached this
       conclusion on the grounds that the application would have no reasonable
       prospect of establishing that it is necessary or desirable in the
       interests of justice for a fresh inquest to be held."

                                              4
Assuming there is no prospect of fresh inquests, there would appear to be no
point in the present applications:


AstoB:


The striking out of the verdict, so as to leave, in effect, an open verdict,
would be misleading and illogical, and pointless.             The former because it is
perfectly clear what the cause of death was, and the circumstances in which it
was sustained;      the latter because it will achieve nothing whatsoever for
anyone.
                                                                         ,1




      The verdicts were announced on 28th March 1991.               The memorial to the
Attorney General was not filed until 15th April, 1992;            and the application for
judicial review was dated 5th May, 1992. The reasons for this delay (which are
set out in the Memorial (App. p.2) are unacceptable.
      Given that the relevant events occurred in April, 1989, it was all the
more important that applications for judicial review were pursued with the
utmost speed. In fact they were not.
      It is submitted that the applications fall at the first hurdle.
                 SECTION B: LACK OF CARE: THE LAW AND GROUND 6


          Lack of care, and the declared desire of the families to achieve such a
    verdict, informs most of the grounds relied upon, and so is dealt with at the
    outset.


                     1. Preliminary; The function and purpose of the "verdict*


0   1.        "The duty of the coroner is to conduct a fact-finding exercise, not to
    apportion blame and not to decide civil liability."         (per Bingham LJ, R v HMC
    for East Kent, ex parte Spooner - transcript supplied, p. 122H).




          The provisions of the Act as to the contents of the Inquisition:
                  "... the jury shall after hearing the evidence - (a) give their
                  verdict and certify it by an inquisition.." (s. 11(3);
                  "An inquisition - (a) shall be in writing under the ... hands of the
                  jurors who concur in the verdict;        (b) shall set out, so far as such
                  particulars have been proved -
                       (i) who the deceased was; and
                       (ii) how, when and where the deceased came by his death; and
                  (c) shall be in such form as the Lord Chancellor may by rules made
                  by statutory instrument from time to time prescribe".


              The Coroners Rules. 1984, SI 1984/552, provide, in Schedule 4 to those
              Rules, forms which may be used, with such modifications as circumstances

                                                   6
       may require.     Form 22 of these rules is the Inquisition;          it contains
       provision for findings as to the following matters:
       (1) the name of the deceased;
       (2) injury or disease causing death;
       (3) Time, place and circumstances at or in which injury was sustained;
       (4) Conclusion of the jury/coroner as to the death;
       (5) Particulars for the time being required by the Registration Acts to
      be registered concerning death.


      It is submitted that the contents of (3) are to be factual;         and those of
(4) are to be the conclusion or inference to be drawn from those facts - e.g.
that the deceased took his own life deliberately;       or that the deceased died by
his own hand as a result of an accident.          Since it is the duty of the jury to
ascertain "how" the deceased died, it will sometimes be the case (as in the
case of death by accident at the deceased’s own hand) that a bare recital of
the factual findings will fail adequately to answer the question "how", hence
the need for (4), which will usually be satisfied (and in practice almost
invariably are) by resort to one of the phrases suggested in the notes to form
22,    (e.g.    "died    from    natural    causes",    "died   as    a    result   of
accident/misadventure", "killed himself" etc.).
      Note however, that "how* the deceased came by his death could, if
      construed widely, encompass an examination of all causative factors,
      whether proximate or remote;         the courts have decided that it is to be
      construed narrowly - i.e. “by what means" rather than "in what broad
      circumstances" (see R v HMC for Birmingham ex parte Sec, of State for
      Home Office (!AtwaT). transcript supplied, page 32).



                                           7
             x . i- i.   y ix   i <» <   < o> o> u




3,    Subject to two provisos (see below) the purpose of the jury's verdict is
      not to ascertain, let alone to apportion, blame:                            indeed rule 42
      expressly prohibits the framing of the verdict in such a way                           as to
      appear to determine any question of "(a) criminal liability on the part
      of a named person, or (b) civil liability".


The provisos are these:


           (i)           the notes to form 22 permit the addition of the words "and the
           cause of death was aggravated by lack of care/self neglect" in the
           case of death from natural causes, industrial disease, dependence
           on/non dependant abuse of drugs, and want of attention at birth, but
           in no other case.                         Thus they do not suggest it in the case of
           accidental death.
           (ii) the coroner is given powers under rule 43 to report to the
           appropriate person or body in cases where he believes that action
           should be taken to prevent the recurrence of similar fatalities;
           but his powers are remarkably circumscribed, being confined to
           announcing at the inquest that he is reporting the matter in writing
           to that person or body.                       He may not, therefore, voice criticisms in
           open court.




                                                           8
ta il'   J.V   V O
                            i       ij i x    1 0 1   u   j u                 i \ .    is ( \..   ,




                                         2. The current law on "lack of care verdicts"


               1.    Earlier history o£.the veffdiCLjaadJte ".ddgr,i:


                     This was fully reviewed in Reg. v Southwark Coroner, Ex p. Hicks
                     (''Hicks") 19871WLR1624 at 1631E - 1633H. It is not repeated here.
                     Since 1980 it has not been possible for a jury to add a rider to its
                     verdict (Jervis on Coroners, 10th edn. para 16.24 - "Jervis").


               2.    Reggm.cases;


               (a±   R v Surrey Coroner ex parte Campbell (1982 1QB 66U
                           Facts:            death of schizophrenic prisoner in custody after refusing
                           food and drink. Medical evidence suggested death due to dehydration
                           due to schizophrenia.                     Coroner refused to leave lack of care to jury
                           because it was (he ruled) a breach of rule 42.
                           Decision of Div Ct:                      not a breach of rule 42.          Should have left the
                           verdict to jury.                     On the facts there was evidence to go to jury that
                           the primary cause of death was not a suicide at all, but a person
                           whose inability to look after himself meant he was being cared for
                           by others, yet he died a death of starvation.                              "The verdict of lack
                           of care is recommended where a person who, owing to his inability to
                           look after himself, is being cared for by others, dies and his
                           death is due to starvation or exposure or similar causes brought
                           about by the failure of such other persons to look after him
                           properly", (page 676, emphasis supplied).



                                                                          9
(b)   R v Southwark Coroner ex p. Hicks (198? 1 WLR 16241
          This case      was the first full attempt by the Divisional Court to
          define what is meant by the verdicts "lack of care", and "aggravated
          by lack of care", and to explain the circumstances in which they
          could be      used.    It was also an attempt to reconcilethe option
          provided in the rules for returning a "lack of care" verdict with
          the prohibition in rule 42 against framing a verdict in such a way
          as to appear to determine a question of civil liability.         It is
          undoubtedly the leading case for the law on this topic and has been
          followed ever since.
          The Divisional Court concluded that:
          (i)     the prime meaning of "cane" is that of physical attention,
          preventingdeath from starvation, exposure,        or bad    nursing or
          medical care" (1631 C).
          (ii)     "lack of care" is the obverse of "self neglect",   that is    to

          say lack of sustenance and physical looking after of the deceased in
          one form or another" (1632C; 1633G).
          (iii)    Lack of care is appropriate only to the physical condition of
          the deceased as causing the death, and should not be used to
          indicate a breach of duty by some other person.
          (iv) What this verdict presupposes is that some other person had at
          least the opportunity of rendering care (in the narrow sense of that
          word - and not as in, say, the case of the Priest or the Levite)
          which would have prevented the death... a real opportunity of doing
          something effective (1634 A).
          (v)     It is appropriate not only when the deceased is not given
          enough nourishment, but also not enough medicine, by those caring

                                          10
              for him.(l634 E).
              (vi)    It is not appropriate to the case where death from drowning
              results from the inadequate supervision of a bathing party of
              children in the Serpentine (1631D;     1633G - "it should be regarded
              as the other side of the coin to self-neglect, and consequently was
              an inappropriate verdict in the case      of the child who drowned in
              the Serpentine."
              (vii)    The verdict should not be used as a means of levelling
              disguised criticism at people who do not act in an emergency or take
              a wrong or inadequate decision in such cases (1634B).




General comment:         ever since Hicks was decided the Divisional Court has
consistently attempted to apply its principles;      they have also been applied in
the one Court of Appeal case (Thomas) where it arose for consideration.          The
concepts which it sought to explain, however, are elusive, and have caused
coroners much difficulty when attempting to sum them up to juries. Subsequent
                                                                      »*
cases have recognised this in varying degrees, and have attempted to refine and
explain them more clearly.


&)    R v Portsmouth Coroner, ex parte Anderson 1987 1 WLR 1640


      Facts     Death of a young soldier following prolonged exercise wearing a
      rubber suit;     death from hyperpyrexia.    Death could have been avoided if
      his instructors had rehydrated him immediately after his collapse and
      then provided further medical help to cool him.         Jury returned a verdict
of accidental death;         "aggravated by lack of care" not left to the
jury.      DC dismissed the application that this should have been left to
the jury.
Material observations:       (per Mann J) although rehydration equipment
available at the time of the collapse might have ameliorated his
condition, the cause of the Deceased's death was not aggravated by the
absence of such equipment;        that in the case of accidental death it was
unlikely that the cause of death could be aggravated by lack of care.
The coroner was right not to leave the verdict to the jury.


Bjy. HMCJfor Birmingham ex parte. Sec of_State for the Home Deot ("AtwaH
        (DC 31.7.90; unreported; transcript supplied)
Facts:      death in prison due to suicide.      Known suicide risk.         Hanged
himself.      Verdict: Cause of death:       cerebral anoxia      due to hanging;
verdict: "lack of care" ( so called "free standing verdict").
Held:      clear that the primary cause of death was suicide;           the direction
of the coroner as to causation between the absence of            physical care and
the death was inadequate:           a clear direction was       essential (Hicks).
Verdict quashed; remitted for fresh Inquest.
Relevant observations: (i) "how" must mean "by what means", rather than
by embodying some vague concept such as "in what broad circumstances”.
(ii)    There is nothing in the judgment of Croom-Johnson U to warrant
the conclusion that lack of care is confined to cases of failure to treat
of ameliorate such a physical condition (22);                   [i.e.   it is   also
appropriate in cases where the mental condition is the true cause of
death (e.g. the deranged man, known to require constant observation, who
jumps through the window and dies).

                                     12
(iv)     Ex parte Anderson: to be distinguished:      in Atwal the lack of care
pertains not to acts or omissions after the life threatening event, but
to the period before it occurred.       In such a case, if there is evidence
which could justify a jury in concluding that lack of care aggravated the
cause of death, then ... it would be appropriate to leave such a
verdict.(31).
(v)    (Per Watkins L.J)     Whether that [i.e. the provision to the deceased
of the opportunity to kill himself], supposing there was evidence of lack
of care in allowing the opportunity to be available to the deceased,
could be said to have a causal connection with "how the deceased died" I
very much doubt.         Such consideration comes close to if not within, it
seems to me, the rider, now forbidden, and the coroner’s power under rule
43     [i.e.     to report in writing with a view         to avoiding   similar
fatalities].".


R y HMC for East Berks ex parte JBucklev (20th Nov.. 1992. unreported,
copy transcript supplied).


Facts:     Death in custody at Broadmoor Hospital following the injection of
a powerful sedative drug. There was some evidence that some might have
gone into a vein, contrary to prescribed procedure.
Verdict of accidental death quashed on ground that coroner wrongly
declined to allow counsel to address him on the question whether lack of
care should be left to the jury.


Relevant observations of the DC:
       "The following propositions are clear:
             (1)   A lack of care verdict, whether free standing or adjectival, is
             something wholly different from a finding of civil negligence:             if
             it were otherwise the coroners court would be making direct findings
             as to the presence or absence of civil liability, and that is
             manifestly not the law.


             (2)     It follows     that a lack of care verdict,             where it is
             appropriate, is concerned with circumstances much narrower than
             those engaged in a trial of civil liability for negligence.


             (3)   Such a verdict only properly arises where the jury are able to
             find that the re was a lack of care by some person or persons in the
             events and circumstances immediately surrounding the death.            In the
             environment of a prison or special hospital, this cannot embrace any
             criticism of the regime in general, or, indeed, of the way in which
             the deceased person was generally looked after.               In that context
             "lack of care" will only arise where some distinct act or omission
             is closely and directly associated with the death, as its cause or
             one of its causes." (page 20)


&        R v Poplar Coroner, ex parte Thomas (1993 2 WLR S47)(CA. Dillon.
         Farquharson. & Simon Brown Lift.


Facts:     The deceased was dying of an asthmatic attack.             An ambulance was
summoned, but took a long time to arrive.                Shortly before it reached the
hospital the Deceased died.        There was medical evidence to suggest that her
life could have been saved had she arrived there earlier.     The coroner declined
to hold an inquest on the ground that the death was a natural one (i.e due to a
natural disease process).      The Divisional Court held that he should have done
so, inter alia on the grounds that the death was an unnatural one because it
was the result of lack of care on the part of the ambulance service.       Held by
CA, reversing Divisional Court: the death was a "natural’’ one, and the coroner
was right.


Relevant observations of CA;
      Although not directly relevant to its decision on the principal question
      before it, the CA clearly accepted the "concept of lack of care as
      understood in this field of law" and as defined in Hicks (553 C), and
      pointed out that it was not appropriate to the facts of that case (i.e a
      case where, as in the present case, the failure of the ambulance to
      attend promptly did not contribute the the primary cause of death at all
      - but might have ameliorated it).
      The term "lack of care", as interpreted in Hicks is a narrow and somewhat
      technical one.      (The context of this remark suggests it was descriptive
      rather than critical).


{gl   R v Coroner for Greater London ex parte Koto (unreported 9.7.93;
transcript supplied)
                                                                   L‘

      Facts:      Death in prison from cardiac failure while struggling with prison
      officers.     Coroner declined to leave unlawful killing or lack of care, on
      grounds that the medical evidence did not support the view that the
      probability was that the death was due to a sudden cardiac arrest
              secondary to the struggle.             Held:        too much weight was given to the
              scientific evidence;        the other evidence may have been sufficient to
              satisfy a jury.


              Relevant observatjonsof the.DC:
                    "The essential distinction is between carelessness, on the one hand,
                    which is the basis of a civil action for negligence, and a failure
                    to provide care on the other.                 It is the latter concept with which
                    coroners should be concerned;                    that is to say, the failure to
                    provide .care in Ihe form of food, medicine, clothing or shelter
                    where, as would usually, although not always, be the case, there is
                    a legal or moral duty to provide such care.               In most cases the lack
                    of care will be an omission rather than an act" (p.l2F).




        £h)   R V Coroner for N. Humberside & Scunthorpe ex parte Jamieson (unreported
        9,7.93, transcript supplied).


              Facts:      Death in custody at Full Sutton Prison.             Verdict:   killed himself
              by hanging.       Coroner refused to leave aggravated by lack of care to the
              jury, on the grounds of lack of evidence of lack of care.                          Held:
              entitled so to conclude.              This was a suicide case and there was no
              evidence to suggest that the prisoner was in need of constant cane but
              was left unsupervised.


              Relevant observations of the DC:
                    (i)      The decision in the Atwal case is authority for [the

                                                             16




in-;! y93                               071   799   777|-|
                                                                                                          F1
            proposition that] a verdict of lack of care should only be added by
            way of qualification of some other verdict and should not be used as
            a free standing verdict on its own. (p. 11 of Lexis transcript)
            (ii)   Discretion:   "Even if 1 had come to the conclusion that the
            coroner's summing up could be faulted I would not have thought it
            right to quash the inquisition and order that a new inquest should
            be held.     The facts were examined at great length at the inquest
            held in 1991. The jury determined the matters they were required to
            consider pursuant to section        11(5) of the 1988 Act." (Lexis
            transcript p. 13)




                                             from the law as it presently stands.


      The present state of the law can be summarised by a number of
propositions:
      1.    The "lack of care" verdict, whether free standing or adjectival, is
      wholly different from the civil breach of the duty of care;
      2.    it is appropriate only to the physical condition of the deceased as
      causing the death, and should not be used to indicate a breach of duty by
      some other person (Hicks 1633F, see also 1632C, 1633F - 1634H); thus it
      is concerned with the failure to provide care (in the form of food,
      medicine, clothing, shelter etc.) (Hicks 1634E), not with carelessness,
      and is appropriate only in cases which are the other side of the coin of
      self-neglect, such as starvation, hypothermia, and persistent failure to
      provide medication.



                                           17
2y-iu   yj   l/;Oi    i-AJL 0 7 1 797 7 5 5 0        R.SEABK00K QC.                             K21019




              3.     It "should not be used to indicate a breach of duty by some other
              person" m icks 1633F) therefore, it is not concerned with the lack of
              "care" (in the sense of taking steps to prevent the occurrence of injury
              the risk of which is reasonably foreseeable - see the judgment of Peter

              Pain J in Hicks at p. 1637A);
              4.     it does not relate to the Mure to provide care s M                  the
               life-threatening event has occurred, which might nevertheless have
               prevented it;       in any event, logically, it is impossible to say that such
               a subsequent event "aggravated" the life threatening event which was the

               cause of death, which is already complete.
               5.    in the case of a verdict of accidental death it is unlikely ever to
               be appropriate (see: ex rarteifleks, at p. 1634G, followed by Mann J in
               ^ parte Anderson ® p. 1648A; see also the notes to Form 22 in Appendix 4
               to the Rules, which make this plain by stating that the "aggravated by
               want of care" verdict is not appropriate except in the four cases there
               specified, which do not include accidental death);        if this were not so,
               it would presumably be the verdict returned in the vast majority of death
               due to road traffic accident inquests;        yet the verdict is not returned

               in such cases.


                IN short, the ambit of the concept is now very narrow;              and it is
         desirable that it remain so if coroners inquarts are to remain comparatively
         straightforward feet finding, not fault attributing, exercises.         The present
         application provides an excellent illustration of the kind of problems which
         would occur during inquests if a wider definition of "aggravated by lack of
         care" were to be used. The moment the possibility of a verdict such as



                                                      18
                                                           n *          <acv<




           "accidental death in circumstances aggravated (or brought about) by lack of
           care" arises, then the field is opened up to those seeking to use inquests as a
           hunting ground for civil litigation (Hicks, 1630D), or, at the very least, for

           apportioning blame.


                     It would be extremely useful if the above principles, if accepted as

               accurate, were to be codified into a single judgment.




                                       for a free-standing verdict of lack ofcai^
                                            Tf ves. in What circumstances?


                      There is no provision in form 22, or in the notes thereto, to the
               possibility of such a verdict bang returned.          Nevertheless such a verdict was
               said to be available to a jury in H id s (page                   th is   seems to have been

               doubted in Jamieson (Lexis transcript p .ll), however, Mowing AMal-


               It is submitted, however, that, logically, there must be a place t o such a
                verdict, although the circumstances         is    which it will arise will be tare.
                Usually the lack of care is merely a contributing factor to a primary cause of
                       . e.g. a case where the deceased is dying erf a natural disease, which
                rWh can be (but is not) prevented by the regular administration of medicines
                by a third party, under whose direct care the patienLla;                in such a case the
                primary cause of death is the natural disease process, although, in this case
                that process is "aggravated" (or, more accurately, "contributed to", or even
                "accelerated   by") by the lack ofcare (ie. the             Mure to administer the
                medicines).    So    the verdict, if it     is to reflea the realities of the case,

                                                             19




'“■q.-l n- 1        1c:                      cy\n1 nqn «7Ern-n                                               r* —
                                                                                                                m
VV   li I • V




will have to be "death by natural causes, aggravated by lack of care".                   It is
possible to imagine cases, however, in which the very lack of care is the
primary cause of the death: e.g. where the mother of a dependant young child
fails to provide it with adequate food and clothing;             in practice, however such
a case is likely to attract a verdict of unlawful lolling.                        It is very
difficult to think of an example of death due to lack of care simpliciter,
which is not either an accident, or an unlawful killing.




                   Around 6: (i.e. failure to leave "lack of gars" jfti sgpflft
          t»\ til* negligence of the pn1ice in Permitting the build-tfP pf
                   rht the delaved summoning of the emergency services; .asd
                                 tc) the response of those services!


                Submissions as to the application of the law (see above) to the fadSi.


          Preliminary note:        The coroner allowed representatives for all interested
 parties (from leading counsel down to members of families) to make submissions
 to him before he summed up. Those submissions occupied 2 full days and occupy
                  *                                            ,
 nearly 200 pages of transcript (2. Cor 417 - 607).
          Despite this, not once did anyone mention, let alone submit, that this

 was an appropriate case for a lack of care verdict.
                                                    1\ • u ijn u a v v ii   •




                     1 Pnlira neglipence in managing the crowd priQf ti> th$ CP-Sh
                                       "appravated bv lackit o l S l


    1.       It is dear that the management of the crowd was negligent in the sense

    understood by the civil law - i.e a breach of the duty of care.


    2.       The immediate cause of the deaths in                  th ese cases   was crush injuries;
    those crush injuries were sustained as the result of a series of acts and
    omissions, proximate and distant, on the part of various bodies.                        They are
0   described in the Interim Report.            They include omissions as to the design of
    the access to the ground;          the inadequate system for counting and limiting the
    numbers entering the pens;           the provision of inadequate perimeter gates to the
    pens;       the failure to divert spectators from entering pen 3 once Gate C was
     opened; various failures on the part of the police and the dub.


     3.       It is clear that the pathological, or direct, cause of death was asphyxia
     due to crush fractures.          These were the result of the errors just mentioned,
     some of which were negligent;              but it was nevertheless ’accidental*;          a road
     traffic accident is an accident even where caused by negligence.                             The
♦    appropriate primary finding was therefore always gang to be “accidental death*

     once unlawful killing was rejected.


     4.        It is tine that one of the multifarious causes of the sustaining of the
         crush fractures was the negligence of the police in managing the spectators;
         but this has nothing to do with ’lack of care" as understood in colonial law

         since at least Hicks. In particular:
               (i)      it is an example of carelessness, not lack of the provision of

                                                      21
physical care;
(ii)       it is not the other side of the coin of self-neglect;       it is not,
for example, anything remotely resembling the failure to provide care in
the form of food, medicine, clothing or shelter (see extract from K m

above);
(iii)        it is indistinguishable from the death by drowning in the
Serpentine, where there was a lack of supervisory care, resulting in
death; but the Court in Hicks described the verdict as "inappropriate in

 such a case;
 (iv)       it is being sought to be used as a "means of levelling disguised
 criticism at people who do not act in an emergency or take a wrong or
 inadequate decision in such cases";               this is not permissible ( H f e

 1634B)
 (v)       to say that this negligent mismanagement of a crowd warranted the
 addition of the words "aggravated by want of care" would be to overturn
 picks, and to make the coroner’s court, once again, even more of a
  hunting ground for civil litigation than it presently is.
  (vi)      in any event the appropriate primary verdict here was accidental
  death;      yet in a case of accidental death it was stated in AndfflOfl that
  it was unlikely that the cause of death could be aggravated by lack of
  care. The same conclusion flows from the wording of the Notes to Form 22

  in Appendix 4 of the Coroners Rules.
   (vii)      If it were permissible to return a verdict of accidental death,
   aggravated by lack of care, such a verdict would apply in most, if not
   virtually     all,   inquests   into   deaths    resulting   from   road   traffic
   accidents, where negligence by one driver will have caused the accident
   which resulted in the crush (or other) injuries which cause the death.
m/xu        x/;oo   r AA u / x   /y/   /oou           K . SfcABKUUft yV,.                i(U U U 1




              Yet the invariable verdict (save in exceptional circumstances) in such a

              case is "accidental death" simpliciter.




                    2. Police negligence in mana^ine the crowd Priot tQ the CTV.sh
                                        fbl "lack of care" freestanding




       1.     There is some doubt as to whether a free standing verdict is permissible
       - see extract from R v Coroner for N. Humberside & Scunthorpe ex. .pads

       Jamieson above.


       2.     But, in any event the objections just given apply equally to the free

       standing verdict.


       3.     A free standing verdict would be inaccurate and misleading, implying as
       it did, that this grim tragedy was not an accident at all, but the direct
       consequence of "lack of care" as understood by the law in this field.




                                                      23
*J   X   I   . *» \ J   4      V I A    t o t   t O O M      I \ , k^XjrVX>A\UUAV   «o(V *




                            3. Delayed summoning bv the police of emergency SSmSBS
                                       -"aggravated bv lack of care" orJree standing


1.           The tune for summoning these services did not arise until afterthe crash
ftflH t^kpn place and the injuries already sustained.                                        So the effect of the
verdict, if permissible, would be to criticise the failure to take action which
might have prevented death despite the prior occurrence of the life-threatening

injuries.


2.           The verdict sought was entirely inappropriate in theseinquests both                               in

law and in fact.


3.           Law


             The authorities cited above rule out this verdict in this category of
              situation:


              (a)           all the objections to the verdict being used in respect of the
              police management before the injuries were caused apply equally to the
              period after they were caused;


              (b) but for acts or omissions occurring after the injuries have been
              jcngtaineri there is the further objection:                      In the present case the onset,
              and indeed continuation, of the Deceaseds' injuries, was not "aggravated"
              by the non-attendance of the emergency services.                                       The case is
              indistinguishable from the principle applied by the Divisional Court in
<JO   jl t . O V   t -1 A   U / i.   I if I   t 0 0 V   ft , a & A D K U U Ii   M '- '.




          ex parte Anderson, where the soldier dying from dehydration might have
          had his life saved if he had received intravenous rehydration. The Court
          applied the principles set out in Hicks and concluded, "the presence of
          the [rehydration] equipment might have ameliorated die condition which in
          fact led to death but its absence did not aggravate” (at 1647H).                            Here
          the earlier attendance of the ambulance might have ameliorated the
          condition which in fact led to the death, but its absence did not
          aggravate it.


          (c)      It can no more be said that any of the Deceased were in the "care”
          of the police (or, a fortiori, the emergency services following the
          crushing), in the sense of that word as defined in Hkk&» than it could
          be said that Miss Thomas, the asthmatic, was in the "caie" of the
          ambulance service which took such a time to come to her aid;                              yet the
           Court of Appeal fex carte Thomas, supra), following Hjfiks, held that she
          was not "in the care o r the ambulance service (at p.552B), and rejected
           the suggestion that a verdict of lack of care was possible in her case.


           Fact


           There was in any event clear, unchallenged, and ample evidence before the
 Coroner to show that the nature of the crush injuries was such that death
 within around 5 minutes of the crushing events was inevitable (this is more

 fully gone into under grounds 3 and S below).                                   Thus the "need for a clear
 causal connection between the lack of care and the death* which Hicks requires
 (1634H) is absent.
tfO   J. I .    I    r jTXA   U I JL   1 91   I ^ ^ u       1\ * J£ < A D l\U U n   u v   *




                                              4.        Response of emergency services
                              "aggravated bv lack of care" andfreg-S&ndmg vfflfet


           The same arguments and conclusions apply, both as to feet and law, as
apply in respect of the police response after the injuries had occurred;                                      these
are dealt with immediately above, and are not repeated.




      SECTION C: THE REMAINING GROUNDS (I.E. GROUNDS 1 - 5. ANDJQ


                              Ground t: the use of summaries in the MinHMWStS


 1.        (a)       The summaries complained of were summaries given in evidence of
               reports into the deaths of each of the deceased;                               they were prepared by
               independent police officers from an independent police force.                                   The
               relevant reports are in section 8 of volume 3 of the exhibits to the
               Coroner's affidavit. They comprise:
                     (i) a summary of the evidence of witnesses obtained in respect of
                     events            surrounding the death,            with references to the source
                     material; and,
                     (ii) a "continuity chart” plotting in diagrammatic form the relevant
                     events and identifying the relevant video and photographic evidence
                     used to reconstruct the deceased's movements.


               (b)     This material was then given in evidence, cot oath, to the court;
               full transcripts of that evidence in respect of each of the relevant
      deceased are to be found in section 8 just referred to.    An example is
      that relatirig to Michael Kelly at sec. 3 (vol 1 of coroner) pp 165 -

      172):   Inspector Sawers read out the first from the relevant report; and
      was cross examined on behalf of, among others, the family;           then
      Detective Inspector Layton took the jury through the visual material,
      producing and commenting upon photographs and plans.


2.   It is not clear whether this complaint is directed to the use of hearsay
evidence, or whether to the fact that hearsay evidence was used in respect of
witnesses whose evidence was so important that he should, as a reasonable
coroner, undoubtedly have called them.


3.   As to the use of hearsay evidence, the complaint is unfounded: Coroners
are perfectly entitled to make use of hearsay evidence, and frequently do so,
see Jervis Coroner 10th edn para 15.22; and Reg v Manchester Coroner ex p.
Tal, 1985 1 QB @ S4G.          (Rule 37, and the position about documentary - as
opposed to oral hearsay evidence is dealt with below.)


4.   As to the alternative, that the oral evidence was too important not to
require to be called, it is said (Memorial) that the contents of the summaries
could not be tested by oral evidence and questioning) and that this was
"improper" because die statements read raised "controversial” issues of whether
the deaths were instantaneous or not, etc.


      (a) The coroner had 95 deaths to investigate and a great mass of
      evidence.    He was heavily dependent upon the cooperation and assistance
      of the legal representatives far for families of each of the Deceased.
Each of the relevant Deceased was represented throughout the        prelim inary

and final inquests. He was further inhibited by the problem that the DPP
was still investigating the conduct of the police with a view to possible
criminal charges;    yet it was at the request of the families that he was
having interim inquests limited to questions of who, when and where. And
no-one voiced any objection to his proceeding in this way.


(b)    For his approach to the problem of presenting the evidence to the
jury    in a manageable way see his affidavit, paras 11, 12, and 24
(Criticism 1) (Cor. p9 ft).


(c)    see also his description when opening the Preliminary Inquests, of
his proposed procedure (1 Coroner sec. 2 p 16E - 17C);                   and his
invitation at the end for representations or applications (ibid p. 33C) -

there were none.


(d)    he was flexible:       when questions did arise as to the adequacy of
proceeding on the basis of summaries alone, he called further evidence
(see, e.g., the discussion below about the evidence relating to the last
minutes of life of Kevin Williams, Paul Carlile, and lan Glover).


(e) To summarise:
       each family was represented;
       prior to the start of the Interim Inquests there had been an
       informal meeting when the Coroner explained to each representative
       his proposal to proceed by way of summaries;          to this proposal the
       representative agreed (the transcripts of      the 2 meetings of the
                       tot   t o w      t\ .   O L . iD i\ u u n   M V ..   ,




          26.2. and 15.4.90 are at 1 Cor sec. 4 - see especially pp. 275 - 277
          of the latte*- - "you are to be commended for putting forward the

          suggestions you have".)
          in opening the Inquest the modus operandi was again described and

          comments invited (1. Cor. p 89C);
          in due course their representative was provided with each written
          summary beforehand;
          no objection was taken to the summary;
          no request was made at any stage for the witness whose evidence was
          being summarised to attend;
          no suggestion was made at any material time by those representatives
           that those summaries, or any of them contained controversial
           material.
           few questions were asked of the witnesses presenting the summaries
           on behalf of the relevant families, and none were designed to
           explore what is now claimed to have been an; important and
           controversial area.


5.    The coroner's approach to the marshalling and presentation of this
evidence, far from being "improper" is to be commended.
                    Ground 2: Documentary evidence.and R u teil


1.    The duty imposed by Rule 37: (q.v).


2.    It is not apparent to what documents, or what class of documents,
admitted by the Coroner, objection is taken by the Applicants;        it would seem
that confusion has arisen as between hearsay evidence being given in relation
to oral evidence (i.e the evidence of witnesses as set down cm witness
statements) on the one hand, and documentary evidence put before the jury on
the other.    If the former, it is not governed by Rule 37; if the latter, which
documents are objected to?        In the absence of any such detail it is impossible
to meet the objection. The following general comments only are made.


3.    The Coroner's approach: tins was explained to the jury when the case was
opened to them (1 Coroner sec. 2 p 76E - 77A).               No objection was taken,
although invited (ibid p. 89C).


4.    In summary:        because of the     enorm ity   of the inquiry, and the vast
quantity of documents involved, it was wholly impracticable to comply with the
strict letter of rule 37(3) in respect of every document to be used during the
Inquest.     It is suspected that copies of all documents put in in evidence were
supplied to the legal representative of the relevant families in advance, so
that compliance with rule 37 became unnecessary, indeed pointless.
           Ground 4; Refusal to call Drs Ashton and Phillies




The application made to the Coroner (and thereby inferentially to call
medical evidence) directed towards showing that the rescue attempts were
disorganised was made on Monday the 19th November 1990 by Timothy King (1
Coroner paragraph 17(3) and paragraph 24 and 1 Coroner Section 5 pages 1
to 10 and in particular page 8D to F).


Following Mr King's submission the other legal representatives responded
(1 Coroner Section 5 pages 10 to 15) and finally Mr King said at page 15D


 "I am seeking to address causes, contributory causes to the deaths, and
 I am concentrating on that, and it is in that context I have invited the
 Court to look beyond 3.15, and certainly we are dealing with it from the
 point of view of possibilities of novus actus, yes, I accept that."

 The Coroner dealt with the application (1 Coroner Section 5 page 332D to
 336D).


 In particular, the Coroner stressed that the emergency services had been
 well represented at the Taylor Inquiry, that he had read die transcripts
 of that Inquiry and was well aware that the issues of the medical
 response had been canvassed.


 However, the Coroner made it plain that having considered the matter he
 was minded to keep to his cut off point of 3.15pm (the reasons for which
 are fully set out in dealing with the Grounds numbered 3 and 5).

                                    31
im tt '   X V   C'V   X (   • VO   A O il   V < A   (V I   I VVV             X \ . •JJJ.'IW iW V il   <9V •




                            Accordingly, the evidence of Dr Ashton and Dr Phillips was not relevant

                             to the "How question”.


                4.          The Coroner had read the Interim Report from the Taylor Inquiry and in
                             particular paragraphs 296 to 298.                                The combined effect of the
                             transcripts and the conclusions were that no valid criticism could be
                             marif* of the rescue services and that both Dr Ashton and Dr Phillips were

                             misconceived in their criticisms.


                 5.         The Coroner further adopts the arguments set out in the Affidavit of

                             Albert Page.


                 6.         A coroner is very much the master of his own inquisaiorial process; his
                             duty under s.             11(2 ),     to examine on oath all persons having knowledge of
                             the facts "whom he considers it expedient to examine".                           The discretion
                             is wide; it is very much left to the good sense of the coroner.


                 7.         The Coroner was perfectly entitled to conclude that it would not assist
                              his jury to rail Dr Ashton and Dr Phillips.




                                                                              32
     Gmnnd 5 : failure to inquire into whether lives could have test* saved bxi
                    fi'i calling the emergency services sooner; .and
           m     nrovidine better emergency care for the injured thereafter.
                                          and
                   Around 3: Selection of 3,15 as the cut-off point


These grounds cover much the same ground and are dealt with together.


1.    The Coroner's approach:
      during the course of the preliminary inquests evidence from distinguished
      pathologists had been called in respect of each of the relevant
                   this showed that within about 5 minutes of receiving the crush
      injuries (which would almost certainly have occurred in each case between
      15.00 and 15.10 hours) brain stem death would have ensued, so that, by
      3.15 p.m. when the first ambulance arrived, each of them was either dead,
      or had suffered irreversible injury (1 Coroner p.22).
      This evidence was unchallenged.
      Accordingly any evidence as to the delay in calling the emergency
      services, or the lack of skilled emergency care when it arrived, was
      entirely irrelevant to the cause of death;        it might have been relevant
      to a more general inquiry (and both points were inquired into in the
      Taylor Inquiry, and findings made in respect of each), but not to an
      Inquest.


2.    The evidence:          is to be found as follows (in each case the
      first references are to the evidence of the pathologist, and the second
      to summary or visual evidence):
illy: (for summary of evidence see Cor. p 41). Dr John Clark
    (1. Coroner sec.3 p 163 ff) Goss of consciousness within
    around    10   or 15 seconds of the crush; his changes were
    fairly mild compared with many that day.          No questions on
    behalf of the families).
    D.I. Layton: (ibid 170D,E):             apparently alive at 15.08
     hrs, but looking "a bit distressed".
     P.I. Sawers:     (ibid 165 G) At 15.35 found lying on the
     pitch, with no signs of life.
     At the Resumed Inquest PC Maughan was specifically called
     by the coroner to deal with the resuscitation which he
     gave to Michael Kelly (App. p. 195ff) approximately       6   to   8

     minutes past 3, when he was lying on the pitch not
     apparently breathing and looking blue. He worked on him,
     and he appeared to start to breathe, but with assistance;
     then then appeared to slip into unconsciousness, and was
     handed over to the care of ambulancemen.
The point made in the Memorial (App. p. 25) is that this would
have been around 3.15 p.m., so unconsciousness was not
instantaneous.     Moreover, the above evidence "suggested to the
family that his death was preventable", and he only died
because of subsequent lade of care from the ambulancemen.
     It is understandable that the family should be dismayed
     that his body was found lying on the pitch shortly after
     this;   but the fact that people were dying all around him,
     so that the few ambulancemen around at this early stage
would have been trying desperately to save any lives they
could, more than explains why his body was left on the
pitch at tins stage.


(For summary of evidence see Cor. p.44) Dr Slater (ibid p.
177 ff) - unconsciousness in 3 - 5 seconds, with death
following after another 3 - 5 minutes. Unchallenged.
D.I. Layton:      (ibid 182C):       apparently alive at 1503; last
seen alive by his Mend Colin Frodsham in the enclosure;
then the crowd surged forward and the latter lost
consciousness.         Next identified lying on pitch by P-C
Friend between 15.20 and 15.40 (ibid 179);             he attempted
resuscitation without success;                then carried to the
mortuary by him and PC Griffith.
The Memorial (App. p. 31) states that the femily were
concerned to know whether his life might not have been
saved by more timely intervention by skilled medical
help;    and that his parents were surprised that his name
was only mentioned once in the Main Inquest, when the
verdicts were announced.          The answer to the first question
was supplied by Dr           S later's   evidence:   the final crush
rarnift at 1504 hours;       he is likely to have succumbed by
 15.10 at the latest, some time before the emergency
 services even began to arrive.            Sadly, there was nothing
 more to discuss about his death in the Main Inquest              ft
 is also to be noted that he fell into Dr West's category



                        35
                                         i \ . j t n c i N   W   t t   w v   .




                 of "classic asphyxia" so that death follows unless rescued

                 rapidly.




ygvin Williams         Dr Slater (Cor. p 189ff) - internal and external
                 haemorrhages and a broken voice box;                                  the most severe
                 cases of both asphyxia and voice box fractures of all the
                 victims      seal     by           this               pathologist      (ibid.     191B);
                 unconsciousness within & few seconds, and death after 3 -
                 5 minutes.          The pathologist was told of the evidence
                 (summarised below) which suggested that he was still alive
                 in the gym, having been canied there across the pitch;
                 but he said that, having given the matter much thought, he
                 found that medically and scientifically inconceivable.                                In
                 particular it is not possible to speak with a voice box
                 fractured in 4 places. Unchallenged.
                 P.S. Killoch (Cor. p. 192ff) still alive at 14.55 in the
                 enclosure.      F ollow in g          the severe crushing PC Craighill
                 carried out what his believed to be Kevin Williams from
                 the    enclosure;            he             attempted            resuscitation    without
                 success. PC Bruder (off duty) then came upon him towards
                 the Spion Kop end of the ground;                                he gave mouth to mouth
                 resuscitation while an ambulanceman gave heart massage.
                 Shortly afterwards the ambulanceman said die casualty was
                 dead, and Bruder left the scene.                                 Sp. Constable Martin
                  later escorted the body to the gymnasium.                                      As to his
                  speaking to her before dying, P.S Killoch had twice (Cor.
194D) spoken to her:              she was particularly distressed
about the events of that day.           Cross examined about the
alleged "convulsions11, the coroner said he would recall
the pathologist to enlarge upon this.
Dr Slater recalled (Cor. p. 195) said that "convulsions"
would be fits which can occur in an asphyxiated,
unconscious,        person,   and    imply virtually irreversible
brain damage;          they reinforce the view that he cannot
thereafter      have      opened      his   eyes   and    spoken.
Cross-examined, he agreed to the proposition put on behalf
of the family that he was at this stage "beyond help., as
good as dead".


But:      2 days later Coroner recalled the evidence (ibid.
202     ff) because of the evidence of a pulse being felt at
15.32 hrs by a PC Bruder when giving resuscitation (ibid.
204).      Bruder was seen, a statement taken by Inspector
Sawers, who gave evidence the next day about it; it is at
Cor. 206ff;         it cast doubt over the feeling of a pulse
an<l the "convulsing" was more in the nature of twitching.
There was no doubt that the youth was dead and beyond
further help when resuscitation was abandoned.           No cross

examination on behalf of the family.
In view of this the pathologist was once again recalled
(cor.    21 Iff);    he reiterated that brain stem death would
have occurred within          6   minutes of trauma, although the
heart could have gone on beating for a further 30 minutes,
^W<1U   L t . - i i   tAJL   Ull     t» t   (OOU           K.^hAdKUUK UC.                              KS016




                                      and seems to have done in this case - where he found
                                      compelling the evidence of PC Bruder that whole body (as
                                      distinct from brain) death occurred in the presence of the
                                      latter. No cross examination on behalf of the family.
                             Finally the coronet elected to call a consultant clinical neuro
                             physiologist (Dr Gumpert - Cor. p. 216ff); he too, agreed that
                             brain stem death would have occurred within 4 - 6 minutes of
                             anoxia;         he felt that Kevin Williams was probably dead before
                             he was got out of the enclosure;          he confirmed that twitching
                             could occur in presence of brain stem death;            he said it was
                             very difficult to feel a carotid pulse in someone with low
                             blood pressure. His evidence was unchallenged on behalf of the
                             families.
                             Submissions:          (i)   the above represented a full and entirely
                             aHgquftte attempt by the coroner to put the relevant facts

                             before the jury;
                             (ii) it showed that he was by no means inflexible about the
                             ■cut off point", and was prepared to go well beyond it where
                             there were sufficient indications to do so.
                             (iii)          the Applicants now seek to introduce fresh evidence
                             (App. p. 229 ff) to rebut it from various sources.                This
                             includes such matters as a letter from a general practitioner
                             in rebuttal of the clinical neuro-physiologist;          and an article
                             from the BMJ, whose conclusions are dealt with in the affidavit
                             of Albert Page.
                      Such material is not admissable in an application for judicial
                      review.

                                                           38
Paul rarlile       (for summary of evidence see Cor. 31)               Prof Usher (ibid.
                   225ff):   - unconscious   10    -   20   seconds;     death within a
                   few minutes. Not challenged.
                   Officer Evans:     (ibid. 227ff) shortly after 15.15, seen
                   hfting carried;    attempts at revival unsuccessful.             Prior
                   to this a Michael Hollingshurst found him at his feet, on

                   the terrace, apparently dead.
           At the resumed inquest Hollihgshurst gave evidence (see App. p.
           67ff);       he gave evidence about the intense crush, and
           eventually realising         there was someone lying on the ground
           at his feet, and his attempts to resuscitate.               The complaint in
           the memorial (App p. 30) is that in an earlier statement this
           witness staled that he first became aware of Carlile when                   he
           tried climbing up his legs.         The statement is not in evidence;
           but it is correct that in it this witness says that some 15
           minutes before he found Paul Carlile lying at his feet, he
           became aware of a hand grabbing at his leg; he grabbed it and
           tried desperately to pull the person up, to no avail.                       15
           minutes later a space occurred, and he found                  2   bodies at his
           feet; that of Paul Carlile had a blue and bloated face, and no
           apparent pulse.       He tried to give heart massage and mouth to
               mouth resuscitation, in vain.       Eventually someone said he had
               done what he could, and helped him out.
               Essentially this was repeated in his evidence, given on oath
               (App. 73ff), save that there was no reference to the attempt to
               climb his leg.   The coroner, quite correctly, did not lead him

                                        39
         on this.      He was cross examined on behalf of the Carlile
         family, but it was never suggested that he might yet he alive

         (App. 76ff)
         F i*w way there is not the slightest evidential foundation for
         the suspicions of his family set out on page 23 of the Memorial
         (App. p.31) that he could have been saved by a more sustained
         attempt at resuscitation at this stage.        Indeed even on Dr
         West's view, he had "classic asphyxia- and so would not have
         survived in any event unless rescued rapidly, which was out of

         the question here.




ttif.harri Jones (For summary of evidence see Cor. 38ff;       evidence itself
                is at Cor. 234 -244). Prof Usher (ibid. 237) - unconscious
                10 - 20 seconds;        thereafter 4 - 6     minutes to die.
                Unchallenged.
                Last seen alive caught up in the surge of pressure which
                preceded the crush (ibid. 239E). Certified dead at 4 p.m.
          The Memorial complains (App. p. 30) that the very lack of
          evidence has made his family concerned that he might have been
          saved had he not been assumed dead when taken to the mortuary,
          but          to hospital   instead But the unchallenged evidence
          of Prof. Usher ruled this out; indeed even Dr West felt that
          his was a case of "classic" traumatic asphyxia, from which
          recovery in the absence of rapid rescue, would not occur.
     Tan Glover      (Summary Cor. p 35)            Prof. Usher (ibid 248ff): -
                     unconscious 1 0 - 2 0 seconds;       thereafter 4 - 6 minutes- to

                     die.
                     Officer Evans: (ibid 250F) M owing a surge in the crowd
                     the Deceased was pushed forward;               next seen in a
                     distressed state near the front of the enclosure;            seen
                     about   20   minute* fatar being pulled from the enclosure
                     onto the pitch by 2 police officers.                 Attempt to
                      resuscitate failed-    Subsequently he       was taken to the
                      gymnasium where a doctor (according to the Deceased's
                      brother) found a pulse, attempted to resuscitate, but was
                      unsuccessful (251B).     Because of this evidence (see ibid.
                      251.G) Prof Usher was recalkd to deal with the question
                      of the pulse;     if there was one, he said (254 H) this
                      could only be explained as evidence of severe brain
                      damage, but not quite at the point where the respiratory
                      and pulse centres had faded out        Death was "very likely"
                      (255B), and if revival had occurred he would have been
                      severely brain damaged (ibid).
                      Because he wished to give evidence (and because he was a
                      member of the family) the coroner permitted the Deceased's
                      father, Joseph Glover, to give evidence during the resumed
                      inquest, just in case he had anything relevant to add ( 1.
                      Cor. 36);       this, it is suggested, is typical of die
                      sensitive and compassionate manner in which the coroner

                      handled this inquest throughout).
(This concludes the review of the evidence relevant to this ground).
2^    The law on "How?":          how wide is "how" - how far need a WTW&,
      investigate?


(a)   It means "by what means" rather than embodying some vague concept such
as "in what broad circumstances" (Atwal. reference above).


(b)   Where a verdict of "lade of care", whether adjectival or free-standing,
is inappropriate in law, then matters going to that question do not, logically,
require to be investigated - and certainly not where they have no causative
potency with respect to the death.


(c)   Beyond this it must be a matter for the individual good sense of the
coroner,    "how" is an ordinary word, in current usage; it should be given its
ordinary meaning (see e.g. ex parte Thomas, at 551B-C). The coroner's decision
in this respect is not judicially reviewable unless "Wednesbury unreasonable".
Thus in R v East Kent Coroner, ex p. Spooner (the Herald of Fra? Enterprise
inquest - transcript supplied), the coroner, as here, imposed a cut-off point;
the Divisional Court rejected the criticism of this:


       "... the coroner is by law an inquisitor;        the witnesses called are those
       whom he, under the statute, flunks it expedient to examine, and he is
       very much the master of his own procedure.            These considerations are
       fortified here because the Coroner has immersed himself in a huge mass of
       material lwhich the court has not seen.         We have scarcely glimpsed the
       top of the iceberg of evidence with which he is familiar.           Very great
       weight therefore should be given to his judgment, although on questions

                                            42
OO    i l   . i t     IA   JL   U I X   I V   I   N O M         A »J tA O A U W n   .




            of law hi is of course exercising a judgment, not a discretion                             In a
            case such as this the chain if causation may be of almost infinite
            length. The Coroner had to break it somewhere to keep his enquiry within
            tolerable bounds.                      He broke it at what I judge to be a reasonable and
            sustainable point, particularly bearing in mind the exhaustive public
            enquiry which had already been conducted by Sheen J." (per Bingham MR at

            p 123).
Those comments are particularly apt in the present case.


In short, questions of causation are questions of fact for the coroner, who is
under no obligation to examine every possible causally contnbutive avenue.


4.           In the face of the evidence summarised in paragraph 2 above, whichwas
unchallenged in all essential respects, it was reasonable of the coroner to
conclude that all the victims had suffered irreversible injury by around 3.15
p.m and to impose a cut-off point at that time.                                     Indeed to have concluded
otherwise on the evidence would have been perverse.




                    Ground 7: Jury not riven the "fall picture" of the evidence of some
                of the witnesses whose evidence was summarised at the Mini-Inquests,




 1,           It is assumed that the absence of the full picture is a reference to the
 "further evidence that has come to light since the Inquest" referred to on page

 38, and 29 of the Memorial.
             This material appears to comprise (Apps' bundle pp 229 - 233):
§




           (a) an unsigned note of a meeting on 15.12.91, after die conclusion of
          the inquest, between Ann Williams, and PC Bruder;
          (b) a conversation between Ann Williams and Special Constable Martin on
          20.2.92;
           (c)     a note from a general practitioner purporting to refute the opinion
          of the pathologist who conducted the post mortem;
          (d) an article in the British Medical Journal dated 30.11.91 saying that
          some injured spectators arrived at hospital convulsing (or who later
          convulsed), yet some survived with no long term physical defects.


    2.    It is claimed (ground 7) that as a result of the failure of the jury to
    receive the full picture,       ’the proceedings were vitiated".    The authority for
    this proposition of law is not cited.


    3.    If this had been an application for statutory review of the decision
    under sec. 13 of the Coroners Act 1988, the court would have had power to
    entertain the application on the basis of "the discovery of new facts or
    evidence or otherwise";         but this is not such an application, the Attorney
    General having refused his leave.


    4.    Since this is an application for judicial review;         and since it is not
    suggested that the coroner had any knowledge of the above matters when he
    conducted the inquest, this further evidence is not relevant to the present
    application:      his inquest, and in particular his decisions made during it,
    cannot be judicially reviewed as a matter of law on this account.
    5.    In any event it issubmitted that the weight and quality of this material
    does not begin to justify the call for a fresh inquest.

                                                44
                                  &-J31SCREHQN


1.      The points made at the outset of these submissions in section A .l are
repeated,


2.      Hie facts were examined by coroner and jury at enormous length at the
initial inquest      The correct approach in this case is the same as that of
Neill L.J in Jamieson, where he said, at the end of the judgment:     "Even if I
had come to the conclusion that the coroner's summing up could be faulted I
would not have thought it right that in the exercise of the court's discretion
it would be right to quash the inquisition and order a new inquest should be
held.       The facts were examined at great length at the inquest held in 1991.
The jury determined the matters which they were required to consider pursuant
to section 11(5) of the 1988 Act."        Exactly the same applies here, only a
fortiori:     the delay is even greater, and the inquiry was vastly longer and
more exhaustive.
                                  IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE



    j. Applicant's    Reference        Notice of Application for   Crown Office Reference
        jNumber                        Leave to Apply for          Number
    (J           JHI H3$r^             Judicial Review
        ]             This form must be read together with Notes for Guidance
    r                            Obtainable from the Crown Office
    1                              To the Master of the Crown Office
                                         Royal Courts of Justice
    1                                           Strand
                                          London WC2A 2LL
    j
          Name, Address and Description       (1)     Sandra Stringer & Donna Carlile, the
        | of Applicants                               mother and sister of Paul Carlile,
                                                      deceased.

                                              (2)     John & Theresa Glover, the father
                                                       and mother of Ian Glover, deceased.

                                              (3)     Joan Sinclair, the sister of Michael
                                                       Kellv. deceased.

                                              (4)     Leslie & Doreen Jones, the -father and
    li                                                 mother of Richard Jones, deceased.

                                              (5)     Peter & Joan Tootle, the father and
                                                       mother of Peter Tootle, deceased.

                                              (6)     James Stephen & Anne Williams, the
                                                       father and mother of Kevin Williams,
                                                       deceased.
,   i
            Judgment. Order, Decision or      (1)      Various decisions of Her Majesty's
            Other Proceedings in Respect               Coroner for        Yorkshire in th<
            of Which Relief is Sought.                 course of the inquest held between
j                                                      the 18th day of April 1989 and the
                                                       28th day of March 1991 into the
                                                       deaths of the deceased hereinbefore
                                                       mentioned and others at the
                                                       Hillsborough Stadium bn 15th April
                                                        1989.

                                               (2)     Conclusion or verdict recorded bv the
                                                        Coroner’s jurv at the end of the said
                                                        inquest that*-these were cases of
                                                        "Accidental Death". «,             .
                                   RELIEF SOUGHT



 (1)     Leave to move for judicial review out of time.



 (2)     An Order of Certiorari to remove into this Honourable Court and quash the

          conclusion or verdict of Accident Death recorded by the jury at the end of the

          inquest hearing on 28th March 1991.



^3)      Such further or other relief, including declaratory relief, as this Honourable

          Court thinks fit to grant.



                    GROUNDS ON WHICH RELIEF IS SOUGHT



                               FACTUAL BACKGROUND



 The background facts of this case are set out in full in the Memorial to the Attorney
 ►
  General which is exhibited to the Affidavit of Jeremy Hawthorn, the Applicants'

 Solicitor. This Honourable Court is respectfully referred to the said Memorial whose

  contents will not be reported here.        a



                                 REASONS FOR DELAY



  The reasons for the delay are set out in fuii in the summary of the steps taken by the

  Applicants to challenge the inquest verdict and othefTelated decisions which is
        I "* .hibited to the Affidavit of their Solicitor, Jeremy Hawthorn.           it is respectfully

            j submitted     that the delay is excused by the extreme difficulties the Applicants

                experienced in obtaining legal representation, the difficulties of a new solicitor and

        I       counsel in obtaining details of whfjTwent on at the unusually protracted inquest, and

                the discovery of new evidence = a process which is going on till this day.        It was

    _           necessary to settle a Memorial to the Attorney General since at first this appeared the
    I
            I more appropriate remedy where subsequent developments were a relevant factor. But

          it has also become clear that, whereas the statutory procedure initiated by the Attorney
       *
       j
    ■ i^ G e n e ra l’s Fiat can provide only one remedy, namely that the inquest be quashed and

            ! a fresh inquest be held, this Honourable Court has a more flexible range of remedies
    I
            ^ in judicial review proceedings and could strike down the conclusion without ordering
            |
|           ^ a fresh inquest. It is therefore submitted that leave should be granted in the public
            \
            J interest, even so far out of time, so that the High Court, in reviewing this matter, can

            ]   have available to it the fullest range of remedies and the alternative option of striking
8
            1 down the conclusion without necessarily having to order a fresh inquest. [This option

                was exercised by the Divisional Court in the case of R -v- St. Pancras Coroners’ Court

■               ex parte Higgins Co/1285/87. in which judgment was given on 23rd May 1988],

l i

i    ‘
r*";]                       GROUNDS ON WHICH SUBSTANTIVE RELIEF IS SOUGHT




                 (1)       The Learned Coroner wrongly conducted the mini-inquests into the question

                           of "who the deceased were, where and when "they met their deaths by

                           reference to summaries of the statements of^sye witnesses which were read

                       <                                                   '                      V-        -
out and whose contents could therefore not be tested by oral evidence and

questioning.   This was particularly unfortunate and improper because the

statements read raised controversial issues of whether the deceased’s deaths

were "instantaneous" or not, which in turn raised important questions as to

whether those who may have been alive for some time after they sustained the

crush injuries which ultimately proved fatal could have been saved by

prompter and better responses by the emergency services.



The Coroner failed to comply with Rule 37 of the Coroners’ Ruleiwhen he

announced his intention of introducing documentary evidence into the mini­

 inquests without going through the procedures laid down of first summarising

 the contents and ascertaining whether there was any objection to the

 proposed course.



 The Coroner wrongly introduced a cut-off point of 3.15pm into the scope of

 the inquest’s inquiry at the outset of the main inquest into the issue of "how"

 the deceased met their deaths.       He wrongly rejected the submissions of

 Counsel for the family against the imposition of this limitation on the scope

 of the inquest. The decision was particularly wrong because there was clear

 evidence that at least four of the deceased were, or may*have been, still alive

' after 3.15pm and lack of evidence in relation to the other two that left the

 issue open that they too were aiive after 3.15pm. Moreover, the decision

 meant that there was no    inquiry   into whether or how' far their deaths were

 caused in part by the delay in calling the em&sgency services, and any
shortcomings in the response of the police, and emergency services to the

plight of the deceased after 3.15pm.



The Coroner wrongly refused to call as witnesses Dr. John Ashton and Dr.

    Glyn Phillips, the significance of whose evidence is summarised in paragraphs

    12 and 13 of the Memorial to the Attorney General. Again this had the effect

    of restricting the scope of the full inquiry into "how" the deceased met their

    deaths which the law requires.



    The Coroner wrongly limited the inquiry into "how” the deceased met their

    deaths so as to exclude inquiry into whether lives could have been saved by

    calling the emergency services sooner and providing better emergency care for

    the injured thereafter.



    The Coroner wrongly failed to direct the jury as to the availability of a verdict

    of "lack of care" or a verdict incorporating some reference to the fact that the

    cause of death was "aggravated by" lack of care, or not prevented from

    proving fatal by "lack of care". It is submitted that the verdict of "lack of care"

    should have been left to the jury both:


t
    (a)      because there was clear evidence that negligence by the police had

             caused the original build-up that resulted in the crush injuries which

             proved fatal; and
                   (b)        because there was clear evidence that despite the limitations

                              imposed on the scope of the inquiry, a more timely summoning of

                              the emergency services and/or a more systematic response by them

                              could have resulted in the savingO of lives.



    |j 7.         Finally, there is now available some evidence that the Coroner and his jury

     J            were not given a full picture of the evidence of some of the witnesses whose

                    statements were partially summarised at the mini-inquests, and that the result

            ^       was that the proceedings were vitiated by the omission of certain facts

||                  [although it is recognised that the motives for such omissions as there were,

                    were well intentioned].
I


I           -                   CONSEQUENCES OF AFORESAID DEFECTS

I

_ - It is submitted that it is open to this Honourable Court, in exercise of its common law
i~                                                                           ■   ■

     j^pw ers of judicial review, either to quash the inquests as a whole and order fresh

H'-ij inquests into the deaths of these six deceased or, alternatively, to strike down the

I         conclusion or verdict without going on to order a fresh inquest - as was done by the

    lO Divisional Court in the case of R -v- St. Pancras Coroners’ Court ex parte Robert
IL-j Higgins (23rd May 1988).                                   ■   ■




                                                                                        ED W A R D F I T Z G E R A L D
I ,                 - ______                                :_________________

I         INVOLVED APPLICANTS S O L I C I T O R S                                    Malcolm J Gregg & Co
^     1                                                                              31 North John S t r e e t
                                                                                     Liverpool,       L2 6 R G
IN THE           H I G H C O U R T OF J U S TICE

QUEEN'S BENCH D I V IS ION

DIVISIONAL C O U R T



IN THE M A T T E R O F AN A P P L I C A T I O N F O R LEAVE TO APPLY FOR
JUDICIAL R E V I E W


AND IN THE M A T T E R O F D E C I S I O N S M A D E BY HER M A J E S T Y ’S C O R O N E R
FOR S OUTH Y O R K S H I R E B E T W E E N 1 8 T H A P R I L 1989 A N D 2 8 T H M A R C H 1991 '




                                             AFFIDAVIT




I, JEREMY J O H N MURRAY HAWTHORN,                   o f Malcolm J G r e g g & Co,     Solicitors

of 31 North J o h n Street,                Liverpool     2, MAKE O A T H and say as

 f o l l o w s :-



 1.              I a m a S o l i citor in the f i r m of M a l colm J G r e g g & Co of

 31 North J o h n Street,              Liverpool 2,       and make this A f f i d a v i t        in

 support of the applic a t i o n by all six applicants h e r e i n for leave

 to apply for Judicia l Review.                      I h a v e authority to m a k e    this

 Affidavit on the applicants'                      behalf.



 2.              On the 15th April          1992    I ca used to be sent to the o ffice of

  the Atto rney G e ner al a m e m o rial m a d e on behalf of the applicants,

  to which were a n nexe d              two v o l u m e s of exhibted material.            There is
                                                                     ~ *■«
  produced a n d s h o w n to me m a r k e d          "JJH/1" a copy of the said

  memorial ani e x h i b i t e d bundles.



  3.              I   confirm    that; the c o n t e n t s of the said m e m oria l    a   r e    t r u   e




  to   t h   e    best of my knowledge and belief.
    4.           There      is    further        produced     and     shown    to   me   m arked     "JJH /2"
i
     ] schedule        showing        the s u b m i s s i o n of the a p p l i c a n t s as      to the

|delay       in s u b m i t t i n g    this a p p l i c a t i o n .    These s u b m i s s i o n s   are

    ! likewise       true    to   the best of my k n o w l e d g e and belief.
     J

     j.          I       a c c o r d i n g l y as this H o n o u r a b l e Court to g r a n t        the r e l i e f

fought         by      the a p p l i c a n t s herein.




|             at L i v e r p o o l    in         )

     the C o u n t y    of M e r s e y s i d e   )

| this^tC d a y o f M a y             1992       )




     Be f o r e me


I                         Solicitor/CoTTTmlSsTomr.:-“fur— Ssrths— -
IN THE HIGH C O U R T O F J U S T I C E

QUEEN'S BENCH D I V I S I O N

DIVISIONAL C O U R T




IN THE H A T T E R O F A N A P P L I C A T I O N F O R L E A V E TO
APPLY FOR J U D I C I A L R E V I E W


AND IN THE M A T T E R O F D E C I S I O N S M A D E B Y H E R
M A J E S T Y ’S C O R O N E R F O R S O U T H Y O R K S H I R E
BETWEEN 18TH A P R I L 1989 A N D 2 8 T H M A R C H                1991




                             AFFIDAVIT




 Malcolm J G r e g g & Co
 31 North J o h n S t r e e t
 LIVERPOOL
 L2 6RG
    17N THE MATTER OF THE CORONERS’ ACT 1988

j AND IN THE MATTER OF THE DEATHS OF:


                                   PAUL WILLIAM CARLELE
                                    IAN THOMAS GLOVER
                                       RICHARD JONES
                                      MICHAEL KELLY
                                       PETER TOOTLE
                                   KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS


            H E R MAJESTY’S ATTORNEY GENERAL:



I                                 THE HUMBLE MEMORIAL OF

                        SANDRA STRINGER AND DONNA CARLILE
                             (the m other and sister of Paul Cariiie)
                                JOHN AND THERESA GLOVER
I                             (the father and mother of Ian Glover)
                                        JOAN SINCLAIR
                                   (the sister of M ichael Kelly)
                                 LESLIE AND DOREEN JONES
                           (the father and m other of Richard Jones)
|                                 PETER AND JOAN TOOTLE
                            (the father and mother of Peter Tootle)
                         JAMES STEPHEN AND ANNE WILLIAMS
I   *                     (the father and mother of Kevin W illiam s)

|
        SEW ETH THAT:

    C\)        Your Memorialists are:


    H                         ■
     J         (i)     Sandra Stringer and Donna Cariiie, the mother and sister of Paul
R
        i              Cariiie, deceased.
IN THE MATTER OF THE CORONERS’ ACT 1988

AND IN THE MATTER OF THE DEATHS OF:


             PAUL WILLIAM CARLILE
              IAN THOMAS GLOVER
                RICHARD JONES
                MICHAEL KELLY
                 PETER TOOTLE
             KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS


TO HER MAJESTY’S ATTORNEY GENERAL:


          . THE HUMBLE MEMORIAL OF

    SANDRA STRINGER AND DONNA CARLILE
         (the mother and sister of Paul Cariiie)
            JOHN AND THERESA GLOVER
          (the father and mother of Ian Glover)
                    JOAN SINCLAIR
               (the sister o f Michael Kelly)
             LESLIE AND DOREEN JONES
       (the father and mother o f Richard Jones)
              PETER AND JOAN TOOTLE
        (the father and mother of Peter Tootle)
     JAMES STEPHEN AND ANNE WILLIAMS
      (the father and mother of Kevin Williams)




M alcolm J. Gregg & Co
Second Floor
Century Buildings
31 North Street
Liverpool
L2 6RG

Solicitors for the Memorialists
(ii)     John and Theresa Glover, the father and mother of Ian Glover,

         deceased.



(iii)   Joan Sinclair, the sister of Michael Kelly, deceased.



(iv)    Leslie and D oreen Jones, the father and mother o f Richard Jones,

         deceased.



(v)     Peter and Joan Tootle, the father and mother of Peter Tootle,

         deceased.



(vi)    James Stephen and Anne Williams, the father and mother of Kevin

        Williams, deceased.



Between the 18th day o f April 1989 and the 28th day o f March 1991 an

inquest was held before Doctor Popper, one of H er Majesty’s Coroners,

touching the deaths o f the six deceased named hereinbefore and some 89

others "who had died as a result o f the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on the

15th April 1989.

                                                        r

A t the said inquest the jury returned and the Coroner recorded that the six

deceased named hereinbefore had died of multiple crush injuries and the

conclusion of the verdict was accidental death.
Your Memorialists hereby seek your authority under Section 13 of the

Coroners’ Act 1988 to apply to the High Court for an Order quashing the snid

inquisition and ordering a fresh inquest They do so on the grounds that the

said inquest was vitiated by the wrongful rejection o f evidence by "irregularity

of proceedings" by "insufficiency of inquiry" and by a failure to direct the jury

correctly as to the verdicts available to them on the facts and in particular the

omission to make any mention at all of the alternative verdicts of "lack of

care", accidental death due to lack of care" and "accidental death aggravated

by lack of care".   They further submit that in some cases at least there has

been a subsequent "discovery of new facts or evidence" that justifies the

quashing of the inquisition and the holding o f a fresh inquest



Your Memorialists respectfully refer you to the individual summaries

appended hereto which set out the particular facts o f their individual cases.

In what follows your Memorialists will develop some o f the points common to

all their submissions which have caused them to seek your authority to apply

to the High Court under Section 13. But they accept that each case will have

to be looked at individually in deciding whether to grant your authority to

some or all o f them. A ll o f them complain that the Coroner wrongly failed

to direct the jury as to the verdicts of lack o f care or accidental death due to

o r "aggravated by lack of care". They do so firstly on the basis that the

negligence of the police in causing the tragedy was self-evident and has

indeed been admitted; this justified leaving the verdict of "lack of care" to the

jury on the basis of the police’s failure to perforav-their duty of care to the
deceased. But, additionally and in the alternative, they complain that the

Coroner wrongly excluded evidence of lack of care in the emergency services’

and police’s reaction to the deceased’s initial injuries, wrongly insisted on a

cut-off point of 3.15pm for the evidence heard at the main inquest (despite

evidence that the deceased were, or may have been, still alive after that time)

and wrongly failed to direct the jury on the availability of a verdict of

accidental death aggravated by lack of care or lack o f care based on the

failure o f the various responsible agencies to provide the deceased with

adequate medical attention after they had sustained their original injuries.



               BACKGROUND TO THE INQUEST



The inquest arose out o f the disaster at Hillsborough Stadium Sheffield which

occurred on 15th April 1989. On that day the semi-final of the Football

Association Cup was arranged to be played at the Stadium betw een the

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest Football Clubs. What happened next can

be summarised in the words of Lord Keith in his Judgment on th e case o f

Cooper & Others -v- Wright:



’T he South Yorkshire Police Force, which was responsible for crowd control

at the match, allowed an excessively large number o f intending spectators to

enter the ground at the Leppings Lane end, an area reserved for Liverpool

Supporters. They crammed into pens 3 and 4, below the West Stand, and in

the resulting crush 95 people were killed and 400r£ hysically injured".
As is recorded in Lord Keith’s Judgment, the South Yorkshire Police have

subsequently admitted that their negligence was responsible for the said

injuries and deaths.



Before the inquest hearing opened on 18th April 1990, there had been an

official inquiry ordered by the Secretary of State for the Home Department

on 17th April 1989. This inquiry was carried out by Lord Justice Taylor with

the help of two assessors. In his Interim Report on the "events at Sheffield

Wednesday Football Grounds on 15th April 1989" which was presented to

Parliament in August 1989, Lord Justice Taylor had established a chronology

of the key events and made certain findings of relevance to this Memorial.

Your Memorialists respectfully summarise the chronology of findings to assist

you by way o f background to their complaints about the conduct of the

subsequent inquest. Lord Justice Taylor’s findings can, then, be summarised

as follows, on the basis of his Interim Report:



(i)     Before the kick-off o f the match, which was scheduled for 3.00pm,

         there was a build-up o f supporters outside the Leppings Lane

         entrance to the grounds which caused pressure and discomfort to

         those trying to get into the ground through the turftstiles.



(ii)    At 2_52pm Chief Superintendent Duckenfield - who was the police

         officer in charge o f crowd control at the match decided that, in order

         to relieve the pressure at the turnstiles, he*would givegpermission’for
         the gates to the ground at the Lepptngs Lane entrance to be opened.

         The opening of one of the gates, Gate C, resulted in a sudden influx

         o f supporters through the tunnel and into the spectators’ pens 3 and

         4, building up an intolerable pressure on the supporters at the front

         of the pens.   This decision to open the gate was found by Lord

        Justice Taylor to be a negligent "blunder". H e also found that the

         police had thereafter further misjudged the situation by failing to

        take any steps to divert supporters from pens 3 and 4. H e found

        that, had this been done, they could have prevented the fatal build­

        up of pressure in the pens during the minutes after 2.52pm - which

        eventually resulted in the supporters being crushed against the

        perimeter wall and the wire mesh of the fence above i t Lord Justice

        Taylor also found that the police had made a fatal error in deciding

        not to postpone the match, once the problems at the turnstiles

        became clear, and that postponement o f the match to enable a

        slower and more orderly entrance into the ground could also have

        averted the resulting disaster.



(iii)   Lord Justice Taylor found that the pressure on those at the front had

        already become intense and life-threatening by 2.59pm, but that the

        dangerous situation went "unheeded" and "unremedied" by the

        police.



(iv)    The match kicked-off just before 3pm andr-shortly after that at
                                                           *
i                                                                          V-

                                -6-
3.04pm a further surge caused by the spectators’ response to a

narrow miss at goal by Beardsley for Liverpool further increased the

pressure on the supporters crushed against the wall at the front. By

then, if not before, many of the supporters had suffered the severe

crush injuries from which they died. The exact time o f death was

not established by Lord Justice Taylor since this was clearly not an

essential part of his inquiry’s task.



To the front o f the crowd, there was delay by the police in opening

the perimeter gates in pens 3 and 4 to the track which ran alongside

the pitch. These were not open until 3.00pm, and until they were

opened the victims of the crush had no means o f escaping from the

pens during the build-up of pressure between 252pm and 2_59pm.

It was only after 3.00pm that spectators were able to escape by those

gates onto the track and the pitch.



The match was not stopped until 3.05pm and it was only then that

the gravity o f the situation appears to have been appreciated.



There was then a delay in evacuating the casualties from pens 3 and

4 and in responding to the magnitude o f the disaster. In particular.

Lord Justice Taylor made the following findings:



(a)      Initially no officer took effective charge of the evacuation-
      of casualties from the pens.



(b)   It was not until 3.12pm that chief Superintendent Nesbit

      arrived on the pitch and organised a chain o f officers to

      simplify and expedite the evacuation of casualties from the

      pitch.



(c)   Though it was not clear when the Major Disaster Plan was

      initiated, it was certainly not initiated until 3.06pm

      (subsequent evidence suggests that the existence of a major

      disaster was not communicated to the ambulance services

      for some time).



(d)   Ambulances from the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Area

      began to arrive at Leppings Lane at 3.13pm and at the

      Peniston Road entrance at 3.17pm.
                                     »




(e)   No request for the fire-brigade or for cutting gear was

      made until 3.13pm (it would obviously have helped to

      evacuate the injured from behind the wijing had the fire-

      brigade and cutting equipment been available sooner).



(f)   No request for help was broadcast to doctors and nurses in

      the grounds until 3.29pm when^according to Lord Justice
                   Taylor’s findings, "it was too late".



It is plain then that, on the basis of the evidence heard by Lord Justice Taylor

(which to a large extent was reheard by the Coroner and his jury at the

inquest) there was clear evidence that police blunders and negligence was

responsible for the fatal crush which caused the deaths of the deceased. If

then the jury were, as a matter of law, entitled to reflect that negligence in a

verdict (whether o f "lack of care" or some other verbal formula falling short

of the gross negligence or recklessness necessary to constitute unlawful killing

by manslaughter), such a verdict should have been left to them on the facts.



Secondly, it is plain that Lord Justice Taylor found som e serious deficiencies

in the police response to the plight of the injured once they had sustained

their injuries at some time between 252pm and 3.05pm, or even later. It is

true that he had concluded that many of the injuries and deaths were

probably inevitable once the fatal crush had built up. But heTecognised that

a quicker response to the emergency by the police to ensure the early

attendance of the emergency services might have saved at least some lives.

These findings did at least raise the further question o f whether the cause o f

death (Le. crush injuries) had not in some cases been aggravated by "lack o f

cafe" in the sense of a failure to respond swiftly enough to the plight of the

injured and provide them with the necessary medical care to avert death.
between the poiice and the emergency services", and further found that "it is

clear that SYMAS and the Fire Brigade should have been called earlier than

they were". But, in view o f his finding as to the "pathetically short period for

which those unable to breathe could survive" he found that it is "improbable

that quicker recourse to the emergency services could have saved more lives".

Moreover, he rejected the criticism that, once they had been called; the S t

John Ambulance Brigade, the Fire Brigade and SYMAS (the South Yorkshire

Metropolitan Ambulance Service) had been slow to respond or inappropriate

in their response or that there was any insufficiency of equipment or lack of

triage. However, it is clear that he did not rule out the possibility that some

lives may have been saved by calling the emergency services in earlier and his

conclusion that in most cases the injuries would have been fatal in any event

after a very short period of crush asphyxia depended on a particular

pathological premise (namely that fatal crush injuries were due to a

continuing pressure which made death inevitable in a matter o f minutes)

which has subsequently been challenged and is inconsistent with the fact that

some o f the dead appeared to have revived briefly and many o f the injured

who got medical attention'promptly did survive (See BMJ article dated 30th

November 1991 and annexed hereto). As to his view that the emergency

services could not be validly criticised, this was based on a rejection of the

evidence o f two doctors present at the ground with which a jury (had they

been allowed to hear their evidence at the inquest) might not have concurred.
           ;                                                                    .        ...



    L-l)       So, despite his reservations about the number of lives that might have been

    ;j         saved by a swifter response Lord Justice Taylor did make findings which

    n          suggested that the lives of some of the dead might have been saved if there
     I
               had been a more timely response by the police to the crisis and if they had

    1j         called in the emergency services more quickly. But, as indicated above, there

    ri         was additional evidence considered by Lord Justice Taylor, and available to

               the Coroner, which went considerably further.       This evidence principally

               consisted of the statements o f two doctors and a nurse who had been present

           ^   at the match and attempted to assist and treat the casualties - namely Dr.

               Glyn Phillips, Dr. John Ashton’ and Mr. FJ. Eccleston, a senior nursing

               manager.



    _2)        Dr. Glvn Phillips



I ,‘           Dr. Glyn Phillips has provided a statement to the Coroner, a copy o f which

^              is annexed hereto. In summary, he remarks in his statement how he had been
'! a
               a spectator at the match, and had experienced the crash as the crowd surged
i              forward in the pen, and had managed to escape from the pen over the

r              perimeter fence. H e then made various attempts to resuscitate unconscious
u
j              spectators lying on the pitch. In one case he succeeded in jejfiving a spectator

               who was lying unconscious by the goal line, cyanosed and pulseless, when he

               first came upon him. After some fifteen minutes o f cardiac massage and

               mouth to mouth resuscitation Dr. Phillips noticed the young man began to

               make his own breathing efforts. He got him to ai^ambulance and told the
arnbuiance man that he needed an ambulance "nov/' - but the amoujaiicc man

told him that he couldn't get the ambulance out. The time, on the basis of

Dr. Phillips’ estimations, must by then have been sometime after 3.21pm. His

evidence is significant in that it demonstrates the possibility that lives could

have been saved with proper emergency help after the crush injuries sustained

at around 3.00pm - 3.04pm. It also indicates that there were matters which

deserve investigation in inquiring as to the cause o f death which occurred

after 3.15pm (the "cut-off point selected by the Coroner).        Dr. Phillips’

evidence is also significant in that he called for a ventilator whilst attending

the victim who revived and was told that there was none; and he also asked

for an oxygen cylinder, and was provided with an empty one. This did point

to a significant ‘lack of equipment’ as a problem that may have contributed

to the deaths of some of the deceased.



Dr. John Ashton



Dr. John Ashton, who had attended the match as a spectator with his two

sons and nephew, is a medical practitioner and senior lecturer in Community.

Health at University of Liverpool. In a statement dated 19th April 1989 he

gave a detailed account of the events that unfolded from about 3.15pm

onwards which highlighted the serious shortcomings in the response of the

police and the emergency services. His account was as follows:



         When he got a view o f the pitch shortly before 3.15pm he said:
"There seemed to be a few St. John’s Ambulance people attending

the people who were lying around the pitch and I could see people

lying on the pitch unattended.      There was a large line o f police

officers across the pitch at the centre circle”.



At about 3.15pm he was able to get a better view of what was going

on the pitch and described what he saw as follows:



’T he overwhelming impression was of a large and growing number

of casualties and not much response. The supporters were now

impatient and angry at the slowness of the response to the

emergencies. There appeared to be only one or two stretchers on

the pitch and one ambulance was making its way around from the far

comer." H e then described how the supporters were chanting for

assistance to be brought to the injured on the pitch and how many

o f them began to tear down the advertising boards and organise

themselves into stretcher parties. It was around this time that he

heard the tannoy appeal for doctors to help. This took place at

about 3.29pm.
                                                     ***» ■




Dr. Ashton asked several policemen who he could report to to help

and was told they did not know. Finally, a senior police officer

(Inspector Grace) was pointed out to him but he too said that he did

not know who was in charge of emergencies or whoffi he should
Dr. Ashton then went out into Leppings Lane at around 3.30pm to

3.35pm and found that there was only one ambulance there.



Dr. Ashton found that there was no triage system in operation to

identify those most in need of medical aid so he organised a triage

system himself as to whom to put in the ambulance.



Dr. Ashton recounted how there was no steady flow of ambulances

until between 3.45pm and 3.50pm. Once they began to arrive he and

a local practitioner worked together sorting out the casualties and

dispatching them in ambulances.



It was not until then that "an anaesthetist arrived from somewhere

and fire engines came with resuscitation equipment, but all of this

was really too late". Dr. Ashton took the view that, by 430p m it was

"all over".



Dr. Ashton recorded his view that "on this occasion crowd safety

took second place to crowd control" and that the emergency service

was "woefully inadequate". He recognised the difficulty o f assessing

how many lives might have been saved by a more timely response,

but clearly his statement raised this issue most clearly.
                                                                ■ - ■ ■■ ■ V
                        Mr. Eccleston



                        Mr. Eccleston is a qualified nurse and Senior Nurse Manager who made a

    Li                  statement dated 18th April 1989 giving his account o f the disaster in which he

                        had been caught up after attending the match as a Liverpool supporter with
    0
                        his son. In his statement which is appended to this Memorial, he gives an

                        account o f the events which occurred after the match was stopped.           His

                        account of events can be briefly summarised as follows:



                        (a)     He was allowed onto the pitch by a steward when he explained he

                                was a trained nurse.



                        (b)    * H e then helped the police pull casualties through the gates of the

                                pens onto the pitch.       The first casualties were conscious and

                                recovered but they then began to pull out unconscious bodies.
,




                        (c)     H e recalls resuscitating one young man to the point where he

                                regained consciousness and was able to talk (pages 3-4) and then

                                 taking him on a stretcher to the S t John’s Ambulance room.



                        (d)     Later on at about 15.30 he strove to resuscitate another young man

                                 but "lost the battle for the young man’s life". H e records that at that

                                 stage "we still had no equipment of any sort to work with".




                                                         -15-
         > -V ,   ' '   A        ' .
                /
It was shortly after 15.30pm that the first ambulances began to maKe

their way onto the pitch.



He later went to the gymnasium where the space was divided into a

part set aside for the presumed dead and a part for the living. This

was about 15.55pm and the scene was "absolute chaos".



Your Memorialists would particularly draw attention to his

conclusions (6) and (7) which were as follows:



"(6)    Observing from the outside it appears to have taken far too

        long to decide that it was not a security problem and that

        the fans genuinely needed help.          Working with and

       • alongside the individual police officers in the immediate

        disaster area, I have enormous praise and admiration for

        their efforts. Overall at the scene, however, there appeared

        to be a lack o f coordination and genuine leadership.



"(7)    For an extremely long time we were without any medical

        equipment o f any description. I still can’t understand why
                                                  .Is** •
        the local Health Authority’s Major M edical Disaster Team

        was not called upon.       I understand that all Health

        Authorities in this country have a major disaster policy. It

        is impossible to accurately estimate the difference this
     r          ' ■                                        "              ■   ‘     :
           1                           would have made in saving life. I do however believe that

           ,                           the Liverpool fans should have been given the chance".



 j         5)         Issues Raised bv Evidence Disclosed to Coroner



                      It is plain then that the general evidence disclosed to the Coroner when he

                      embarked upon the Inquest proceedings in April 1990 raised at least two

                      issues that deserved investigation and might result in a verdict that reflected

                      culpable failure on the part o f the police and/or the emergency services:



                      (i)     Firstly there was the negligence of the police in permitting the

                              situation to develop to a point where the "fatal" pens were so

                              crowded that the crush injuries resulted which proved fatal to the

                              deceased.



^                     (ii)    Secondly, there was the slow response by the police and emergency

                              services to the pligH o f the injured, the evidence that some could
[
L- j                          have been saved by a more timely response, and the general
   i
                              evidence of chaos, lack o f leadership, lack o f equipment and lack o f
Lr ?                                                       . .
 £’,j                                                                    •
l ‘                           ambulances during the crucial time from 3.04pm until 330pm and
                                                                                  r .   '
-n■)
 t
 .
     .•!                      thereafter.



                      These were all matters which, it is submitted, require investigation in order
 1
                      to determine properly "how" the deceased met their deaths, and they made
the Coroner’s subsequent decision to fix a 3.15pm cut-off point unlawful and

unjustifiable. Against that background your Memorialists turn to the conduct

of the Inquest itself.



Opening of Inquest with Jurv - 18th April 1990



The Coroner swore in a jury and commenced the inquest before the jury on

the 18th o f April 1990.    On that occasion the Coroner explained the

procedures that he proposed to adopt to the jury and to the representatives

of your Memorialists’ families. The situation was complicated by the fact that

the Director of Public Prosecutions was still contemplating the initiation of

criminal proceedings against officers of the South Yorkshire Police for their

part in permitting the disaster to occur. The Coroner therefore decided to

open the inquests and hear evidence in the first stage at a series of mini-

inquests which would be confined in their scope to the statutory question of

"who" the deceased was in each case and "when and where" he m et his death.

H e indicated that he would postpone all wider investigation into the further

question of "how" the deceased came by their deaths - and the extent to which

fault played a part in that causation - until after the Director o f Public

Prosecutions had reached a decision on whether to •initiate criminal

proceedings. H e therefore explained his intentions as follows:



(i) .    He would firstly hold a series of mini-inquests into the deaths of

         each of the deceased confined to the investigation o f "who the
 d ecreased   was, when he died, as far as it can be established and

where he died, as far as it can be established" (page 10 G-H of

tra n s c r ip t of proceedings on 18th April 1990). A t the end of each of

these mini-inquests he would adjourn pending the decision of the

Director of Public Prosecutions on criminal proceedings.



He would not permit any investigation of the wider question of "how"

the deceased met their deaths at these preliminary inquests and "no

criticism or attack on any person or corporations will be permitted

and if a question is asked I will not allow it" (page 128).



The evidence of these mini-inquests would be presented in the form

of "summaries" read out by presenting officers. These "summaries"

would summarise the statements taken from eye-witnesses as to the

movements of the deceased on the day of the disaster, th e sightings

made of them a t the time of the fatal crush, th e finding of their

bodies on the pitch, any attempts at resuscitation m ade, and the

taking of their bodies to the temporary m ortuary in the gym, and the

certification of death. There would be no oral evidence a t these

mini-inquests save for the reading out of these summaries, based on

statements taken, by presenting officers and the evidence of

pathologists as to the cause of death (pages 13F - 14F).



The Coroner adm itted that he was not complying wkh the
         requirements of R ule 37 of th e Coroners’ Rules which lays down the

         p r o c e d u r e th at must b e followed before documentary evidence is p u t

         before an inquest instead of original viva voce evidence (page 17D

         18C). In particular, he was not going to summarise the contents of

         the summaries and then invite the consent of the interested parties

         to this mode of adducing evidence as Rule 37 requires. H e justified

         this departure from the requirements of Rule 37 on grounds of

        practicality.



The mini-inquests of the six young men whose deaths are the subject of this

Memorial took place between the 1st and 4th of May. D etailed accounts are

included in the individual statements relative to the deceased individually

which are appended herewith. But the six mini-inquests had th e following

features in common:



(i)     A t each of them post-mortem evidence was given by pathologists to

        the effect that death was due to traum atic asphyxia or crush

        asphyxia. P ut simply this means that the pressure of th e crush of

        bodies on them prevented their chests from moving in o r out so that

        they could not breathe and oxygen was cut off £rom their vital

        organs. As a result they lost consciousness and subsequently died.

        In each case, the pathologists claimed that the deceased would have

        lost consciousness in a matter of seconds and that they would have

        died within a m atter of a few minutes.
At each of them the evidence of eye-witnesses relating to the

deceaseds’   movements prior to death, the injuries they sustained,

their condition on being found and the certification of death was

primarily given by way o f reading out a documentary ‘summary’

which collated and summarised the statements of the contemporary

eye-witnesses. With few exceptions none of the eye-witnesses gave

oral evidence and the families of the deceased had to rely on the

accuracy of the summary presented in order to gain an account of

the last hours o f their sons’ deaths and the circumstances of their

deaths.



In four of the cases there was some evidence that the deceased were

still alive after sustaining their initial crush injuries and for longer

perhaps than had been said seemed to be possible by the

pathologists. T hese were the cases of Paul Carlile, Ian Glover, and

Kevin Williams and Michael Kelly. Coupled with the evidence that

some o f the other victims who survived were found unconscious after

the initial crush but revived by timely medical intervention (see

paragraphs 11-14), this has raised in the minds of the deceaseds’

families the question o f whether their lives could have been saved by

a more timely m edical response and suitable efforts at resuscitation.

This, in turn,   raises the issue o f whether the causation o f their

deaths was referrable to or "aggravated by” "lack of care" in the

accepted sense o f that expression as defined in cases such as ex.
         parte Hicks f!987> 1 WLR 1524. Similarly in the two cases where

         there is no evidence of life after 3.04pm, the cases of Richard Jones

         and Peter Tootle, their families are left with reason to suspect that

         the deceased may have still been alive and capable of being saved

         between the time of the crush and the time when they were certified

         dead (at 4.00pm in the case of Richard Jones, and 3.54pm in the

         case of Peter Tootle). The evidence relating to the four who showed

         signs of life after 3.04pm and may have been alive after 3.15pm and

         capable of being saved, will be briefly summarised below.



In respect of three cases of Paul Carlile, Ian Glover and Michael Kelly the

evidence (as fully set out in the families’ individual appended statements) can

be summarised as follows with regard to the question o f survival:



(i)      Paul Carlile



         The evidence o f Professor Usher was that Paul Carlile, who was not

         in fact certified dead until 435pm, would have fallen unconscious

         within ten to twenty seconds of sustaining his crush injuries and died

         within minutes thereafter. This claim appears to conflict with the

         statement o f the off-duty nurse Michael Hollinghurst which was

         shown to his mother, Sandra Stringer.        In that statement, Mr.

         Hollinghurst describes how he first became aware of Paul Cariile

         when he felt him ‘climbing up his legs’. He was seen to be pulling
himself up by holding onto Mr. Hollinghurst’s trousers. This would

have taken place between 3.03pm and 3.15pm and suggests that Paul

Carliie was alive and conscious when first found by Mr. Hollinghurst.

In the statem ent Mr. Hollinghurst describes his attem pts at

resuscitation, and how he was told to leave the enclosure by a

policeman or ambulance man who said he could achieve no more.

This has raised in his family’s minds the suspicion that Paul Carlile

could have been saved by a more sustained attem pt at resuscitation.

 It is questionable whether Paul was in fact dead at the point. There

was no electro-cardiogram to test for a pulse (which is extremely low

in traumatic asphyxia cases).   Given that he had been conscious

when he was trying to pull himself up, Paul’s family believe that he

might have been saved had Mr. Hollinghurst been allowed to stay

with him longer. They are also very concerned that though he was

one of the first casualties to be taken out through the tunnel to the

Leppings Lane area shortly after 3.15pm, he was, however, never

placed in an ambulance and was still on the ground in th a t area at

435pm when D r. Monaghan certified him dead. A final matter of

concern raising the question of possible survival is the fact that Mr.

Monaghan requested the use of a machine when attending to Mr.

Carlile. This may suggest that, even then, it was not certain whether

he was dead or not A further point to note is that w hen Michael

Hollinghurst gave evidence at the resumed inquest none of the

details relating to Paul’s attempts to sta&d up-were raised as an
 Inn Glover




 Ian Glover was removed from Pen 3 by two police officers and was

 placed on his back on the ground. His brother Joseph attempted

 mouth-to-mouth resuscitation but was stopped by a police officer

 who pronounced Ian dead and placed a jum per over his face. No

 equipment was used to ascertain the presence of a pulse.           The

 evidence of Professor Usher was that he died of traum atic asphyxia,

 and that his injuries would have created unconsciousness within ten

 to twenty seconds and made death inevitable within four to six

 minutes. This, however, was inconsistent with the evidence of his

 brother, Joseph, which was not given orally to the mini-inquest but

indirectly via the Reporting Officer Geraldine Evans. She states (at

page 5B of the mini-inquest transcript for 4th May 1990):



"Sir, I have to include that I have spoken w ith Joseph this, morning

and he wishes to state that in the gymnasium a doctor was present

and when he examined Ian he did in fact find a pulse and attem pted

• to resuscitate him for about fifteen minutes b u t was unsuccessful".



 It is clear that these attempts at resuscitation would have taken place

during the period between 3.25pm and 3.40pm and suggest the

possibility both that Ian was alive after 3.15pm and th at he might

have survived had there been a more timely attem pt a t resuscitation
    he was on the pitch possibly prevented such an attem pt.



    Michael Kelly

                                                                                 ..   .v..


    In Michael Kelly’s case the pathologist, D r. John Clark, gave

    evidence at the minirinquest on the 1st of May 1989 th at he died of

    crush asphyxia but that the asphyxial changes in him w ere relatively

    mild. There was evidence that he was still alive at 3.08pm (10D of

    mini-inquest transcript) which tends to negative any suggestion of

    instantaneous unconsciousness and death minutes after. Moreover,

    PC Maugham gave evidence that he reached M ichael Kelly at some

    time around 3.08pm, gave him artificial resuscitation, and carried him

    to th e Spion Kop End on a hoarding improvised to serve as a

    stretcher. T hat would have been some time around or after 3.15 pm

    and PC Maugham was quite confident that M ichael Keily was still

    alive at that stage.   H e described how M ichael Kelly was still

    breathing for himself when he handed him over to th e S l John’s

    Ambulance Service. Moreover Michael’s Post-M ortem details reveal

    no evidence of brain damage and he agreed with Counsel for the

    family that he was confident that he "had won through" in Michael
*

    Kelly’s case and resuscitated him. Naturally this evidence, together

    with the evidence that Mr. Kelly’s asphyxial changes were relatively

    mild, suggested to his family that his death was preventable and that


                                                                             v

                            -25-
             ‘           ■ '           '   .             "    '    •• 1 ■    / 1. .               :
' !                          he only ceased to breathe subsequently and died because of some

                             shortcomings in the care he received after he was handed over to the
n
,u                           St. John’s Ambulance Service.        He was not certified dead until

                             3.59pm.


Ll
(19)             Kevin Williams’ Mini-Inouest



                 A t Kevin Williams’ mini-inquest on 2nd May Dr. Slater, the pathologist, gave
                         ✓
                 evidence that death was due to asphyxia and that his injuries were likely to

         Q       have resulted in unconsciousness within seconds and in death within three to

                 five minutes (page 3B-E).        However, evidence was then read out, in the

                 course of the summary, from two police officers which suggested that he might

                 still have been alive for some considerable time after he sustained his original

                 injuries and capable of being saved. The evidence took the following form:



     I           (i)         There was first a statement from a PC Brader which was referred to

                             in the summary in which he stated that he had com e upon Kevin

                             Williams lying on the ground of the pitch having convulsions (the
 n
                             rest o f his statement in which he referred to Kevin Williams’

                             vomiting and to him having a pulse was not read o u ta t this hearing

                             though this clearly provided further evidence that he was still alive).

                             Qearly this evidence suggested that Kevin Williams was still alive

                             and moving a considerable time after his original injuries and even

 0                           after being moved onto the pitch. This raised the question o f
that his own attempts at resuscitation eventually failed and that

Kevin Williams went grey.



However, a further statement was then referred to from a Special

Constable Deborah Martin who had made a statem ent to the effect

that Kevin Williams was alive and had been briefly resuscitated as

late as about 4pm. In the original, statem ent she made which was

not read out at the inquest but merely referred to, she said:



"He stopped breathing so I gave him the kiss of life, and heart

massage and a doctor also helped. He started breathing and opened

his eyes, his only word was "Mom" and then he died".



This statement was referred to with some scepticism (page 6F of

transcript and page 7D-E).    But clearly it once again raises the

possibility of survival long after 3.15pm (as late as 4pm) and the

question o f whether death might have been prevented by more

timely medical intervention. The Coroner was sufficiently concerned

about this evidence to call further evidence on the matter on 4th
                                                ' *V** '
May at a resumed mini-inquest into the death o f Kevin Williams.
p|0)           Kevin W illia m s jthe resumed mini-innuest)
ill


               When the mini-inquest was resumed on 4th May the Coroner called further
n
f:             evidence which was undoubtedly intended to discredit the suggestion that
:j
               Kevin Williams had survived for some considerable time after sustaining his

               crush injuries and to reassure the family by qualifying and undermining the
 i-i
               testimony of PC Bruder and Special Constable M artin. T he fu rth er evidence-

 ■]            took the following form:
 H


 '!                                                                                '             *


           ^   (i)          An Inspector Robert Sawers was called who stated th at h e had re ­

                            interviewed PC Bruder on 3rd May and that, in the light of the

                            further questions put to him, PC Bruder now accepted that his

                            description of the deceased as ‘having convulsions’ should be altered

                            and the ‘movement’ was best described as a ‘twitch’ (6C). H e also

                            reported that PC Bruder had now qualified his claim to have ‘"felt

                            a slight pulse" and that he now accepted th at "whatever h e felt there

      r-                    he cannct b e categoric it was a pulse” (page 6G ). H e fu rth e r reports

                            that PC B raden now accepted that he had n o t w itnessed Kevin

                            Williams being sick (page 7b).



               (ii)         D r. David Slater, the pathologist, was then recalled. His evidence
                      • *


                            was that Kevin Williams’ death was caused by a “very very severe

                            case of asphyxia" and that there "was four fractures to the voice box".

                            In his view unconsciousness would have resulted from the crush
                                     '   '                                         ■
f>                            injuries within seconds and irrecoverable brain damage death would

I                             have occurred within three to six minutes thereafter but whole body
vl
‘1                            death may not have resulted until sometime thereafter (pagers 10-

l\                            12). This might explain the apparent twitches some considerable

[|                            time after he had been taken from the terraces. But he was sure
H
[                             that Kevin Williams had died before Special Constable Martin

                                 arrived on the scene.                                                  .
I
h
i;                   (iii)          In addition, a Dr. Ernest Gumpert was called to explain further-the

                4)               distinctions between brain death and whole body death and to record

                                 his view that Kevin Williams was brain dead before he got out of the

                                 area where he was standing, when he lost consciousness.



|i                   Subsequent Developments Regarding Williams’ Inquest


    I
            ;        Subsequent investigations have revpaled that considerable pressure was put
    I                        ■ ■
    • ; ^ o n both Special Constable M artin and PC Bruder to retract or qualify their

    |                evidence as to the signs of life they described in Kevin Williams. These are

                     set out more fully in the statem ent of Kevin Williams’ m other, appended

                     herewith. B ut the m anner in which the very significant evidence of these two

                     witnesses was presented to th e mini-inquest was highly unsatisfactory. Q early
        1L1                  .
    |jg              the jury and the family should have had the benefit of hearing oral evidence

                     rather than somewhat misleading second-hand accounts of their original
        \
                     statements and of the qualifications they had subsequently been persuaded to



        L        ■                                 ;     -29-
                                                                                                    I

f*            make to their original evidence.            And clearly the edited version of their

              evidence actually presented was, at the very least, not a complete picture of

              their eye-witness accounts.



    "IT)      Mini-inquests concerning Richard Jones and Peter Tootle

i;

| J           The mini-inquests into the deaths of Peter Tootle and Richard Jones revealed
    - ' •;                       . .                            i       '■
. :           no positive evidence of signs of life after they suffered from the crush injuries
|
              which resulted in their deaths. The only evidence in respect of these two
m
| 4)          after they suffered their injuries was as follows:




              (i)         Richard Jones



                          Richard Jones, who was found to have died o f traumatic asphyxia

                          has been identified standing in enclosure 3 at 2-5Gpm. T he only

                          evidence o f what happened to him after this time came from Police

                          Sergeant Killoch who disclosed in his summary that sometime later

                          Police Constable Paul Bromley joined a group o f supporters who

                       were carrying Richard Jones across the pitch to the north stand on

                          a makeshift stretcher.     Once there, the constable^ attempted to

                          resuscitate him but was unsuccessful. He then assisted in earning
                                                                                                        :   1
                          Richard Jones into the temporary mortuary where at 4pm he was

                          certified dead.   The very lack of evidence has made his family
       ‘"'1

                      5   concerned that his life might have been sa^^d had there been



                                                   -30-
with the Coroner their concern to know w hether his life could have

been saved had he not been assumed to be dead when taken to the

temporary mortuary but instead taken to hospital and given the

benefit of resuscitation attempts at the hospital. The C oroner dealt

with this by saying at (page 8D of the transcript) that in an ideal

world everybody would have gone to hospital but that this ignored

the practicalities.



Peter Tootle



In the case of Peter Tootle there was very little evidence as to what

happened to him after he fell unconscious from his injuries in the

third enclosure. His friend and companion Colin Frodsham saw a

police officer attem pting to resuscitate him fo r about ten to twenty

seconds when he (Colin Frodsham) recovered consciousness himself.

There is then evidence th at at some time betw een 3.20 and 3.40pm

Police Constable Friend saw Mr. Tootle a t th e end of th e ground

opposite to the Leppings Lane end; he th en examined him and

carried him into the temporary mortuary w here he was certified dead

a t 3.45pm. (Dr. Bull who certified him dead certified-^ total of 30

victims dead in the space of twenty m inutes).      His family were

concerned to know w hether his life might no t have been saved by

more timely intervention by skilled medical help.    A t the resumed
                                                           .
                inquest Mr. and Mrs. Tootle listened to all the evidence but only

                heard their son’s name mentioned once as a verdict was attached to

                It.



    A t the conclusion of the mini-inquest, when the Coroner adjourned to await

    the result of the Director of Public Prosecution’s decision, the position was

    as follows:



    (i)      Pathologists had given their view that in most cases unconsciousness

^            had followed within seconds of the crush injuries which eventually

                proved fatal and that brain death occurred on average within four to

             six minutes thereafter.      But clearly, there w ere some cases (eg

             Michael Kelly) where the comparative mildness of the crush injuries

            m eant that, even if this general rule was correct, it was not

             applicable in the individual case.



             O n th e contrary, eye-witness accounts to d those o f doctors actually
§   &

            present a t the scene tended to suggest that lives could have been

            saved by more prompt medical attention. T here were a number of

            examples of successful resuscitation when prom pt medical attention

            had been made available. The report of Lord Justice Taylor had
            ♦


            found that there had at least been delays in summoning the

            emergency services. The evidence was very strong that there had

            been shortcomings in the response of the emergency services. None



                                      -32-
of this evidence had been heard because it was inevitably bound up

with the wider question of "how" the deceased m et their deaths and

with questions of fault which the Coroner had excluded from the

mini-inquests.



Your Memorialists all had reason to believe th at the delay in calling

the emergency services and the shortcomings in their response may

have played a part in the causation of their relative’s deaths. Ln four

cases, there was evidence of survival beyond th e four to six minute

period given by the pathologist for death to ensue, and in two cases

(Michael Kelly and Kevin Williams) there was positive evidence that

resuscitation had proved temporarily successful.        This made it

necessary to investigate whether some failure in medical attention

contributed to the causation of deaths which w ere not in fact

inevitable.



Most important of all the deceased’s families had been lead to

believe that the question of "how" their relatives m et their deaths

would be fully investigated at the resumed inquest.          And they

considered that an inquiry into "how*' they died that-did not extend

to the time o f their actual deaths and deal with th e preventability of

their deaths by suitable emergency response could hardly be called

adequate.
                 T he Resumed Inouest



                 In Septem ber of 1990 a decision was reached by the D irector of Public

                 Prosecutions not to prosecute anybody in respect of the Hillsborough disaster.

                 Thereafter, the Coroner decided that the adjourned inquests should be
0
                 resumed and completed with a full inquiry into the question of "how".
H
,.j
                 However he indicated that he would impose a cut-off point of 3.15pm on the

                 inquest and would hear no evidence as to events after th at point. H e chose

                 this cut-off point because that was the time that the first ambulance arrived

             ^ o n the pitch. The effect of the decision to impose a cut-off point at 3.15pm

                 was as follows so far as it affected your Memorialists:



                 (i)          It ruled out any inquiry into the adequacy of th e response of the

                              emergency services and effectively meant that th ere was no inquiry

                              into the question of whether the deaths of the individual deceased
         i


                              might have been prevented by more prompt and adequate medical

             q                intervention.



                 (ii)         It proceeded on the basis that all the deaths of those involved in the

                              disaster had become inevitable by the time they h ad sustained the

                              crush injuries they suffered before or up to 3.04pm o r thereabouts,
                        • ®




                              despite the fact that there was ample evidence to suggest otherwise
 •■•i-
 ,-:.!

                              which the jury should properly have been perm itted to consider.

;4 ,w y

                                                                                                       V-


                                                      -34-
                                                                                            4   .
      r? ... ...                             ' ' :             v'"    ■  '
        (iii)    Moreover it meant that there was no evidence o f the wider

      H            circumstances surrounding the last minutes of life since there was

                    considerable evidence that these six deceased were or at least may
      Li
                    have been still alive after 3.15pm.             Yet    the- surrounding
      r"            circumstances of what was going on after 3.15pm and before they

      H            were certified dead were not inquired into.



           Submissions on 3.15pm Cut-off Point and Ruling



           A t the outset of the resumed inquest in November 1991 the C oroner heard

           submissions from the representative of the families (Mr. King) th at he should

           not restrict the evidence by reference to a 3.15pm cut-off point and that he

          should investigate the question of whether the failure to summon the

           emergency services swiftly enough and any failures in th eir response had

           caused or contributed to the causation of the deaths of the deceased. He

           rejected these submissions and ruled that the 3.15pm cut-off point would be

      Observed. It is respectfully submitted that the said decision was unlawful for

           the reasons set out in paragraph (24) above and th at th e consequence was

           that the Coroner failed in his duty to inquire "how" the deceased came by
U
           their deaths in the fullest sense and wrongly excluded from the jury’s

           consideration what in many cases were the last minutes o f the deceased’s
?v}
           lives. Your Memorialists submit that in the light of all the circumstances set
  i
           out above the Coroner thereby gave grounds for the High C ourt to quash the
.
           inquisition on the basis of "rejection of evidence" aiid "insufficiency of inquiry"
-I
n
                                                                                                 N-
                                             -35-
                                                                    ;
       within the meaning of Section 13(1) of the Coroners’ Act 1988.              Your

    ;j Memorialists adopt the arguments of their Counsel in his submissions which

    ■1 are appended herewith in the transcript of the proceedings of that day and

       th e Coroner’s ruling.


I
V The Coroner then proceeded to hear the evidence of the events of the

b      Hillsborough Stadium disaster together with his jury. The evidence heard

|      disclosed that the deaths of the deceased were largely caused by the negligent

|     ^ i l u r e of the police to control the influx of the crowd into pens 3 and 4, to

       prevent the dangerous build-up of pressure in the pens and thereafter, once

^ the pressure was proving life-threatening, to remedy the situation by

|     evacuating the crushed supporters onto the pitch and thereby saving their

|     lives or limiting the number of casualties. The evidence heard also showed

      th a t there had been delay in sending for the ambulances and calling for an
I
1 ' emergency response. On the basis of this evidence alone it is respectfully

I . submitted that a verdict of "lack of care" or "accidental death" "due to" or

|     "aggravated by” lack of care should have been left to th e jury.



^ j O n the 12th of February 1991 Mr. and Mrs. Jones, two of your Memorialists,
I '                                                                   **
     w rote to the Coroner asking him to reconsider his decision about the 3.15pm
 i-A .                   ♦



g cut-off-point In their letter they pointed out th at there had been, a lengthy

      delay in removing the casualties from the pens and that th e process was not

      .complete until 3.35pm "a fairly lengthy delay which obviously did nothing to

      help their chances of survival". They pointed out th at some of the* survivors
    recovery later in the day. And they requested that D r. John Ashton and Dr.

    Glyn Phillips should be called to give evidence at the inquest; the Coroner

    had already seen these doctors’ statements.        The Coroner wrote back

    declining to revise his decision on the 3.15pm cut-off point or to call Drs.

    Ashton and Phillips to give evidence.       In this refusal it is respectfully

    submitted that he was once more guilty of an unlawful "rejection of evidence".

    The letter sent by the Jones’s and the Coroner’s reply are appended herewith.



^ . t a later stage the Jones’s caused a report by Dr. James Bums, a Home

    Office pathologist, to be sent to the Coroner. This report questioned whether

    the approach of Professor Usher (and the other pathologists who gave

    evidence of the cause of death) had been, correct insofar as they suggested

    th a t the crush injuries sustained by the deceased would have proved fatal in

    a number of minutes. As D r. Bums pointed out, the claim was based on the
»



    supposition th at the crush injuries were caused by a continuous restriction of

j^chest m ovem ent In fact it was possible that in many cases the restriction of

    chest movement caused by the pressure of the crowd was n o t continuous but

    interm ittent and in that case death would not inevitably have occurred before

    3.15pm, and there might have been a possibility of recovery if they were

    evacuated and given proper attention - if they were unconscious but not yet

    brain dead. The Coroner did not admit this further evidence n o r did he

    review his decision as to the 3.15pm cut-off point in the light of i t In this

    decision, again, it is subm itted that he erred in law and wrongly rejected

    evidence.
          i

                                     -37-
                  rteferts nf Coroner’s Summing-up
        FT


                  When at the conclusion of the inquest the Coroner summed up he failed to

    [j           direct the jury as to the availability of a verdict of "lack o f care" or of
        -   j


                  combining "lack of care" with "accidental death” in some such formulation as
    I
                  "accidental death due to lack of care" or "accidental death aggravated by lack

    I             of care".   It is respectfully submitted that this was a fatal and unlawful

    | * omission. H e had a duty to so direct the jury wherever there was evidence

                 ^hat a culpable negligence short of the level necessary to justify a verdict of

                  "unlawful killing" was present and caused or contributed to the death of the

    I             deceased. In the alternative, if this wider submission is not accepted, then it

                  is respectfully submitted that he did at least have an undoubted duty to direct

                  the jury as to the availability of a verdict incorporating reference to "lack of
                          9
                  care" if they found that there had been some culpable omission as a result of

                 which an "opportunity" to render essential medical care and thereby prevent

|                fatalities had been "lost" (the test of a lo s t opportunity to render care" was

            ^ a i d down in the case of R -v- Southwark Coroner ex parte Hicks H987) 1
I
                                                                                                                 i"
                  WLR 1624 and is applicable here). O n the evidence before the jury, despite
I
                  the limitations due to the imposition of the cut-off point, it was open to them

I                to conclude that, but for the delays in the arrival of the emergency services.                  ; vs . .

            -   V
|                the deceased, or a t least some of them, would have survived.
                                                                                                                  "t.




h4                Your Memorialists James and Anne Williams also draw attention to the
                                       ;                 . :        v           -              .         • v.l
                 further evidence that has come to light since the inquesUvhich is summarised              ^ ,

                                                                                                     ^       i
                                                                  :'■■ "■               ' ■;   •■"


                                                  •38‘                                     4
I
  v. i



           in their individual statements. This suggests that the inquest did not get a full

  tj and complete picture of the evidence of PC Bruder and Special Constable

  | j M artin and that the inquest into Kevin Williams’ death should be quashed on
  L.J

           the basis not only of "rejection of evidence" and "irregularity of proceedings"

  " but also on the basis of the "discovery of new evidence".
 n
       j

 H Finally, all your Memorialists submit that there has been an "irregularity of

           proceedings" in that the Coroner wrongly dispensed with the requirem ents

           # t u l e 37 and introduced composite summaries into evidence without going

           through the proper formalities for ’ the admission of such documentary

      I evidence. Alternatively, he was wrong to dispense with oral evidence from

           im portant eye-witnesses who had actually seen some of the deceased in their

           last minutes before death and could throw light not only on the actual time

      i o f death but also on the causation of death and its preventability.


 ,1
           ^four Memorialists therefore humbly request that you grant leave to them

           under Section 13(l)(a) of the Coroners’ Act 1988 to apply to the High Court
  1 "      '   ■ ■■ ■                              '       ^
    for an order that the inquisition be quashed and that a fresh inquisition be

  j held.         Your Memorialists submit together with this Memorial a volume

           containing all their individual statements in support of this application and a

           second -volume containing all the appendices referred to herein.
‘■■f


-H
 A
ikJ
                                                            EDWARD FITZGERALD
           this '■aHay of     April 1992 by Malcolm J. Gregg & Co, Second ^loor,
y         i
ury Buildings, 31 North Street, Liverpool, L2 6RG.
IN THE MATTER OF THE CORONERS’ ACT 19SS

AND IN THE MATTER OF THE DEATHS OF:
                                                 VS*-- ' ■
                                                 ii
              PAUL WILLIAM CARLILE
               IAN THOMAS GLOVER
                 RICHARD JONES
                 MICHAEL KELLY
                  PETER TOOTLE
              KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS


TO HER MAJESTY’S ATTORNEY GENERAL;


           . THE HUMBLE MEMORLAL OF

     SANDRA STRINGER AND DONNA CARLILE
          (the m other and sister of P aul Cariile)
             JOHN AND THERESA GLOVER
          (the father and m other of Ian Glover)
                     JOAN SINCLAIR
                (the sister of M ichael Kelly)
              LESLIE AND DOREEN JO N E S '
        (the father and m other of R ichard Jones)
               PETER AND JOAN TOOTLE                         IE
         (the father and m other o f P eter’Tootle)
      JAMES STEPHEN AND ANNE WILLIAMS
       (the father and m other of Kevin Williams)


                                                             'I


Malcolm J. Gregg & Co
Second Floor
Century Buildings
31 North Street
Liverpool
L2 6RG

Solicitors for the M emorialists
PAUL WILLIAM C&RLILE



     Paul Carlile the           son and brother respectively               of the

     Applicants Sandra Stringer and                   Donna Carlile was born
                     I
     on 8 th August, 1969, and was 19 years old when he died

     at Hillsborough football ground on 15th April, 1989.



2.   He went to the stadium - in the company of friends, but

     it is not     known whether he was in                 their company when

     he took up a        position inside the stadium in enclosure

     3.


3.   During the course          of the mini inquest              the jury heard

     from Professor       Usher that              in his   view the . cause of

     death was     traumatic asphyxia.                 The death      would h w e
     been   painless as         he        would    have fallen        unconscious

     within 10     or 20 seconds             of his chest       being crushed.
     This was     follovcd by             the evidence of       Police Officer
     Geraldine Evans and Detective Inspector Michael Layton

     which when combined produced                  the following chronology

     of events: At 2.45 p.m.                 Paul Carlile was outside the

     ground near to        the perimeter gate.                 Some time before

     3.03 p.m.     he climbed             over the fence from enclosure 3

     into enclosure        4.    Between           3.03 p.m.    and     3.15 p.m.

     Michael     Hollinghurst, an             off duty      nurse, found      Mr.

     Carlile lying on the             floor unconscious in enclosure 4

     whereupon    he tried           to    resuscitate him         but was    not




ANNAAF                                o
     successful.           He    then    moved        on       to :treat'^another

     casualty      after     being      told     by        a    uniformed : police

     officer to leave the terrace.                Shortly after 3.15 p.m.

     DC Goulding and DC Pont saw Paul Carlile being carried

     from    the general         direction       of    the tunnel,           in    the

     concourse at      the Leppings          Lane end            of the     stadium.

     The    two    officers and         an   unidentified             ambulanceman

     attempted to revive             him but were not             successful.       At

     4.35   p.m.      behind         the Leppings          Lane stands        Doctor

     Monaghan certified Paul Carlile dead.



     The   jury also heard directly from Mr. Hollinghurst
         -» *
     that it was only when the pressure began to ease in

     enclosure 4 that he realised Paul Carlile was lying at

     his feet.       He began        helping him and another                 man who

     was unconscious        a few feet         away*           Eventually     he was

     told that it was time             for him to leave the enclosure,

     and he did this through a hole in the perimeter fence.
     He recollected        two a m b u lancemen        had arrived           to take

     over   from      him       in    the    attempts            to   resuscitate
     casualties.



5.   The Applicants submit that much important evidence was

     not put      before the         jury thus    depriving them              of the

     opportunity properly to consider                  what happened.             Much

     of this      evidence was        also relevant             to the      issue of




ANNAAF
      whether death was aggravated by lack of care/'an"issue

      which was not left to the jury.



 6.   The evidence          that Mr. Hollinghurst gave            was markedly
                        *
      different        to that       contained       in a    statement he     had

      previously        made.        In this    he stated       that he     first

      became aware of Paul when                he felt him climbing up his

      legs.     He    was pulling himself up by               holding onto Mr.

      Hollinghurst's          trousers.        Mr.    Hollinghurst     reached

      down and        took Paul's hand         and began pulling       him up.

      This task       was made       difficult by        people standing      on

      Paul.      He lost        Paul's hand and        so took hold       of his

      hair’
          .     All    this time Paul was trying               to pull himself

      up.     He was in        pain and aware         of what was     going on

      around him.       This contrasts strongly with the evidence

      of Dr. Usher          that Paul would have            fallen unconscious
      within 20 seconds of            being crushed and would not have

      been in pain.           In the statement Mr. Hollinghurst also

      said that       he was     told to       leave the      enclosure by     a

      policeman or ambulanceman on the grounds that he could

      do no more.       However the        person who told him to leave

      did not       himself check       Mr.     Carlile      to see   if there

      were    any     signs     of    life,     before      instructing     some

      supporters to         carry him to        the back of      the terrace.

      The Applicants submit that this evidence was extremely

      important and possibly indicated that Mr. Hollinghurst




•ANNAAF
     was given insufficient time               to attempt to resuscitate

     Hr. Carlile.



7.   There was        a ^discrepancy       between PC Evans      account of
                        t
     the       activities of      DC    Goulding and    DC    Pont and     DC
                                                                  t

     Gouldiirg's own account.              This account, contained in a

     statement he had           made, was to the effect         that he was

     initially on his own with             Paul Carlile.      He then left

     him in       order to      see what    his colleagues .were doing
     after which he returned to him              with DC Pont.        DC Pont

     then left and returned to him with an ambulanceman.


           *

8.   The Applicants           were informed by West      Midlands Police

     Officers that Paul           Carlile was the first         casualty to

     have been taken           off the terraces.       This matter never

     came out at the inguest.            They are deeply concerned by

     the       fact   that he     was   left    in   the area     and   only
     certified dead at 4.35 p.m.               They feel that he should
^    have been one of the first persons to have been placed

     in an ambulance and taken to hospital.                 They were also

     informed that Dr. Monaghan             had requested the use of a
     machine when           he was attending     to Mr. Carlile.        This

     possibly indicates that he believed that he could only

     be    certain that        Paul Carlile      was dead    or alive     by

     using such a machine          or that alternatively efforts to

     save Paul may have          been successful had a machine been

     available.




                                    ©
ANNAAF
-9.   The Applicants submit    that had all this ‘ evidence '■and

      the evidence   of Dr.    Glynn Phillips, Dr.     John Ashton

      and Hr.   F. Eccleston   been put   before the     tribunal,

      there would have been     sufficient material for them to
                     %
      consider whet'her to return a verdict that the death of

      Paul Carlile was aggravated by lack of care.




 •'




ANNAAF
   HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

               STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL. 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


             PAUL WILLIAM CARLILE




                    Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

            (Her Majesty’s Coroner)




                      At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                      On

                3rd May, 1990.




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors’ Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH              Medical and Dental Union of
                          Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                          Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN          Trent Regional Health Authority and
                          South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                          Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY            Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE            Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN          Police Federation of England and
                          Males

MR. P. ISAACS             Cnief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and      Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF            Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and      Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                               T:Ti.;X TO T l' .^ SCRIPT



    pnop. AI.^’T      yr'V?,?. Cr-1.1.od
          T y T H D C.OjlCT'iSR.........................

B         ':y i-ni.               ..................................................
    O F F T C ^ Cr.iSRALDIMT: ^I J?.AT<TCTTT 3VANS Called

          7?y TTTT, CCROblEX                   ...............
    POLICE IMSP^CTO^ IDICTTATvL LAYTON Called

          :-w tf-: cc.^oreR...... ..............
 **rr! IV.-"-. 1990

      i?:';T'/,3T ikto tut?            of fatjt. \m.nAi'   capxij/
                                                                 j

       T1.ID COIlCinJ'l:    Good nominj,       Pleaso sit down.

       i n . FH.A.S0 II: Sir, tho evidence you arc go in 5 to
]ior.r nou relates to Paul Villiam Cnrlilq. Sir, Paul 1s
nuim is within tho precincts of the building but would
rather not hear the pathological evidence so will come
in, as it wore, halfway through the hearing, Paul’s
stepfather and two sisters and aunt are present in
Court, sir. Sir, tho practice that represents them
is a menber of ny Group and I, therefore, appear in the
usual guise this nominj; as their agent through tho
Steering Committoe.

     TIES cop.cinsn:        You, sir, are the stepfather, is
that right?

       oTJPFATI-723.1:     Yes

      TH35 C0110I7ER: Just so 7. know who I am looking at.
¥hiclr are the two sisters? PjLght.

       Can I just explain to you, before we begin, so to
speak,   the procedure so that you know what is coning.
You have probably already been told, in the circumstances,
but very very briefly I ar.i going to read the evidence
which I took right at the beginning Inst year in April,
in fact, tho 19th, and then, when I have done that, I
an going to toll you what tho blood alcohol levels
were and thon ve will listen to Prof. Ushor who will
toll us about the pathology. I think I will pause then,
lir. Frr-.sor, so that \:o can allow Paul’s mum to come back
if she wishes. '.lion we are all settled again, so to speak,
the presenting Officers of tho Vest Midlands 3 olico will
present the evidence which they have summarised for me
and Inspector Layton will doal with the visual side of
the evidence, lie will describe it, first of all. There
is not, I think, in fact, very much visual evidence,
is there, in this particular instance?

     IUSriSCTOR LAYTOH j         Thore is, sir.      Some of it is
not confirmed.

     THU CORONER:    Anyway, he will describe it. You may
findthat bit a little bit confusing. Do not bo too
worried about that because, in a moment, after he has
described it, ho comes round hero and, as far as ho is
able, ho shows us 011 these big plans what he has boon
talking about and then it falls into place somewhat
better.




                                 -1-
      This then is a rosuuei*. Inquest which vns opened on
 the ip'tli ‘— ~ 1 1^0r‘ "•* ’ — 4-1. - * ----- don, I'eil Anthony
 P ark i:* , 1
            s,Thc body which is the subject of this
           Inquest has been identified to a)C 3155
           '..'allr.ee of the South Yorkshire Police
           as that of Taul ’./illiara Carlile by George
           PecJce, his uncle. lie was       years of ago
           hc.yin£; been bora on the Oth August, 10^9
           at Liverpool. He yr.s a single nan and he
           lived at
           Liverpool, lie was a plasterer by occupation.
           ITe died at Hillsborough Football -Ground
           following an incident there on Saturday,
           15 th April, 1 9 8 9 . 1C 1212 Goulding caused
           the body to bo rcr.iovod to tho Medico Legal
           Centro and there ho identified it to
           Detective Constable Simon Veigold i/ho
           sxibscquontly identified the sane body to
           Prof# Usher# It is the family wish that
           the body should be cremated.”

       I then adjourned the Inquest and what I did was, I
wrote to you and, in fact, I think you, llr. Stringer
 signed tho form, James Stringer, which I sent to you on
the 2 7 th April, 19"9 and asked you to check names and
addresses and, although tho pronounciation of the surname
was correct, in fact wo had mispelt it and it should be
spelt *Cn.rld.le *• And vo had also mispelt Kirk'oy because
■are had loft tho *2c* out. It is spelt ’ICirlcby’ but I
have boon told that it is pronounced •I’irkby*.        7.
am learning. Apart from that, I think, all the other
inform: tion vr.s, in fact, correct?

       ir*. J. STTiirGISIl:   Yes.

     •TFM CORCKSU:  ’
                    ..’hen I opened this Inquest Dr.
Forrest cane along and told us all about the blood
alcohol levels for everybody and, in the ease of Paul,
the level which ho measured was 61 tag/ 100 ml.

       ITow vo are going to turn to Prof. Usher.
                    FJ?0F. ALAI7 USI-ISI? Called

                        Dv TIIS CORONER:

Q. Prof. Usher, you are a Home Office Pathologist and
   l’rof. of Forensic I'odicino here in Sheffield, is
   that right? - A. Yes.

Q. Prof. Usher, you are going to tell me about a man by
   the name of Paul Uilliam Carlile and what nuir.ber did
   wo ...• - A. 73f sir.
»J. That is right, yes.       Can you tell me then, please? -
V             A
                                                             3'IGF.


                     A. Tho body T. examined was that of a hcavily-liu5.lt,
                     dark-haired young, white rnalo, 171 cr,is in height and
                     voinline GO kgs, Tho typical signs of trat«r:atic
                     asphyxia ’.;cre present both externally raid internally.
                     There was sorno swelling of the brain which is, again,
                     not unccnmon in traumatic asphyxia, and occasional
                     petechial haemorrhages on the lungs. The heart weighed
                     about hOO grains and that is slightly enlarged but I
              B      am qxiite certain that heart disease played no part
                     in bringing about this nail's death.

                  O. Ue will come back to the heart in a moment. - A. In
                     ftict, I give his cause of death as traumatic asphyxia.
                     I really believe that he had an average expectation of
                     life for his ago.

              C   Q. You. do, because I thir>Jc you said there was slight
                     particular hypertrophy, which is thickening, and you
                     also nention, I notice, that the valve seemed a little
                     bit dilated? - A. Yes, it did. I do not know this
                     man*s occupation so ....

                  Q. A plasterer. - A. Veil, that is fairly heavy muscular
                     work and it may well be that this slight enlargement
              D      of his heart was, in fact, due to work hypertrophy of
                     his heart.

                  Q. So what you are saying is nothing to worry about,
                     ccrtaiiily nothing for tlio family to worry about - this
                     is not a genetic matter which they need to bo concerned
                     about for themselves? - A. No, not at all.
              E   Q. That is really what I wanted to bo quite certain about
                     in riy mind. - A. Yes.

                          J-!r, Fraser?

                                          ny Mr?. PHASER:

              F   Q. I*rof. Ushor, can you offer some roassurance to the
                     family about the timescale for this type of injury
                     in terms of the time that you think it may have taken
                     for Taul to lose consciousness once the crushing that
                     wo have hoard about actually started to take place? -
                     A. Yes, the reason for Paul*s death was that his
                     chest was held so tightly that he could not breathe
                     in or out and,.once that had happened, then he would
              G      have been unconscious in a matter of seconds, between
                     10-20 seconds* He would have died within a few
                     minutes but at the time, of course, subsequent to
                     his unconsciousness, he would not have been aware of
                     any pain.

                         TIIlS COIIOIJ55R: Can you check that the family got
                    that bccause it is so important that people shotiL d
              H     appreciate it.

                         HR. FRASER:       Yes, thank you.
H trphm ltd
     TIU' CC!JC!~-;Hs     Any questions?     (Mo questions fron
ths Jury)

l’rof .. Usher, I am most obliged to you and tho sane
arrangement as before, thank yo\t. - A. Yes, indeed.

      TITK C0750I7TI5: Prof. Ushor is in the biiilding so
ho jo os back to his office. ?-7ov, shall v/e vait for
nun to come back?           CARLIL5 CAT"--; INTO CCTJUT)
2\~ulfs mum is now with us.

      Hello, Mrs. Stringer. !.re will call the VJest
I!idlands Police Officer, I thinlc.

      CFFIC-7R OSRALDIN3 ELIZABETH EVANS Called:

                        My TF7D COnONJSTt:

T7hcn you are ready vill you introduce yourself and
take me through tho summary, please? - A. I am
Geraldine Elizabeth Uvans, an Officer of tho T/est
Midlands Police.

Yes, tell me what you have summarised in this case,
please? - A. At about 0930 hours on Saturday, 15 th
April ....
I am sorry, not vhat you have summarised, vhat has
been summarised vould bo more accurate, I tliiiic ? -
A. At 0930 hours on Saturday, 15 ^ April, 1939* Mr.
1-aul William Carlile, together with a Mr. laul Darren
Murray and Mr. Ism Joseph Ford, left Liverpool and
travelled by train to Sheffield in order to vatch
the FA Cup Semi Final football match which was due
to be held at the Ilillsborou^I* Stadium that day.
Upon their arrival in Sheffield thoy boarded a bus
which toolc them to the Loppings Lane end of the
Stadium, arriving at about 1 2 3 0 hours. They met up
with other friends and sat on a wall outside the
ground whilst they had refreshments.

Shortly afterwards Paul went off on his 01m stating
that I10 was going to a nearby public house in order
to try to swop his terrace ticket for a seat ticket.

At about 13^0 -hpurs a Mr. Paul Patrick William Nagle
was outside the iStadium in Leppings Lane when he
saw Paul who was in the company of Mr. Carl David
Lewis. Mr. Nagle arranged to soe the other two men
later inside the ground. In fact, this is the last
time Hr. Nagle saw either man again.

That was at 13h0, was it not, I think you said? -
A. Yea. Shortly after 1515 hours and following the
sevoi'c* crushing in tho *'©st Stand terracing, DC
Colliding and DC I'ont entered the Stadium via Gate
C asc*. sav: a r>un who they now Icnoi; to bo Paul
Carlile being carried from tho general direction of
tho tunnel on the !7ost Stand concourse. Together
with an ambulanceman, who has not been identified,
the officers attempted to revive Paul but v/ithout
sttcccss. The persons carrying Paul have not boon
identified.
A Kichaol Thomas TTollinghurst, an off duty nurse,
was a spectator at tho natch and was in Ten 4 at the
Leppinjs J^ano end of the ground when he bo came aware
 of tiio increasing pressure being exerted on him by
 tho crowd. After being subjected to this pressure
for approximately 15 ninutes, llr. Ilollinghurst became
avrrc of. a space being created around him, and on
looking down to the floor of the terracing, ho saw a
nan ho now knows to be Paul 'Jilliam Carlile. Nr.
Tfollinghurst saw that Paul was blue in-the face and,
on not detecting a pulse, he tried to resuscitate him
by heart nassa.ge and mouth to mouth resuscitation.
Paul failed to respond to the emergency treatment and
2jr. Ilollinghurst then moved on to treat another
casualty.

Can I just stop you? This is very late information,
is it not? - A. That is correct.

And I think, strictly chronologically, this should
have come before the paragraph about Detective
Constables Ooulding and Font because that is still
wifcliin the terraces? - A. Yes.
That is right, is it not? - A. Yes.

Just so that wo got the order right. - A, At 1635
hours Dr. David Monaghan examined Taul at the rear
of t:o '.7cot Stand and pronounced life extinct.

Shortly thereafter DC Goulding accompanied the body
of I'aul to the gynaiasiuw where a temporary mortuary
had boon sot up.

This Officer later escortcd the body of Paul to the
Hedico J,ogal Centre whore he confirmed the
identification ,to DC IJoigold.

At approximately 0300 hours on Sunday, 16th April,
1909, Hr. George l ealce identified the body of his
nephew to Detective Constable l.’r-llacc at tho ITodico
l,ogr\l Contl'o.

On Konday, 17 th April, IpOp, following an identification
by Dotcctive Constable Veigold, Prof. Alan Usher
carried out an autopsy and submitted a report giving
cauno of death.
                                                              •. •    t* * •




  Dviucnce is included regard in £ tho analysis of tho
  bloof’ sar:;:lo from Iuttl v.iioro the presence of ethanol
  was detected, Tho witnesses proving tho continuity
  of tho blood sample arc Hr. Philij> Harvey liich,
  Uetcctive Serjeants Fletcher and Turner and Jr.
  Alo;:undor Robert Forrest carried out tho analysis.

  Found in the personal effects of Paul vas a full
  match ticket. lie is shovn on visual evidence, sir,
  near to the outer perimeter gate at 1h2h 1’ours.

          That concludes the summary, sir.

          TiU CG‘
                >!CITJ£.^j         Hr. Fraser, anything you want to
  as!:?                 .

          : I,         ..J.vi:     TIo «;uoiit:io*!tj.

                  lijtm :        no, tiiwjJC you, sir.

          121. C.;/-.'CIII;CL70:       !*o, than!; you, sir.

                 pclt .c h   jirsr::cTcn i-iciiast,      iaytoh      called:

                                            c e ^ n -sn :
. Yes, Inspector? - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
  Inspector, T ..Tost l-Iidlaiirls Police. Sir, if I can say
  there? r.ro a nunber of snail additions to the evidence
  that you fro to hoar so if you could bear vit'o me.
  Sir, an orcaiiii-iation has been made of video film and
  photographic evidence and Paul has boon identified
  alive outside the stadium.

 Donna Carlile, Paul’s sister, and in fact the same
 applies to Michelle, his other sister, who is also in
 Court, have identified Paul on a photograph v.'3iich has
 boon ^iven the reference number II*L10/33A. This
 photograph, sir, is timed at 1454 and shows Paul
 .alive outside the ground near to the outer perimeter
 gate. In fact yesterday, sir, on a second photograph,
 Y.'.TL*&/jh-.9 which is timed at 1455* Paul again lias been
 identified by Donna ead Hichollo as being near to tho
 outer perimeter gates.

 Carl Levis, as you have beard, also one of those who
 died at Hillsborough, is not on the photograph and
 there is no evidence as such that they were together
 after being seen at 1340 by Hr. Nagle.

 Sir, on the 2 9 th March, 1?90» Donna and ilichelle were
 ugaiu scon and perhaps I should point out that, in
 total, tho two girls have viewed visual evidence for
 something lilzo 15 hours together with their social
 worker and, in fact, they made further identifications
 of ’aul both on photographs and video. '
                    TJ;o iiositiou is, Pir, that, whilst tho girls to tho
                    bout of their belief fool thr.t t".’        .«so pbotogr;v;.bs and
                    V lfi'- C 3^:01 3';:U.i., tl’oy cannot be lOO per ccr^t certain
                    (’lie to t ■: c  >tail O* iv. Is is shOVil.

                    r;iu', on      photograph — - there tiro c. nur.ber of
                    photographs, in fact, but oji a photograph referenced
                    '.X'i?■■/••/19   person who they believe is Paul is shown
                    climbing from On closure no. 3 into        closure no. h .
             B      That photograph, six-, is not timed.

                    There are, in fact, then, sir, a number of other
                    photograjihs and I do not knov whether you wish me
                    to z'or.d ".13. the reference numbers out but I have
                    referred*to one of thor.i on the pl.m which I will
                    indicate later.

                 Q. Pic1- that one because they arc all, I toko it, fairly
                    close together? - A. Yes, they are, sir, and in fact
                    they are in iinclosuro no.   opart fi'on the first one
                    J b-'ive just mentioned.

                   Sir, tho photograph I have referred to on the plan is
                   rri2 /.'i and if you could just boar with me a second, sirj
             D     I ’./ill confirm the time. Sir, that photograph is
                   timed at 15°5« Again, on a Br.C video, referenced
                   1IA2’ 0 and tinsod at 1503 s5° *18 and also 1503t52:03,
                   again the person that the girls believe is Paul is
                   sbovm on that video. All those identifications
                   actually are in ]2n d osure no. ^ apai-t from the first
                   one.
             £ r\<.• Tf I can just stop you there bccauso at this point X
                   sooi;: to renionibor because every effort had been made
                   but this was still just the start and this was one
                   of the cases whore wo thought it was Enclosure 4 but
                   wo could not really be certain? - A. That is right,
                   sir. In fact, one of the points I was going to make
                   was that the subsequent evidence you will hear will,
                   in fact, slightly alter the figures which I gave to
                   you on the first day and perhaps I will mention it
                   in a moment.

                   Sir, in respect of the last identifications I have
                   prepared a plan which has been given the reference
                   no. 17:’JL 12S. There is another addendum, sir. In
                   respect of Hr. Ilollinghurst, whose evidence you have
                   already heard about, he has viewed photographs and
                   confirms that Faul is one of the persons that he
                   tried to revive and he has signed a plan of tho
                   terracing indicating the position at which he treated
                   Paul. That p l m , sir, is referenced MTTl/1. I think,
                   sir, that probably covers the additional visual
                   ovidence.

             H

HarphamLtd
                      ‘ tlu> f   iros I ^f’
                                          .vo I’ou on the first r’ay,
                      7 sail* to you r.-fc that stc.^-o tj’.it \:e
                        sever of tl'.o people that <liec! v;oro in
                        s' am! that possibly tvo, r.t that stage,
     r.u-y -ir.vo boon in ’Jnclosuro no, h, As a result of*
     tho oviclonco of Mr, Ilollinghurst, in’fact, it is now
     eight j>eoplo that we boliovo v:cre in no, h r.nd one
     that nr.y have been,

     .Sir, car. I refer you then to a plan which has been
     given the reference no, 1-H.ML 170 and that relates to
     the identifications outside the ground, sir,

n. That will be C221, - A, I have already referred to it,
   sir, but in.rJL 128, which is a plan of the terraces •,,,

o. That is C222, Tliis is tho one where the two young
   Indies, if I can refer to them, spent so much effort? -
   A, That is right. Finally, sir, MTIl/1, which is Mr,
   Ilollinghurst *s plan,
Q, That will be C223, - A. Sir, if X can deal, first of
   all, with the identification outside and that is
   Ii'.rJL 170, The point at which we bolieve Paul — —
   well, wo lenow Paul is shown is at this point here,
   the outer porimetor gates near to here. These are
   tho outer perimeter gates and it is in this position
   hero,

          TIE C0H0NEH:       La&ios and gentlemen of tho Jury,
     can you see that?      Mot Gate C ,,,,

          TI113 ’7ITHESS:   It is tho actual outor gate, sir,

Q,        TIPS COTlGron:  Yes, - A, Sir, in respect of the
     torraco j>lan, this is Enclosure no, 3 and this is
     Knclosuro no, V and, in respect of the idontification
     where it appears that Paul is, as it were, going from
     3 to h at the dividing fence, the position that I
     belicvo that is shown Is at this point here. In
     rospoct of the photographic and video identifications
     actually in Enclosure no, h t as I say, on the plan
     I havo reforrod to just one, PRT/2, but tho position
     shown is here. I think it is fair to say, sir, on
     those photographs and the video, I am satisfied that
     Paul is probably still alive at that stage but I
     cannot say at. what stage of the medical process that
     you have already* hoard about Paul has actually reached,

Q. Yos, on tho assumption it is Paul, tho porson you are
   looking at? - A, That is right, sir, yes,

     Thon in rosj>ect of tho photograph MTIl/l, Mr,
     Ilollinghurst *s ,,,,

Q, Not photograph - plan, I think? - A, Yes, Ke has
   indicated a position again in no, 4 Enclosure and in
   this position here, in lEnclosure no, 4,
                                                              V.   1. Ai'iV




vl. \jifs, of course, Mr. Ilollinghurst1s evidence "ns qtiite
    cj.eor that lie vns in iJnclosurc h t was it not? - A, That
    is ri'jht, sir, yes,

        I-'l.                   Ko questions, sir, thrnk you.

        Ihi. I.J.jn:      7'ot thfvnk you.

        1-SV2. CA.TCI’j:CLI2s      To,    th r n lc y o u .

         fiil. FftASi-R:   Sir, just before you conclude, will
  you lot ne road a very short note that the family gave
  to r.:e thi?i i»orni)i'; which contains words of thanks
  which como hotter from then than me, sir.

        Ti?:i                   Y es,    thanlc y o u .

        IT'.?. PnASMii; The note is froia the family in
  general, sir, and I road it as it stands. They want
  to thank Michael I-ayton and Peter Hogan who, I
  undoi-stand, is an Officer who assistod Inspector
  Layton, sir, for their help throughout tho Inquiry.
  They want to thanlc tho two Officers, Goulding and
  Pont, fox- tho assistance which they cave to Paul on
  the day, together with the ambulanceman whose name has
  not been traced. Sir, they want to thanlc Maureen Vroe
  and Peter Hyde from Moseley Social Services and they
  have been, in the family's words, sir, a "lifeline for
  us throughout tho last year." Sir, they want to thanlc'
  Michael Hollingliurst for trying to save Paul. They
  say, ”«7ortIs v/ill never express how we feel but knowing
  that he was with Taul, we are all grateful." Finally,
  sir, they want to thajik you for being, again their
  words, "so thorough and a gentleman" as you have
  boon throughout those Inquests and, in particular,
  tho Inquest; into their loved ono.

       THIS CORONER:         That is very kind of you.                        Thank
  you over so much.         1/hich is Donna?

       I think I have told you, ladies and gentlemen,
  that there are very fow familios that I have the
  opportunity of speaking to but I have spoken to you,
  in fact, and I have probably spoken to Michelle as
  well but I did not know who you wero at the t irne.
  So you are one of tho few families whom I havo had an
  opportunity to speak to and it is very good of you to
  say nice things about me. I appreciate it very much.
  I appreciate it even more that you have said nice
  things about the Officers, in fact, I think they are
  both in Court, and, of course, all the other people
  who you havo mentioned and who we have heard about.
  I must say that I was very pleased that we managed
  to get the evidence from Mr. Hollinghurst because
  not only does it help with the technical problems as
  to whore he was, it is the fact that' he was a n u r s e ---
  okay, ho did not succeed in reviving Paul but at least
  you have tlio comfort that fairly immediately after
  tho incident there was somebody who was actually near

                                  -O -      <S>
IV.ul doing hits best and that is sorno cncouragcnont and
all credit to hi::i and all credit to you for acknovledgin
it.you very nucli indeed.

      T am - in a sense I an just echoing what you have
said - very very conscious in all Inquests but tl»e
only one I ar.« thinking about at tho noment is this; one,
thinking about laul • I an very very conscious l\o'.:
(£r«atly loved people are who wo hear about and today,
at the nonent, we have hoard about Paul and I would like
you to know how much we Teel for you and for you, Mrs.
Stringer, a very hard time for you and I am sorry that,
if you like, we have added upset to you this morning
but you arc here, you have got your family, and they
will support you, I am quite sure.

     Tl;e last point is I am exceedingly sorry that you
had tlu! delay because, of course, that ’
                                        ./ould have added
to your stress today. It was notanybody* s fault but
there is nothing I can do about. I am very sorry that
it happened to you today. Anyway we waited because we
did net want you not to be hero. ThanJ: you for coming.
God bless you.
                                     M. T. HOLLINGHURST

          MICHAEL THOMAS HOLLINGHURST Sworn
                   Bv THE CORONER:

It is Michael Thomas Hollinghurst? - A. Yes.
Of                                                 A.
No, I have changed addresses since then.

Tell us what it is now? - A.
                 since June last year.
You are a charge nurse by profession? - A. Yes, that
is right.
And also a football fan? - A. Yes.
Following Liverpool I take it? - A. Quite right.
Is it right that bn 15th April 1989 you went to the
football ground in Sheffield to see the Semi Final? -
A. Yes.
Am I right in thinking that you went by car? - A.
Yes.
You left I think at about 10.30 with four friends? -
A. Yes.
What time did you arrive in Sheffield? - A. We
actually parked the car up at about 2.15.
That was quite a long journey. Was there any reason
for that? - A. There was quite a lot of traffic in
and around the Stockport area but when we got almost
to the end of the Woodhead Pass we decided to call
and have something to eat as a couple of us hadnot
brought anything to eat and we called infor
something to eat and a drink.
You stopped at the Woodhead Pass? - A. At the very
end, the Sheffield end.
What time did you get to this place where you
stopped, about? - A. About 1 to 1.15.
You had something to eat and then you came on? - A.
Yes.
Having parked, you made your way to the ground? - A.
Yes.
You do not know where you parked I take it? - A.
Overton Road.
                                                          62


                                          M. T . HQLLINBHTmgT


Q. How far from the ground? - A. I would say it is about
   a ten minute walk.

Q. Were there other supporters going to the ground at
   the same time? - A. Yes.

Q. Liverpool or others? - A. Mainly Liverpool.

Q. Did you notice anything about their behaviour which
   worried you in any way? - A. No, everybody was good
   humoured.

Q. Did you see anybody drinking cans of alcohol? - A.
   There were the odd ones but not excessive numbers.

Q. What I am interested in is - and I am not trying to
   pin you down to say if there were 22 - an approximate
   percentage of the total crowd that you saw in your
   judgement? - A. Of people who were walking to the
   ground who were actually drinking?

Q. Yes. - A. Not a high percentage at all.    As I say, we
   saw the odd one or two.

Q. Very few as far as you were concerned and their
   behaviour was fine? - A. Everybody was good humoured,
   yes.

Q. I think you got to Leppings Lane at about 2.25? - A.
   Yes, an approximate time.

Q. What was it like outside? - A. We immediately made
   towards where the turnstiles were and there were a
   few hundred or maybe a thousand or so people already
   around the turnstile area.

Q. When you say the   turnstile area do you mean the
   actual turnstile   area or the area outside the
   perimeter gates?   - A. The area that actually leads
   down towards the   turnstile.

Q. Had you been there before? - A. The previous year.

Q. So you had been there before? - A. Yes.

Q. So there were about 500 to 1,000 people? - A. Making
   a rough estimate, yes.

Q. Just look at the model so that we get it right. Just
   show him the turnstile area ( indicating!. Are we
   talking about that area there or the area outside the
   gates? - A. We immediately went down to the area that
   has got a partition dividing it down the middle
   leading towards the turnstiles.
                                                         63


                                          M. T. HOLLINGHTTR ST

Q. That is the turnstiles A to G? - A. I think that is
   the area we went down to, yes.

Q.   That is the area where the people were? - A. Yes.

Q.    Did you    see any mounted Officers or anybody else?-
     A. I noticed in particular one mounted Officer who I
     had seen several times outside Liverpool's ground.

Q.   Where was he? - A. He was in that area.

Q.    Did you see what he was doing, if anything? - A. He
     was trying to get some kind of order, people to queue
     in some kind of order.

Q. Why did he not succeed? - A. There were already a
   mass of people. There would be no particular queues.
   There didn't appear to me at that stage to be anybody
   sectioning people into queues which is the kind of
   arrangement I am used to when I go to football
   matches at Liverpool certainly.

Q. Because the configuration at Liverpool is completely
   different, is it not? - A. Yes.

Q. Was there any pushing? - A. As I say, there was no
   order at all and so there were no orderly queues and
   there didn't seem any facility for making any orderly
   queues. People were just sort of massed in what was
   really a small area trying to get through a few
   turnstiles.

Q. Did you see anybody distressed? - A. Yes.

Q. In that area I am talking about? - A. Yes,becoming
   more so over the next few minutes.

Q. Why was that? - A. The crush got more andmore.   We
   arrived and more and more people were arriving behind
   us and so the numbers we are talking about originally
   obviously were swelled by the people arriving behind
   us.

Q. Did you feel anybody pushing you? - A. Everybody was
   being pushed.  It got to the stage where there was a
   crush of people and, in fact, some people were
   distressed and trying to make their way back out of
   the crush outside the turnstiles.

Q. You did not take that course? - A. No.

Q. Does that mean you were not particularly
   distressed? - A. Yes, I was quite frightened at that
   stage actually as most people around me were, you
   know.




                       ©
                                                           64


                                             M. T. HOLLINGHURST

Q. At this point, as I understand it, you could not help
   yourself any more? - A. No, as I say, I got into that
   area and people were arriving behind us and it just
   gradually got worse.

Q. Did you hear anybody making appeals for people not to
   push? - A. People were shouting all sorts of things,
   "Don't push, there are people getting hurt, there are
   people getting crushed".

Q. It made no difference? - A. No, it didn't seem to
   make any difference at all.

Q. You entered through a turnstile, is that right? - A.
   Yes.

Q. You did not see any of the big gates open, is that
   correct, or did you? - A. I didn't, no.

Q. Having got in, do you know what time it was that you
   got in by any chance? - A. Only judging by the next
   few minutes I would say between ten to and five to
   three.

Q. That is an estimate, is it? -   a   . That is an estimate,
   yes.

Q. You do not actually know the exact time? - A. I don't
   remember looking at the time.

Q. Having got in did you go down the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. When you got to the entry of the tunnel before you
   went down did you by chance look towards the pitch? -
   A. Through the tunnel?

Q. Yes. - A. Yes, that is what I am basing the time on
   because as we were entering the tunnel the players
   were on the pitch. The match hadn't started.

Q. We know what time that was and your time is quite
   accurate actually. At the entry of the tunnel the
   players were on the pitch. You could see them, could
   you? - A. Yes.

Q. What was the tunnel like? Was it empty, full, or
   were you able to get down it? That is what I am
   trying to find out? - A. We were getting down it.
   There were a lot of people going down but it wasn't
   crushed. A lot of people were making their way
   through the tunnel.

Q. Before you went in you actually heard people talking.
   I think you mentioned that you heard stewards or
   somebody saying, "Plenty of room inside" or words to
   that effect? - A. Yes.
                                                        65


                                        M. T. HOLLINGHimST


Q. Where was that? - A. Once we got through the
   turnstile everybody thought they were out of the
   worst of it because it was such a bad crush outside
   and we were relieved to get through. Of the four of
   us who were making their way through the turnstiles
   we lost one and so the three of us were still left on
   the groundside of the turnstile and we met up
   together. Obviously we wanted to make our way
   straight into the ground and there were   stewards    -\
   around and a couple of Police Officers.I distinctly J
   remember a Police Officer saying, "Make   your way    \
   straight in. There is plenty of room on the               J
   terraces, plenty of room inside".




                                /Q. Did he point you i n ..
                                                          66

                                            M- T, HOLLINGHPRST

Q. Did he point you in any direction or did he just say,
   "May your way through"? - A. Just generally.   He just
   said, "Make your way in."

Q. He didn't point in any way.   He just said, "In lads", or
   words to that effect, "There's plenty of rooa"? - A. Yes.

Q. Was it said to you personally or just generally? - A. No.
   I mean, within a couple of feet of me as I was making my
   way.
Q. Down you went down this tunnel and you got to the other
   end of it, of course? - A. Yes.
Q. You went left or right? - A. Left.
Q. When you got on to that terrace - we call it pen 4 - tell
   me what happened and how it was? - A. Well, on the way
   through the tunnel the three of us were still together.
   Having been there the previous year, as I have said, when
   it was quite full the previous seasons we had noticed
   that the terracing to the left corner had been
   particularly empty yet where we were was crushed, the
   season before.    Even going through the tunnel, and as
   far as 1 can remember even on the way to the natch that
   day,  we said we would make our way to that left terrace.
Q. That   is the banked one, the high one? - A. The left hand
   corner behind the goal.     Of course, not knowing that
   that end was penned off in separate pens. We thought it
   was all one complete terracing.
Q. So that was your objective to get... - A. Out of where it
   was crushed.
Q. You entered pen 4, however, because you were expecting to
   walk along the terrace? - A. Yes.
Q. Justdescribe to me what that pen was   like wnen you
   enteredit? - A. It was quite full - well, very full, but
   nothing that I had not seen on a football terrace before.
   It was fairly fluid because we could make our way
   through, albeit it was a struggle at first for a few
   minutes.   Then it suddenly became more and more tightly
   packed by the minute really.
Q. Do you recollect when you first entered, when you said it
   was quite fluid, had the match kicked-off? - A. No.
Q. It had not? - A. Ho.
Q. Then you say it became tighter, that was the word you
   used.   Do you recollect what time that was in relation
   to the match?   I am not asking you to tell me what time
                                                           67

                                       *    M. T. HOLLINGHURST

   it waSj but in relation to vhat was going on on the
   pitch? - A. I think we are talking about around kick**off
   time that it really became oppressive and got more and
   more so in the next few minutes.
Q. The tightness, was it coming from behind you? - A. As far
   as I could gather it was coming from behind me.
Q. You had initially made your way in, as you say, and then
   it got tighter.   Did you come to a stop? - A. I think
   what we actually did was come across the dividing fence,
   that we didn't know was there, obviously.   Then we just
   came to halt and stopped virtually where we were.
Q. Against that fence? - A. We came back in slightly and
   *then.».
Q. So you were able to move off the fence at that stage? -
   A. Yes.
Q. Was that kick-off time or before? - A. That was just
   before kick-off time we hit that fence. Roundabout kick-
   off time we are talking about now.
Q. At that point had you ever been in a situation like this
   before on the terrace? - A. No, that is when it started
   to become really frightening then because...
Q. You are saying at kick-off time it became frightening? -
   A. Yes.
Q. Up to then you had coped, so to speak? - A. Yes.   As I
   say, I have been in football crowds before but it became,
   unlike any football crowd I had ever been in before.
Q. I think you were rotated once or twice, is that right? -
   A. Certainly once, yes. At one stage I had my back
   completely to the pitch, facing upwards towards the
   stand.
Q. Did you see people being pulled up at that point? - A.
   Yes.
Q. Then did you manage to turn round again or were you moved
   round? - A. I just remember that...   I did get back the
   other way.   I don't know how I managed to do it.
Q. You had lost your friends by that time? - A. Yes.
Q / W h a t happened then? What did you see or notice? - A.
  V The crush got worse rather than better and after a few
   ' minutes I was aware that somebody was on the ground right
     by where I was standing, by where I was positioned.
                                             M. T. HOLLINGHURST

Q.    Was the    match still in progress when you became awareof
     this or can you not remember? - A. Yes, the match was
     going on.
Q. This was in fact a young man? - A. That's right.
Q. Being a charge nurse you checked to see whether his pulse
   was going and things like that,    as   soon as you could?-
   A. Yes, but not at that particular moment.
Q.   I realise that. - A. As soon as the crowd cleared...
Q.    That isin factmy next question.   How long did it take
     before you were able to get at this lad? - A. I really
     could not put a timescale on it because it just seemed
     like forever.   It seemed like it was getting tighter and
     tighter and you were fighting for your breath.   It was
     probably only a matter of ten minutes at the moment, five
     or ten minutes.
Q. I presume the match had stopped by then? - A. By that
   stage, yes.
Q. Did you see it    stop? - A. I was not aware of what was
   going on to be    quite honest.
Q. Most people aren't... - A. I was not aware of when the
   match particularly stopped or when...
Q. Most people can remember bits but they do have great
   difficulty with timing so don't be concerned about that.
   What you are saying is that the pressure eased after
   several minutes, it is difficult to say how many but
   after several minutes? - A. Yes, the pressure began to
   ease and a space...
Q. Then you were able to get down? - A. People were in more
   and more space and that is when I actually saw someone on
   the ground below me.
Q. As I say, at that point that is when you had a look to
   see whether there was anything that could be done for
   this lad?_- A. Yes.
Q.Cln fact I think you came to the conclusion there wasn'tA
  Cis that right? - A. I tried, as veil as the lad who vas
   immediately below me.   There was somebody just a couple
   of feet further avay.   He vas also in the same
   condition.
Q. So you tried for both of them? - A. Yes, I vas going
   back...
                                                        69

                                          M. T. HOLLINGHURST

Q. Did you know whether the other person recovered?   Have
   you any idea? - A. Pardon?

Q. Do you know anything about the other person, not the lad?
   We know about the lad because you identified him, didn't
   you, in due course? - A. I believe...   Well, I
   identified the other person as well.   I believe they are
   both deceased.
Q. It was somebody called Paul Carlile? - A. The young man
   was.




              Q. He was the first
                                      M.T. HOLLINGHORST


p. He was the first one of the two whom you tried to help?
   - A. Yes, he was the one who was immediately next to
  -me and the one who I had been aware of originally.

Q. Did you see any activity on the perimeter fence? - A.
   By that stage people were trying with their bare hands
   to rip the fence, you know get the fence down. That is
   what I was aware of going on around me, people were
   pulling at the fence.

Q. Were you attempting to help the lad when people were
   attempting to pull the fence down or was it earlier.
   Can you remember that? - A. From what I can remember as
   I was helping the young lad and the other fellow people
   were frantically trying to get the fence down.
Q. But it had not yet come down? - A. No, they had made
   a hole. There may have been a gate opened, I don't
   know.
q   . Would that have been at the same time as you were
      resuscitating the lad or had you already started
      resuscitation earlier? - A. Well immediately there
      was any space at all when I saw the lad under my feet.

Q. Of course that is what you were concentrating on? -
   A. Yes.
Q. And how did you get out yourself? - A. Through a hole
   in the fence eventually.
Q. You went frontways? - A. Somebody picked me up and
   said: "It is time for you to get out yourself". By
   that time I think two ambulancemen had arrived and
   taken over from me trying to resuscitate.
Q. Somebody had come into the pen? - A. Yes.
Q. Well I know, I think I know anyway that the family
   were very grateful that you were there with regard
   to that young man, Paul Carlisle.
           Do you remember this was the witness whom we
     discovered so to speak half way through the Inquests
     in April and May so I thought it would be good to have
     him in here.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. KING:
Q. Mr. Hollinghurst, can you just help us a little about
   yiour experience in 1988 the previous semi-final. You
   gave some evidence that you had made your mind up in
   1989 that if you could you would go to a different
   place? - A. Yes.
                                                          71


                                      M.T. HOLLINGHURST


q   . Where had you been on the terraces in 1988? - A. I think
      we were, it would probably be Pen 3, the one to the
      right of the tunnel.

Q. As you cone down the tunnel ....    A. Rather than the one
   to the left, yes.

Q. And what had been your experiences in that pen in 1988
   which had led you to make the decision you had for 1989?
   - A. Well it was quite crushed. It was quite crushed
   in relation obviously to the situation that we could see
   in the corner of the pitch which is why we made the
   decision in 1989 to try and make our way in that directio
Q. I am sorry to press you a little, but when you mean
   "crushed" could you put that into perhaps a little detail
   of what it meant as far as space went of the people aroun
   you? - A. Well it was a heavy football crowd. As I said
   when I first came in 1989 it was probably still fluid but
   there were quite a lot of people in that particular area
   compared to an area which was a few yards away where
   there was nobody as far as we could see.

Q. I just want to go back to 1988 because you clearly had
   been concerned of what had happened in 1988? - A. Yes.
Q. What had been your concern? - A. I thought somebody may
   have been injured in 1988 and at half-time people were
   clambering into the Stand in 1988 during the half-time
   break out of that pen.
Q. Do you mean clambering up ....   A. They were being
   helped up into the seated area at half-time to get out''
   of the standing area.
           HR. KING: Thank you. I ought to say because as
     you know I represent, or you may not know, a large
     number of the be.reaved and injured including the
     family of the boy who you helped. Can I say also on
     behalf of them how grateful they are for what you did.
     Thank you.

                 Cross-Examined by HRS. HcBRIEN:
Q. Hr. Hollinghurst, when you said you got to Leppings Lane
   at 2.25.did you mean right at the top of Leppings Lane
   or did that mean right by the perimeter gate? - A. No,
   we made our way straight down to where the entrance was.
Q. What I am trying to find out   is where you were at 2.25?
   - A. We went straight to the   turnstile area. From
   walking from the car we went   straight to the ground, we
   didn't make a stop anywhere,   we just went straight to
   the ground to get in.
                                   M-.T. HOLLINGHURST


How did you know it was 2.25. Why did you say that
time? - A. That is just a rough estimate. Approximately
2.25 judging on the events that, you know, my perception
of the events that followed.

So you are not absolutely sure about the time then? -
A. I did not look at my watch at that particular time.

What was it like anyway when you got to Leppings Lane,
was it easy enough to walk right down to the perimeter
gate? - A. Down to the area where the turnstiles was but
as I say there were probably 500/1000 people already in
that area. They were in that area, the immediate area
before the turnstiles and obviously trying to get into
the ground at that time.
So the crowds were mainly congested just near the perimete
gate, they weren't spreading up the Lane at the time? -
A. I don't know what you mean by the "perimeter gate"?
The main gate before the turnstile area? - A. They were
in the area that you funnelled into before the turnstiles.
      MRS. McBRIEN:   All right.      Thank you very much.

                 Further By The CORONER:

1988, do you know what time you arrived in 1988 as a
matter of interest? - A. I could not tell you sorry.
                        »


We want you to mark the plan, want you to show us where
you were. We are asking all the witnesses. If you would
walk up to the overhead. - A. Is it where I ended up?
What I want you to show me, I want you to mark the positio
where you were with a cross where you finished up near the
lad whom you helped. Point out which is Pen 4? Before
you mark it you had told me that you were next to the
perimeter fence. Are you saying that you managed to move
back off, the radial fence, you moved back off it, didn't
you? - A. When we came to a halt in the fence we just
stepped back inside.
      THE CORONER:    Hark it then.     That is fine.

      MR. BEECHEY:    345 sir.
      THE CORONER:    Thank you.
When you   got to the radial fence before you moved back
off, was   that when kick-off had taken place or had
kick-off   not yet taken place. I just can't remember
what you   told me? - A. I don't think the match had kicked
off.                       -
                                                             57
                                                       EDWARDS



Q. I am sorry? - A. I was worried about how packed it
   was in 1980.

Q. When you say very packed, I want to know which bit
   was very packed. Are you saying that the whole of
   the terrace from one end to the other was packed?
   Sergeant Griffiths, can you put the ground plan up?
   This, of course, is a ground plan of 1989 but if you
   just turn round and look. Just indicate the
   terracing from one end to the other. Ignore all
   those radial fences because you are quite right that
   they were not there. Are you saying that the whole
   of that was packed or are you saying that just a
   central section was packed? - A. When we first came
   in to the right that was less packed. As we moved
   across it was packed for a good distance. It was not
   just the centre. A wide area was packed.

Q. It was sufficiently dense there for you to want to
   move towards the front? - A. Yes.

Q. Is that because right at the front it tends to be a
   little bit easier? - A. Yes.

Q. Because people   do not actually like standing there or
   whatever? - A.   At the time I was young and that is
   where a lot of   young people go at the fence, out of
   the way of the   crowd and you have got a better view.

Q. I do not think you are very old now but you were
   younger. Thank you very much indeed. - A. Yes.
                     IAN JOHN FEARNS Sworn

                        Bv THE CORONER

Q. You are Ian John Fearns? - A. That is correct.

Q. Is it Still                  ■ A. It is, yes.

Q                            I believe? - A. That is right

Q. Mr. Fearns you are another lifelong Liverpool
   supporter? - A. Yes.

Q-. You came to the 1989 match anyway on the 15th
    April? - A. That is correct.

Q. Did you come to the 1988 one as well? - A. Yes, I
   did.

Q. Let us talk about 1989.     I think you had a ticket? -
   A. I did.
                                                 P. EDWARDS


You came by train I believe, is that right? - A. That
is correct.
It was not a football special but it was just a
regular train? - A. It was a shuttle train that was
on its way to Norwich which passed through Sheffield.

You stopped off and you got off I think at about
quarter to twelve I think the train arrived, is that
right? - A. That is approximately quarter to twelve.

It does not   have to be to the minute or anything like
that. When    you got off how many people were there?
Were you by   yourself or did you travel with a
group? - A.   I travelled with one friend on the train.

Which one was that? - A. Terry Mainwaring.

I think you met two or three other people I think? -
A. We met three other friends when we were actually
put on to the buses that were laid on to take us to
the ground. We actually met them on the actual bus
itself.
Was that Paul Carlisle, Paul Murray and Ian Ford? -
A. Yes, that is right.
Were you wearing football gear? - A. No, I was
wearing casual jeans and a jeans shirt.




                             /Q. So how come.
                                                       59


                                         I.J. FEARNS


Q. So how come that you got on to the football coaches? -
   A. Well as we were coming off the train the Police were
   saying: "Liverpool supporters this way, Nottingham
   Forest supporters the other way"/ so we just followed
   their directions.

Q. Then you were steered towards these coaches? - A. We
   waited in the forecourt, car park of the area till the
   buses actually arrived.
Q. So you were quite pleased because you came with one
   friend and you had met three more so there were five     of
   you at that point? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. You then, I think the coach eventually or bus took you
   towards Leppings Lane. Is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. I think you got off near the ground about half-past-12
   something of that order? - A. Something about that.

Q. I think the first thing you did was find yourself a chip
   shop, got something to eat, and then I think you bought
   four cans of lager each. Is that right? - A. That was not
   specifically what I said during the course of the interview
   by the Police. I said we purchased a couple of cans of
   lager. I did not give any quantity.

Q.   I see, so how many cans did you actually have yourself?
     - A. I myself only purchased two.
Q.    It does not matter to me whether it is one or ten. Well
     ten might matter to me but all I am trying to find out
     as briefly as I can, you had a couple of cans. Right?
     I think you sat on some nice grassy slope? - A. Yes, there
     was a verge just across the road.

Q. Because it was a beautiful day? - A. Yes.

Q. All I want to deal with at this point, I want you to tell
   me about Paul Carlisle, all right, because he was with
   you at about 12.30? - A. He was.
Q. How long did he stay with you? - A. He stayed for approx­
   imately I would say, what, half-an-hour at the most.

Q. In other words you are saying he left you for whatever
   reason at about 1 p.m.? - A. That is correct.

Q.   You never saw him again after that, did you, on the day?
     - A. Unfortunately not.
Q. So when he left you that in fact was goodbye, unfortunately
   - A. Yes.
                                                           60

                                         I.J. FEARNS


Q. Now Paul, why did he go? Tell me why he left, as far as
   you know. Don't tell me what other people have told you
   at this stage, just what you know as to why he left? -
   A. Paul was saying previously when we met him on the bus
   and for a number of days before that he wanted to obtain
   a Stand ticket. Unfortunately he only had a season ticket
   at Anfield for the ground so he was only allocated a ground
   ticket and he wanted to actually try and swap this ticket
   and obtain a Stand ticket.

Q. I see, so when you say "ground ticket" he had a terracing
   ticket? - A. He did indeed.

Q. And what he wanted was to have a Stand ticket to go upstairs;
   - A. Yes.
Q. Was that the reason why he left because he hoped to do a
   swap? - A. He hoped to do a swap.

Q. And    in fact I think you went towards a place calledthe
   Horse and Jockey but you have got no idea, he just said
   "That is where I am going". Is that right? - A. Well he
   said he was going up to the pub up the top of the hill to
   try and swap his ticket. We gave him roughly three-quarters
   of an hour and followed up.

Q.   Oh Isee. And having followed him   you never found him?
     - A. We didn't no.

Q. So you can't say whether he succeeded or not but you know
   that that is what he was trying to do? - A. That is the
   reason he left.

Q. Hoping to do, shall we say? - A. Hoping.

Q. So   you then followed him up and eventually you came back
   to   the turnstile area at about half-past-2 I think. That
   is   right, isn't it? - A. Yes, approximately quarter-past
   to   half-past. I could not be sure.

Q. I am not going to take you through the detail ofhow you
   got in apart from asking whether you went through a turn­
   stile or through a gate? - A. I went through a turnstile.

Q. The only other question I want to ask you is did you see
   any of the big gates open? - A. No, not at all.

Q. You never saw that? - A. No.
Q. When you got in tell me who you were with when you got
   through your turnstile? - A. When I entered the actual
   ground I was with Terence Mainwaring; Ian Ford? Paul Murray
   and we had met up with a friend just outside called
   Carl Lewis.
                                                         61

                                       I.J. FEARNS


Q. So it was Ian Ford, Paul Murray .... How well did you
   know Paul Murray, did you know him well as well? - a .
   We went to home games. I knew him more through Paul Carlisle
   who knew him a lot better than myself. He was a friend we
   went to the matches with.

Q. And then you met up with this other lad called Carl Lewis?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. You met him on the inside? - A. On the outside. We were
   actually in the area outside the turnstiles with him and
   we all entered the ground together.

Q. Did he come through a turnstile as well as far as you know?
   - A. He did.
Q. Now on the inside there were the five of you including
   yourself, I think you noticed some Police Officers in that
   concourse area. Is that right? - A. I did indeed.

Q. Do you know about how many you saw? - A. No, it was just
   about three or four, five at the most.

Q. And did they search you, can you remember? I don't mean
   all of them? - A. I recall them searching some fans but
   I myself never got searched.

Q. So you saw that was happening but you weren't? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you wait any longer for Paul or did you decide you
   did not know where he was and you were going .... A. No,
   we assumed if he had swapped his Stand ticket we obviously
   would not meet up with him until the way home or if he
   hadn't we told him we would be in the ground at a certain
   place, you know, hoping to meet him in there, so we made
   our way straight there.
Q. And did you go down the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. Now something peculiar I think about Carl Lewis. Did
   he actually have a terrace ticket? - A. He didn't, he had
   a Stand ticket.
Q. What did he do, did he go to the Stands or did he come
   with you? - A. Unfortunately he came in through the turn­
   stiles with us and we were waiting for Paul Murray who
   was still outside at the time. I don't know exactly what
   happened but between the time we were actually going in,
   which must have been all of about two minutes, Carl did
   not have his stub so he was not allowed up into the
   Stands.

Q. Was your ticket torn, can you remember, your ticket I am
   talking about when you came through or was it intact? -
   A. No, the person on the gate had taken the stub from
   the ticket.
                                                            62

                                         I.J. FEARNS


Q.    I am not too worried precisely what happened to the ticket,
     but what you are saying is he could not get up to the
     Stands because he could not prove ... A. He could not prove
     he had a Stand ticket.

Q.    So if he was going anywhere he had to go down on to the
     terracing? - A. Well that was the way.

Q. And in fact that is what he did with the rest of you? -
   A. Yes, he did.

Q. And you all went down I think the tunnel.    Is that right?
   - A. That is correct.

Q. Did you know there were other routes into the ground? -
   A. Yes, I did.

Q. But do I take it that   you liked being behind the goal.
   I don't mean directly   behind the goal but in that centre
   section? - A. Well at   Anfield that is usually where we
   stand so therefore to   make it easier when Paul Carlisle
   had gone away to swap   his ticket that is where we said we
   would be.

Q. I see. So that was where you were hoping Paul would come
   if he had not succeeded with his swap? - A. That is right.

Q. And you went down the tunnel. The tunnel I take it was
   reasonably clear. You did not have any particular
   difficulty in the tunnel? - A. No, no real problems at
   all.

Q. And when you exited from the tunnel did you turn right or
   left? - A. Right.

Q. Have you any idea what time this would have been that you
   got there? - A. Roughly about 25-past, half-2.

Q. How long would you say it took you to get through the
   turnstile area? - A. From the outside I would say between
   15 minutes, you know about 10/15 minutes.

Q. If you got to the turnstile area at the time you told me
   you would have had to be later on the terracing wouldn't
   you? - A. Yes. As I say they were given as approximate
   times.

Q. In your statement you put 20-to-3. Would that sound
   reasonable to you or would you prefer to change that?
   - A.. 20-to-3 was when we actually got on to the terracing.

Q. Yes, that is what I am trying to find out.    You have
   understood what I am asking? - A. Yes.
                                    I.J. FEARNS


At that point were you able to find, select a spot where
you wanted to be? - A. We obviously had to push through
because obviously there was a crowd there but we didn't
find any great difficulty at all except when we got in
obviously the crowd was still increasing and there was a
lot of pushing going on.

Did you feel any surges? - A. Yes, I did. The first surge
must have been about quarter-to-3 but that was just with
people singing and what have you because as I say at that
time there was nothing out of the ordinary. Then it must
have been some time between 10-to, 5-to-3 there was the
surge that came and that just pushed me right down to the
front.
Can you remember whether the players were already on the
pitch at that point, not for playing but for pre-kick-off?
- A. No, they weren't.

They weren't or you can't remember? - A. No, they weren't
on the pitch.

They were not. So you felt this surge which carried you
forward before the players came onto the pitch? - A. I
did.

Some time after 10-to-3 you would say but before the players
were on the pitch? - A. It was before the players came
on the pitch.

Before, that is right. Did you hear the teams being
announced? - A. I can'thonestly remember. I probably
did but I can't honestly say.

Did you see the playerscome on to the pitch at    all? -
A. No.

Did you see any bit of the match? - A. No.

I don't mean the detail, but did you .... A. I never got
to focus on one player or the ball at all.
So you are not able to say any of your events in relation
to what was going on on the pitch apart from being sure
when the surge came it was before they had come out? - A.
It was before they came.
Did you get split up from your friends? - A. Yes.

But I think you did actually see Carl at one point, he
was slightly over to the right, wasn't he? - A. Carl was
originally standing to my right just in front of Terry
who was also standing to my right. When the surge came
                                                              64

                                         I.J. FEARNS


     that pushed me right forward to near the front I went
     off sort of to the left and Carl went straight forward
     and that was the last I saw of him.

Q.   Was it at this point when this big surge came? -   a   . Yes.

Q.    Did this surge go forward and ease back at all or did it
     stay continuously forward? - A. No, when the surge came
     the pressure was so intense with the surge that I decided
     me and Paul Murray had been pushed that way, we will see
     what it ij> like down the front because usually there is
     a gap between the railings and where the terracing starts
     coming up. We got into this gap and then the surge just,
     you know, it became more and more and then we became
     trapped unfortunately.

Q. Tell me: when you first got down to the front was there
   in fact a gap there? - A. No. We assumed there would be
   a gap there but when we got there there wasn't and there
   was no way back.

Q. Obviously we know things became dreadful in the front
   there, we know that. What I am trying to find out when
   you first got to the front bit where you were hoping
   things would be easier, was it in fact any easier at
   that point when you were moving or being moved by the
   surge? - A. No, when we actually got to the front it was
   just as packed as what it was up the back and then it
   just gradually got worse.

Q. Could you see the little gate? - A. I saw it when I
   was further up the pitch being opened once but when I
   was forward I had no view of the gate at all.

Q. Tell me about that. When did you see this little gate
   open then, tell me? - A. It was just before the surge
   came the gate opened. I don't know for what reason or
   whether there was a fan trying to get out. I honestly
   don't know. I just remember the gate opening and the
   Police Officer pushing the fan back in and closing the
   gate.

Q. You say this was before the players were on the pitch?
   - A. That was before the players were on the pitch.
Q. You are quite sure about that? - A. Positive.

Q. And you say you saw it opened and the fan being pushed
   in at that point? - A. Yes.

Q. After that you lost sight of it? - A. Yes.
                                                        65


                                       I.J. FEARNS


Q. How did you yourself get out as a matter of interest?
   - A. I was stuck in the crush for about a full 20, 25
   minutes and when the pressure did finally ease off a
   little and I was able to move my body and turn, I
   literally panicked and forced my way to the back.
   A gentleman who was nearer the back actually took hold
   of me and he did literally hit me and told me to calm
   down and then him and a friend passed me up into the
   Stand above.




                        Q. You did the,right
                                                        66
                                               I. J. FEARNS


Q. You did the right thing to go back actually. I am sure
   that was the right thing for you to do. I want you to
   show us on the plan where you, were when you took your
   match viewing position, and then show me the second
   position, where you finished up near the front.
   (The witness marked Exhibit C467) I think you said
   that in 1988 you were in one o£ the stands, is that
   right? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Q. There was one other thing I wanted to ask you. Do you
   remember a beach ball being knocked about? - A. I do,
   when I first went in, yes.
Q. Was that the position which you have marked with a "I"?
   - A. Yes.
0. Were you there at that time? - A. I was there at that
   time.
0. So the big surge happened sometime after that? - A. It
   did.
                Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Q. Mr. Fearns, you tell us that Paul - this is Paul
   Carbide - wanted to swap his ticket? - A. That is
   correct.
Q. So he obviously did not want to be on the terrace in
   the standing area, he wanted to be in the stand. Did
   he say anything to you as to why he wanted to swap it?
   - A. He never said anything to me personally but me and
   my friend Terry Mainwaring came to the assumption that
   obviously he was a bit worried about this. For what
   reasons, I didn't get into ....

Q. I am just interested in whether he spoke to you. Mr.
   Terry Mainwaring is here, isn't he? - A. He is not, no.

        THE CORONER:   Ask him for the hearsay.   I am not
   intending to call Mr. Mainwaring.
        MR. KING:   I see. Sir, I want the best evidence
   but this may be the best I can get.
        THE CORONER:   Yes.   I don't mind you taking the
   hearsay on this point.
        MR. KING:   Thank you, sir:

Q. Let me investigate a bit further then: what did you
    assume and why did you so assume was the reason for why
    Paul did not want to be on the terraces? - A. For the
   .whole of that season, even being at Anfield on the Kop,
                                                             67
                                                 I. J. FEARNS

     on numerous occasions Paul when he did stand behind the
     goal, moved away to either the side or nearer the front
     because the pressure, he felt it was too much for him.

Q. Do you know whether he had been to the semi-final in
   1988? - A. He had been, yes.

Q. Were you there with him in 1988? - A. No, Ididn't
   travel with Paul.

Q. Did you ever speak to him about his experiences in
   1988? - A. Only about the game itself.

Q. Not about his experience on the terrace? - A. Not about
   any experiences, no.
                Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Q. Mr. Fearns, did you say you saw the perimeter gate
   opened before the players came out? - A. The perimeter
   gate in area "C" was actually opened once to my
   recollection, that.I can remember, but that was
   immediately shut by the Police Officer who was on the
   track.

Q. Yes, you are talking about in the perimeter fence,
   aren't you? - A. Inside the ground itself. Not gate C,
   as in the concertina gate, no.

Q. No, gate 3. I was wondering if you could look at C277,
   the sixth time from the bottom. Can you see there it
   says 14.59.20, I think it is, "Gate 3 open"? - A. Yes.
Q.   So that was a little later than you have said, wasn't
     it? — A. No, I said ....

Q.   You said you saw it open before the players came on the
     pitch? - A. Yes, itdid open once.   As I say, there was
     no big flood onto the pitch. The Police Officer just
     closed it straightaway.

Q. It is just the time that I am trying to get correct. -
   A. As I say, I couldn't be certain on it. It was
   before the teams were on the pitch though.
Q.    Because we know the teams came out at 6-minutes-to-3
     and 14.59 is when gate 3 opened, so all the events that
     you have mentioned in the pen, could they have been
     just a few minutes out, do you think? - A. As I say,
     that is possibly the case, but I can remember that gate
     being opened before the teams were on that pitch.

Q.   Yes, it is not the events themselves, it is just the
     timing. They could be that little bit later?




                            ©
                                                         68

                                                I« J. FEARNS

          MR. KING:   Sir, to help Mrs. McBrien, it is a
     long time since I made the point, but all we know for
     certain is that 14.59 shows the gate in a state of
     openness. Sir, I think Mrs. McBrien, probably not
     deliberately, has rather misrepresented to the witness
     when indicating at 14.59 the gate was in the process of
     being opened.
          THE CORONER:   I think what Mrs. McBrien is trying
     to find out is whether this witness could be five
     minutes wrong with his time but we don't know.

          MR. KING:   We don't know. I am only trying to
     make sure that there is no confusion over the
     significance of 14.59 on the chart for gate 3. That is
     only a time when we know the gate was in a state of
     openness.
          MRS. McBRIEN:   And it doesn't say anywhere that
     gate 3 was opened before, does it, sir?

          THE CORONER:   No, it does not, but you cannot
     from that figure say that it didn't open before; you
     cannot say that it did; and you cannot say what
     happened after it. All you can say, as Mr. King
     correctly points out, is that at 14.59 it was open.
     How long it was open, whether it was shut again,
     whether it stayed open continuously, from the figure
     itself you can't tell. What this witness is saying,
     and he will correct me if I misrepresent what he is
     saying, is that his recollection is that the gate did
     open, but that it was considerably earlier, before the
     players were on the pitch, that somebody came out and a
     Police Officer put him back in, and then it was shut,
     but he has no further recollection of any events on the
     gate. That is his evidence.

Q.        MRS. McBRIEN:   Mr. Fearns, you do say that your
     timings could be a little out, don't you? - A. Yes, but
     I do know distinctly that the teams were not on the
     pitch when I first saw that gate open. As I say, when
     the gate was opened it was closed virtually immediately
     by a Police Officer who was on the track, so for the
     record that might not go down as the gate being open,
     but as I say, it was opened and closed straightaway.

Q. When you saw that gate open what was the state of the
   pen then? - A. From where we were it was starting to
   get really quite packed at the time. It was just
   before the surge actually happened. As I say, then the
   surge came and recollection from then was just panic
   really.
                                                            69

                                               I. J. FEARNS

Q. You didn't feel in any danger at all when you saw that
   gate first opened? - A. No. I was feeling a bit
   worried about the intensity of the pushing, but it was
   just like any cup game to me at the time.

Q. Did you see how the gate was opened? - A. No. I can
   only recollect the actual gate opening and the Police
   Officer closing it virtually straightaway. I couldn't
   tell you who opened, why it was opened.
Q. Did anybody gst out at that time? - A. No, the gate was
   closed virtually immediately.

Q. Nobody at all? - A. No.
q.        THE CORONER:   Did you say nobody got out? I
     thought you said somebody got out and was put back in?
     - A. Well, they didn't get out - that was the question.

Q. I see, yes.    I understand.
          THE CORONER:   Mr. King, are you happy with what
     you have heard with regard to Mr. Mainwaring? As I
     say, I do not intend to call Mr. Mainwaring because I
     think it isn't really terribly --- I know it is very
     important to the family but it is not terribly relevant
     to the Inquest. Do you want to ask him any further
     questions?
          MR. KING:   Yes. I don't want to suggest
     something which he has no knowledge of.
              Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Q. Did you know Mr. Carlile in the previous season, that
   is Paul Carlile, in the 1988 season? - A. Yes.
Q. Would he go to the Kop at Anfield in the 1988 season? -
   A. Yes, he did.
Q. In the 1988 season did he exhibit the same reluctance
    to be on the Kop and worried about crowding? - A. Yes.
    I tnyself only started going to football matches with
   Paul Carlile, it was about the '87 season.         since
   then I knew for a fact that he was nervous of the large
   crowds, but as I say, he never, ever actually came out
   and said it to me personally.
Q. In the 1987 and ' 8 8 season he was still going on the
   Kop as far as you knew? - A. Yes.
Q. Then he went to the *88 semi-final at Hillsborough? -
   A. Yes.
                                                                            CORONER’S COPY


                                              CORONER’S CERTIFICATE AFTER INQUEST
                             furnished under section 23 (1) of the Births and Deaths Registration Act 1953

      •PM       •Wo*PK/l


  To the registrar
              trar ol births
                      Wrths.aMJ.dealh* for the sub-district ot ............                                                            i>l)c 1 i .ic W .

  I certify that: at an i n v e s t h ^ f *                                      :...an»31:5.-5|at //                               i -g o ^            ?> :?X 3,.C ouA .:.t;..
                         City                                                     Sheffield                               £
  PART I OSCEAS CO PERSON (Not still-born - see separate Form 99A)
  1. Date and                                                fifteenth April 19 8 9
     place of death
                                           Hillsborough Football, Ground, Sheffield.

     'lam e and                                                                                                                                                3. 9m
                                                                                                                                                                                •Mat«/Pem*te'-
                                       Ian Tliomiis .Olover                                                                                                    < ■ Mifc^aumewwt*!
                                                                                                                                                                   wCHfl™” •••*0 MlUifWw




     SjSv'®* ; ; Taeth January 1969:                                                                                hi                       Paver
                  {/^iwpool




                                1( a)          Traumatic Asphyxia


                                                                                                                                          ■{X C-i.XiSt.X'AnX                             L“   —   ^
'                                                                                                       i ‘ under S ection 7 o l Mm Visiting F orces Act, 1952.
w                  i                                                                                    < 'and has n ot been resumed.____________________

  •PART III. BURIAL/CREMAttOM
                                                                                                  liith A p r t i. 1 i*
  i have given     *kn O rder for Buriai/a Certificate E » < i6 r^ em a tio h dated

  of (address) . _____________________________________________________


    ‘ate                                                                                   S ig n a tu re /.,

S f i l . Coroner foj                                                        .............................................................................................................

  PART IV. ACfIDENT OR MISADVENTURE (Including desttw Irom neg lect or from anaesttwrttes)

  1. Place wham accident occurred:!                                                      4. If motor vehicle accident, deceased was:t
      0. Home       \                         5.   Street or highway                              0. Driver of m otor vehicle                                         5. Rider of animat;
       1.Farm        l                        6.   Public building                                   other than motor cycle                                              occupant of animal-
       2.Mine or quarry,                      7.   Resident institution                           1. Passenger in motor                                                  drawn vehicle
      i  industrial place or prem ises        8.   O ther specified place                            velite)* o th e r tfian                                          6. Pedal eycfist
     Q ) Piace of recreation o r sport        9.   Pface not specified                               motor cycle                                                      7. Pedestrian
                        i‘                                                                        2. Motor cyclist                                                    8. O ther specified person
                                                                                                  3. P assenger on m otor cycle                                       9. U M ffc if'w ) person
  2. To be completed for all persons aged 16 and over                                             4. O ccupant of tram car
       When injury was received deceased w asf
       1. On way to, or from work
     /3
     K*l
       )‘
       *\ At work
        I
        I Elsewhere
                                                                                          5. Type of injury
 3. Details of hiiw accident happened:                                                          Crush
    S u s t a i n e d Icrush i n j u r i e s                   at                         6. Parts of body injured;
    f o o t b a l l aro u n d .                                                                 Che3t
                        V'         .                                                      7j_Jnterval between injury and deathf
                                                                                                     Less m an o n e year                                                2. One year or more


 PART V. MARITAL CONDITION, etc
 All persons  ft      G snvia
 aged 16 and ovf^                                  Marries   3. Widowed                      n i r s n n s 1**1                       Dat9 0( Wf,t'
                                              2.             4. Divorced                     persons                                  ^ su(vjy(ng spouse                     ............................
                        if                                    FOR COMPLETION BY THE CORONER

                        7              ;

                                                                fPfMM ring apptopeitt* nuntm ti                                                                        FORM f 9 ^ e v ) (COPY)

                                                                                                                                                                                                  I R ( T ) 6 S 4 (85
IAN THOMAS GLOVER




1.   Ian Glover, the son       of the Applicants John           and Teresa

     Glover was born on        20th January, 1969, and was twenty

     years old when he died at Hillsborough football ground

     on 15th April, 1989.



2.   He   was accompanied      to    the     ground by    his     brother*3

     Joseph Glover and John McCarthy but only he and Joseph
     entered enclosure        3 of     the Lepping    Lane end      of the
     stadium.



3.   At the     inquest the    jury heard       first from       Professor

     Alan Usher about        the cause of death which           he gave as

     death through        traumatic asphyxia.       Evidence      was then
     put by Officer        Geraldine Evans in which          details were

     given, inter alia, of          what had happened to Ian Glover

     between 2.30 p.m. and          shortly after 3.40 p.m. when he

     was certified dead        by Dr. Alan Redgrave.            In summary

     that evidence        was to the       effect that Ian      and Joseph

     Glover took up a position in the centre of enclosure 2
     at approximately 2.30          p.m.    Following a      surge in the

     crowd they     were both       pushed forward.       Joseph states

     that     both were    being     crushed from     about 2.40      p.m.

     onwards.     Joseph managed       to escape from the enclosure

     via a     gate in the    front perimeter fence but           Ian was




ANNAAC
     left    Inside        about     4     feet        frdm the       front     of     the
     enclosure.       Joseph tried to                 climb back in to help Ian
     but was pulled off the fence                      by a police officer.             He

     spoke     to    Ian     through            the     fence   until         Ian     lost

     consciousness.           There is           video evidence          of Ian        and

     Joseph together          in enclosure 3              and of Joseph             on the

     fence outside of the             enclosure.           Approximately twenty

     minutes later         Joseph saw            Ian being      pulled from            the

     enclosure on to          the pitch by two              unidentified police
     officers.        He attempted              to resuscitate          Ian who       was
     then carried on          a makeshift stretcher to                  a gymnasium

     which     was    serving        as     a temporary         mortuary.             The

     officer reported that Joseph                      had that morning said to

     her    that     while      in        the     gymnasium       a     doctor        had

     identified       Ian's     pulse           and     attempted,       for        about

     fifteen        minutes,         to     resuscitate           him      but        was
     unsuccessful.           Joseph        assented that          it was       himself

     together       with     other        fans    who     carried       Ian.          His

     statement was then            changed by a West              Midlands police
     officer       to read     "may        have carried         .... "         Shortly

     after 3.40 p.m. Dr.           Alan Redgrave, in the presence of
     P.C. Glave       certified that Ian                Glover was dead.              The

     transcript       of this        part        of the     inquest hearing            is

     exhibited to this memorandum at Exhibit


4.   The jury never          heard from Joseph Glover                  himself, but

     were merely       presented with                 excerpts from      statements




ANNAAC
     that he had made to the police.            They did not have the

     benefit of     hearing relevant matters which              related to

     the period after        the 3.15 p.m. cut-off         point.     These
     matters are set     out in a note of a             statement made by
     Joseph    Glover   which      was    taken    by    Sheila     Coleman
     (researcher) and is        exhibited at exhibit                to this

     memorandum.     Of particular        relevance are the notes at

     the   end of    the record      which state        first, that      the

     ambulances     had great      difficulty      in    getting to      the

     gymnasium     because    of    the     presence      of    crowds    of

     supporters     trying to      leave the      stadium and       second,
     that Ian, upon being taken out of the enclosure by the

     police, was left on the pitch lying on his back.



5.   These matters when       combined with the evidence            of Dr.
     Phillips and Dr. Ashton are all highly relevant to the

     issue of whether Ian       Glover's death was aggravated by

     lack of   care, this being          an issue which        should have

     been left to the jury.




ANNAAC
STATEMENT OF JOHN McCARTHY RE IAN GLQVER

   brother of Ian Glover.
Got Ian out of bed on the morning of thedisaster to give him a ticket
for the Leppings Lane terracing.

- John had a ticket for the North Stand.
He saw people spilling onto the track and   turned to his friend and
said 'Our Ian and Joe are in there'.

He saw a fat man being carried from the Leppings Lane end to the Spion
kop' end. His friend was trying to revive him. He obviously failed as
he began punching the ground. John knew then that the man was dead
and his fears for Ian and Joe grew.

He stayed in his seat because although he wanted to get on the pitch
and search for them, police with dogs were lined up in front of the
stands.
Another friend, who was on the front row of the stands, shouted John
and said: 'Your Ian's dead. I'll take you to Joe'. This was
approximately 3.25pm.
The friend (Paddy Starkey) took John to Joe outside the gymnasium
(3.30pm approx). John asked:

        'Where's our Ian?'
        Joe answered:
        'He's in there.'

John and Joe then went to the door of the gymnasium. There were two
police officers at the door (one had glasses on). They said 'You
can't go in there.' John replied:

        'My brother's in there.'

He moved them out of the way and entered the gymnasium.

Joe took him to Ian who was in the middle of a row of bodies.
Bodies were very close to one another.
John knelt down to see Ian and stood on somebody's head.
He began shaking Ian, trying to wake him up.
Ian had wet himself. His stomach was compressed and his chest was
protruding.
His face was bruised.
John and Joe staying with Ian for what John thinks was about 5
minutes.
They were very upset and were taken outside.
John asked a police officer if he could use a phone. He was directed
to a pay phone but could not get a line. He returned to the police
officer who produced a telephone from under the table and he
immediately rang home and informed his Aunty of Ian's death.

Outside the gymnasium John saw people on stretchers. One of these was
Danny MacArthur (Ian's friend). He was looking at John but John was
unable to respond to him in his state of shock.
John and Joe were taken in an ambulance to BARNSLEY Hospital (18 miles
away). This was approximately 4.20-4.30pm.

- They arrived at the hospital where a doctor told them that they
were suffering from shock and were given a drink of water.

John Glover (father) arrived at the hospital and took them to look for
Ian.
They travelled to the Police Station and Hammerton Road Boys' Club
where he remembers names being shouted out.
Travelled on bus back to the Hillsborough ground.
Had to look through all the photographs and John picked Ian out. His
(Ian's) body was brought to them and it was then that John noticed a
footprint on Ian's face.
They were taken to a table and were questioned by plain clothes police
officers (who we know to be CID).

HE    John remembers about 3 rows of bodies in the gym when he arrived
      at approx 3.30pm. He estimates about     bodies. This would be
      about right as there were bodies still at the back of Leppings
      Lane.

HE    John's timings as to his arrival at the gym are quite accurate as
      he remembers seeing Danny MacArthur on a stretcher before Danny
      was taken to hospital.

JOSEPH GLOVER RE IAN GLQ.VEB

-     Travelled to Sheffield with brother Ian.
     In Pen 3.
     Both being crushed from 2.40pm onwards.
     Shouting to get out.
     Gate was opened. Few people got out then it was closed again.
     Gate opened again. Joe got out. Police directed him to side pens
     but he went back to the fence to Ian.
     Ian approx 5 yards from front fence.
     Joe was shouting to Ian to move.
     Ian was saying 'I can't, I can't move'.
     Joe was shouting to people around Ian to move and help him, but
     they said that they couldn't move either.
     Joe saw Ian's eyes closing.
-     Joe climbed on fence (see video) and was shouting to Ian.
     Joe ran to ambulanceman and pleaded with him to help Ian.
-    Ambulanceman went to Policeman who said 'we can't do anything yet'.
-     People were being pulled out.
-    Joe was still on the fence. Ian was ■unconscious but was standing
     up.
     Two police officers brought him out, laid him on the pitch then
     returned to get more bodies out.
     Joe tried to resuscitate him.
     Someone else also tried but said 'it's too late'.
     Ian was placed on a hoarding and Joe andLiverpool supporters
     carried him to gymnasium.
     In gymnasium Doctor (unidentified) felt for pulse and said 'There's
     a pulse there'. He tried for about twenty minutes to resuscitate
     Ian but then said he was dead.
                             - 3 -

-   Plain clothes police officers in Gym kept Joe with Ian. They asked
   -Joe for Ian's name and address and they wrote it on a tag and put
    it on his wrist. They emptied Ian's pockets and put hie
    possessions in a brown bag.
-' The gym at this time was being partitioned off and Joe was asked to
    move to the side where the injured were being dealt with. Instead
    he went outside where he met John McCarthy's friend (Paddy
    Starkey). Joe told him that Ian was dead and Paddy went to find
    John.

NB   Joe remembers that the ambulances had great difficulty getting to
     the gymnasium area because of the Nottingham Forest fans leaving
     the ground (the gym was at the 'Forest' end of the ground).

NB   When Ian was taken out of the pen by the police he was laid on his
     back and left.

JOHN GLOVER RE IAN GLOVES

Ian's father.
Was informed that Ian was dead and travelled to Barnsley Hospital
where he met Joe and John.
Was told at the hospital that Joe was dead - but Joe was standing with
him.
Went to Police Station then to Boys' Club.
- Was taken to ground on bus.
Looked through photographs for Ian.
John McCarthy picked out Ian (no 37).
- Ian was wheeled out.
He had a dirty blanket over him.
His leg was hanging off the trolley and his head was to one side.
John straightened his head and a catholic priest gave him the 'last
rites'.
John and family were then led to a table where they were questioned by
CID officers.
They were asked how Ian had travelled to Sheffield. How much he had
to drink etc.
They were then told that they might as well go home.

m    John states that looking through the photographs was "the worst
     think in [his] whole life".

m    It was unnecessary for John and the others to go through this
     process of identification as Ian had a tag on him bearing his name
     and address from Joe's earlier identification.
                                               15 October 1990

Dr Stefan Popper
The Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield

Dear Dr Popper

I am the father of Ian Glover, one of the 95 victims of the
Hillsborough Disaster and I am writing to you in order to voice my
concern regarding the forthcoming inquests.  In particular, I am
concerned that there are specific issues relating to Ian's deat h which
might not be addressed.

I am aware that the inquest held earlier this year was meant to deal
specifically with who Ian was and when and where he met his death.
However, I have to state that I found the limitations of this format
extremely frustrating and intimidating.  Consequently, there were a
number of issues relating to Ian's death which I felt were
inadequately addressed yet I felt powerless to pursue answers.   It is
for this reason that I am writing to you to ask that you consider
calling evidence in an attempt to find the answers my family and
myself so desperately seek.




                                                 *AfVi
There are a number of other issues that I feel need raising.     These
are as follows:




                                        c o n t i n u e d ...
4.   At the resumed 'mini' inquests my son Joe pointed to a factual
     error in the summary which was to be read in the court.  The
     summary referred to a named police officer carrying Ian across the
     pitch to the gymnasium.  In actual fact as I have previously
     stated, it was Joe and a group of fans who carried Ian across the
     pitch.  When Joe indicated this inaccuracy the Summary Officer
     altered the summary so that it read that the officer may have
     carried Ian across the pitch.

     I am most concerned that a police officer's statement could, in
     effect, be altered with such ease and without the officer being
     consulted, particularly as this new information apparently
     contradicted the visual evidence.

     I request that an explanation be given as to how the summary
     officer could alter the summary and further request that my son
     Joe be called as a witness in order to give evidence relating to
     who carried Ian to. the gymnasium.

I would ask that you give serious consideration to the issues outlined
and to the possibility of these being raised at the forthcoming
inquests.

Yours sincerely




John Glover
                                               15 October 1990

Dr Stefan Popper
The Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield

Dear Dr Popper

I am the father of Ian Glover, one of the 95 victims of the
Hillsborough Disaster and I am writing to you in order to voice my
concern regarding the forthcoming inquests.  In particular, I am
concerned that there are specific issues relating to Ian's death which
might h o t be addressed.

I am aware that the inquest held earlier this year was meant to deal
specifically with who Ian was and when and where he met his death.
However, I have to state that I found the limitations of this format
extremely frustrating and intimidating.  Consequently, there were a
number of issues relating to Ian's death which I felt were
inadequately addressed yet I felt powerless to pursue answers.   It is
for this reason that I am writing to you to ask that you consider
calling evidence in an attempt to find the answers my family and
myself so desperately seek.




There are a number of other issues that I feel need raising.     These
are as follows:




                                        c o n t i n u e d ...
When Ian was lifted onto the pitch he was placed in a position
close to the goal mouth.  His brother Joe was with him when a
police officer pronounced him dead and covered his face with a
pullover.  Joe and a group of fans carried Ian on a makeshift
stretcher to the gymnasium where he was examined by a doctor who
found a pulse on him and attempted resuscitation (NB this was
approximately twenty minutes after the police officer had
pronounced him dead).  I believe that this issue was inadequately
dealt with at the inquest and request that a detailed explanation
is sought at the soon to be resumed inquests by calling the
relevant witnesses.

There are three issues relating to the notification of Ian's death
and his identification which I feel need addressing:

(a)   On the evening of the disaster I travelled to Barnsley
      hospital to see my injured son, Joe (having been informed of
      his whereabouts by my other son John).  The police at this
      stage knew that Ian was dead (Joe had identified him in the
      gymnasium in the afternoon).  However, an official at the
      hospital checked a computer print-out and informed me that
      Ian was alive because he was not on the list.

(b)   When I was at the gymnasium and before I had looked at the
       photographs of the deceased I was told by a policeman in the
       reception area that both Ian and Joe were dead.

(c)   Whilst I was being given the above information in Yorkshire a
       police officer visited my home in Liverpool and informed my
       wife that Joe was injured yet made no mention of Ian even
       though it was some three and a half hours since Joe had
       unofficially identified him in the gymnasium giving his name
       and address to a police officer.

I request that witnesses be called to explain how this inaccurate
information was disseminated.  Moreover, an official complaint
made by myself regarding the actions of South Yorkshire police
has, to date, been ignored.

When Ian was brought home from Sheffield his neck was in a collar.
We were told by the undertaker that it was necessary because his
neck was broken.   When this issue was raised at the inquest in
May, Professor Usher (Pathologist) stated that the collar was a
device used by undertakers to stop the deceased's chin from
flopping before rigor mortis sets in.   Following this explanation
the coroner asked Mr Fraser if I was satisfied.   However, I have
to state that given the formal structure of the court I did not
feel able to speak out and register my dissatisfaction with the
explanation given.   Moreover, I received yet another possible
explanation from a Liverpool based consultant who stated that the
use of the collar was probably a direct consequence of the Post
Mortem examination.   It is clear then that there are three
explanations as to why Ian's neck was in a collar and perhaps the
coroner will understand my concern over the issue T


                                     *   * **
                                      c o n t i n u e d ...
1                                               \
                             - 3 -




4,   At the resumed 'mini' inquests my son Joe pointed to a factual
     error in the summary which was to be read in the court.    The
     summary referred to a named police officer carrying Ian across the
     pitch to the gymnasium.  In actual fact as I have previously
     stated, it was Joe and a group of fans who carried Ian across the
     pitch.  When Joe indicated this inaccuracy the Summary Officer
     altered the summary so that it read that the officer 2L2JZ have
     carried Ian across the pitch.

     I am most concerned that a police officer's statement could, in
     effect, be altered with such ease and without the officer being
     consulted, particularly as this new information apparently
     contradicted the visual evidence.

     I request that an explanation be given as to how the summary
     officer could alter the summary and further request that my son
     Joe be called as a witness in order to give evidence relating to
     who carried Ian to the gymnasium.

I would ask that you give serious consideration to the issues outlined
and to the possibility of these being raised at the forthcoming
i n qu e s t s.

Yours sincerely




John Glover




                                                      4
                                                   I. SOUTHGATE

                  Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

Q. When the great big surge came whereabouts did it come?
   Go up to the plan and just point. - A. The surge seemed
   to come from directly behind and I seemed to get pushed
   this way and Phil got pushed forward downwards towards
   the pitch.
          THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed.      I am
     very much obliged to you.

          Mr. and Mrs. Hammond, your lad was very young and it
     is very very sad you have lost him.   I have said this
     before already I know, but it is still the same.    I
     wrote to you to check on Mrs. Hammond's occupation.
     Have you sent it back?   In that case we will just use
     the note.   It pure formality.

                      (Short adjournment)
                      JOSEPH GLOVER Sworn

                        By THE CORONER:

Q. You are Joseph Glover? - A. Yes.

Q. Of                                  • A. Yes.

Q. You are the brother of Ian who unfortunately lost his
   life? - A. Yes.

Q. It is our dad at the back? - A. Yes.

Q. You went by car with Ian and others to the match on the
   15th April, 1989? - A. Yes.   In my statement I made a
   while ago, it was the day after I buried my brother and I
   have left a lot of things out of it.

Q.   Yes, that is why you have come so you can tell us.     At
     the moment I am trying to find out how you got to
     Sheffield.  You came by car? - A. Yes.

Q. What time did you leave? - A. About eleven o'clock.

Q.   Youhad a ticket? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did Ian have one as well?    - A. Yes.

Q. Having left by car, did you drive straight to Sheffield?
   - A. Yes.
Q. What time did you arrive in Sheffield? - A. It was
   roundabout two o'clock, just after two o'clock.
                                                   J. GLOVER
Did you stop en route at all? - A. No.
That is quite a long time from* Walton? - A. Coming up on
the motorway we hit a bit of traffic, there were hold­
ups .
Which way did you come?   Did you cdme across the Passes
or did you come on the motorway? - A. No, on the
motorways.
You were in a car so I assume you weren't stopped and
searched? - A. No.
Did you notice whether the Police were searching coaches
as you were driving along? - A. Well, when we got not too
far away from the ground, I am not sure how many miles it
was, I think we saw a few minibuses getting stopped and
coaches.
Of you just drove on? - A. Yes.
It was of no interest to you.      Having got to Sheffield.
You weren't driving? - A. No.
Somebody else was driving.      Was the car parked up? - A.
Yes.
In fact you parked quite a long way from the ground? - A.
I think it was a mile or a mile and a half.

You then had to walk to the ground? - A. Yes.

What time did you arrive at the ground, about? - A. I
couldn't really say.

How long does it take you to walk a mile or a mile and a
half, normally? - A. Ten minutes, fifteen minutes.

That is quite good walking.    Did it take as long as that
or longer? - A. I am not sure.    I think it is at
Penistone...   I am not sure the road we parked in but it
was just a straight walk down.

Don't worry about the time. - A. I am not sure of the
times.
It isn't that important what time you arrived. I just
like to know if I can find out.   Walking down did you
see other supporters? - A. There were a lot, all walking
towards the ground.

Did you see any of them carrying cans of alcohol? - A.
No.
                                                     J. GLOVER
Q. You didn't see any? - A. No.

Q. None at all? - A. No.
Q. Do you remember walking past a big roundabout before you
   got into Leppings Lane? - A. No, I can't place it.

Q. Were you checked for alcohol at any point as you were
   coming down? - A. No.
Q. Did you see whether anybody else was? - A. No.
Q. Of course you were driving in the car and you hadn't
   stopped from Liverpool to Sheffield? - A. No.

Q. When you got to the turnstiles, never mind what time it
   was, how did you enter?   Did you enter through a
   turnstile or through a big gate? - A. We entered through
   the turnstiles.

Q. Do you remember the big outer perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

Q. You do remember those. - A. As we walked down we got to
   the Leppings Lane turnstiles.   We left Danny, just me
   and Ian, and we joined...   They weren't queues.    There
   was just like a crowd outside the turnstiles.    We joined
   the back at the turnstiles and then a lot of fans started
   coming down and getting behind us.   That is when we
   first started getting into trouble at the turnstiles.
   We started getting crushed at the turnstiles.

Q. Are you saying you were actually crushed at the
   turnstiles? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you see any Police horses there? - A. We noticed one.

Q. Was that outside the perimeter gates or inside the
   perimeter gates when you noticed that? - A. I think it
   was inside.

Q. Which way on was it to you?    Was it broadways or
   longways on? - A. Long.

Q. Was he communicating with you or the other people in the
   crowd?   Was he shouting or waving his arms or anything
   that you can remember? - A. No.   I think he was just
   longways by the gates.   There is like a barrier.
Q. How crushed were you in the area outside the turnstiles?
   - A. It started getting pretty bad.

Q. Could you feel any pressure from anywhere? - A. Yes.

Q. Where was it coming from? - A. From the back of us.
                                                    J. GLOVER
Q. Did you shout out about pushing or anything at tfiat
   point?    Pardon?    I didn't hear you. - A. There were
   just crowds coining behind us.   I am not sure how many
   turnstiles there are, but there didn't seem to be any
   queues or any stewards or anything there.    It was just
   people entering the turnstiles to queue up for the match,
   but there were no queues.

Q. Did you see any Police Officers outside the turnstiles? -
   A. Not outside the turnstiles, no.

Q. You didn't see any? - A. No.
Q. Apart from themounted Officer you saw no other Police
   Officers? - A. I think there might have been two or three
   on the side.   There wasn't any outside the turnstiles.

Q.    Were they saying or doing anything that you noticed? - A.
     No.
Q. I didn't hear your answer to my question when I asked
   whether you were shouting out to people not to push.
   Did you do that or not outside the turnstiles, you
   yourself? - A. Yes.
Qr^xdrTrtrTirake^ttty— di£#erenee^as— far: as you could tell? - A.
    I think there was just that many coming down and there
   was no-one to stop them.       They just all tried to come
    towards the turnstiles to queue up to get in. With there
   not being any queues it just formed into a crowd.
Q. I don'tknow whether you will be able to help me on this
   because the perimeter gates were behind you, but did you
   notice whether they were open or shut? - A. I didn't
   notice.

Q. Did you hear any messages over the tannoy while you were
   out there? - A. No.

Q. Did you hear any messages from a Land Rover behind you? -
   A. No.

Q.    Did you see it by any chance? -   A. No.    Me and Ian had
     split up by then as we got into    the entrance to the
     turnstiles and he shouted over,     "I'll meet you inside."
     As I got through the turnstiles     Ian was waiting inside
     for me.

Q. So he had got in before you? - A. He got in before me.

Q. So once you had got through - there is a biggish area
   there? - A. Yes.
                                                J. GLOVER
Was it quieter in there?   Was it easier? - A. Yes.
Once you got through the turnstiles, yes.
Were you searched in that area at all? -A. No.

Did you see any Police Officers? - A. No.

None at all? - A. As we got through the turnstiles there
was none on the turnstiles.
Pardon? - A. There was no-one searching at the turnstile
as we went through.
Was anybody searching on any other turnstile? - A. I
couldnt tell you. The turnstile I went through, there
was no-one on that one.

How long did you stay in this big area behind the
turnstiles? - A. As we got through the turnstiles?

Yes. - A.How do you mean?

Did you go through the turnstile, saw Ian and walked
straight into the ground or did you go to the toilet, did
you buy a programme, did you buy a cup of coffee? - A.
Ian was there waiting for me as I ca m e^ th r o u g h we j u s t
went straight down the tunnel.   That was the only
entrance we saw.

Had you been to the ground before? - A. No.

So you could see the tunnel ahead of you? - A. That was
the only place we could see.   Usually as we go through
the tunnel we would usually go towards the left or the
right, to the corner, so we could see.   We would have a
better view with only being small, but we didn't know
there were the dividing fences dividing it into pens.
We just thought it was it was one big area.

When you got to the tunnel entrance on the concourse
side, were you able to see the pitch at all? - A. Through
the tunnel?

Yes. - A. Yes, we just seen the tunnel and like daylight.

But you couldn't see what was happening on the pitch? -
A. No.

Before you left the turnstile area had you noticed...
There was a big gate there, we call it Gate C.   Did you
notice whether that gate was open or shut? - A. I think I
just caught it getting shut, so I presume it had just
been opened.
                                                             19
                                                   J. GLOVER
Q. Was it quieter in there?   Was it easier? - A. Yes.
   Once you got through the turnstiles, yes.
Q. Were you searched in that area at all? -A.. No.

Q. Did you see any Police Officers? - A. No.

Q. None at all? - A. As we got through the turnstiles there
   was none on the turnstiles.
Q. Pardon? - A. There was no-one searching at the turnstile
   as we went through.
Q. Was anybody searching on any other turnstile? - A. I
   couldn t tell you. The turnstile I went through, there
   was no-one on that one.

Q. How long did you stay in this big area behind the
   turnstiles? - A. As we got through the turnstiles?

Q. Yes. - A.How do you mean?
Q. Did you go through the turnstile, saw Ian and walked
   straight into the ground or did you go to the toilet, did
   you buy a programme, did you buy a cup of coffee? - A.
   Ian was there waiting for me as I came through we just
   went straight down the tunnel.   That was the only
   entrance we saw.

Q. Had you been to the ground before? - A. No.

Q. So you could see the tunnel ahead of you? - A. That was
   the only place we could see.   Usually as we go through
   the tunnel we would usually go towards the left or the
   right, to the corner, so we could see.   We would have a
   better view with only being small, but we didn't know
   there were the dividing fences dividing it into pens.
   We just thought it was it was one big area.

Q. When you got to the tunnel entrance on the concourse
   side, were you able to see the pitch at all? - A. Through
   the tunnel?

Q. Yes. - A. Yes, we just seen the tunnel and like daylight.
Q. But you couldn't see what was happening on the pitch? -
   A. No.

Q. Before you left the turnstile area had you noticed...
   There was a big gate there, we call it Gate C.   Did you
   notice whether that gate was open or shut? - A. I think I
   just caught it getting shut, so I presume it had just
   been opened.
                                                     J. GLOVER
You actually saw it being shut? - A. Yes.
Did you notice whether a lot o f p e o p l e were still coming
through that gate at that point? - A. No,^I just seen ^
them getting closed.   They were just finished filtering
through.                                „
Are you quite sure that you saw it closed because in your
statement you say you actually saw it being opened?    Was
it being opened or was it being closed? -A. No, it was
being closed.




           Q.   How wide open - when.
                                                         21
                                                   J. GLOVER


Q. How wide open - when you first caught a glimpse of it,
   okay, let's assume it was being closed, was it at that
   point when you saw it being closed wide open, or was it
   only a narrow little opening? - A. Ho, it was about
   three feet wide.

Q. So it had been opened quite wide? - A. It was as though
   it had been open full, people have come in, they have
   let a few in and they have sort of like closed it, then
   we walked down to the tunnel and went into pen 3.

Q. When you got into pen 3, when you first got into pen 3,
   did you have a quick look to see what was happening on
   the field? - A. There was nothing happening on the   ..
   field.

Q. No one was on it? - A. No.
Q. Now you are quite sure about that? - A. I think the
   players had been out, a couple of players, and had just
   gone off the pitch as we came in to pen 3.

Q.    You are quite sure - I am going back to the gate,
     because you say the gate had been wide open and was
     being shut, you are quite certain about that? - A. Yes.

Q. And yet when you got out of the tunnel there was nobody
   on the field? - A. I think they had just left the
   field, yes.

0. Kick-off had not taken place yet? - A. No, it must have
   been about 20-to-3 by the time we came in, 25-to.   I am
   not sure of the times but it was a while before the
   players came out.

Q. How long did it take you, once you got to Leppings
   Lane, when you joined the crowd, how long did it take
   you to get through? Have you any idea? - A. I couldn't
   tell you, no.

Q. The reason why I ask you this is that if the gate had
   been wide open and it was being shut, we know from the
   video, at least we think we know, that that gate was
   opened at 8-minutes-to-3. - A. No, it was before that.

Q. And it was shut at 3-minutes-to-3. - A. No, it was
   before that. I would say the gate had been open before
   that.

Q. Okay, so you went through, you think, at about 20-to.
   You don't know but you think it was about 20-to? - A.
   Yes, it was about that time, yes.

Q. You thought the players had left the field? - A. Yes.
                                              J. GLOVER


But not pre kick-off? - A. No, not pre kick-off, no.

You are right, there were players on the field at about
20-to-3 or thereabouts, and they wer.e going off at
about that time. Did you actually see them disappear
off the field or is that an assumption you have made? -
A. That was an assumption, yes.

You are not sure, okay. So you got into pen 3, yes?
Did you see at that point a beach ball being knocked
about? - A. I am not sure. I can't remember, no.

You can't remember, or you didn't see it? - A. I can't
remember, no. I never seen it.
Sorry? - A. I can't remember, no.
Did you hear the players being announced over the
tannoy? - A. No.
You didn't hear that? - A. No, I never heard it, no.

Sorry? - A. I never heard it, no.
You didn't hear it, okay. Did you see the players come
out before the kick-off for their .... - A. No, by that
time in pen 3 me and Ian, we were worried, before the
players came out.
Yes, I will come to that. I am just trying to find out
what you saw. Did you see .... - A. No, I never seen
the players come out.

Did you see any players on the pitch at any time? - A.
Just after kick-off or ....

So you saw them at that .... - A. I ended up on the
pitch.

Did you see them before you ended up on the pitch? - A.
No.
Right, so you came out - now we will go back to your
story - you came out into pen 3, you say? - A. Yes.

Tell me in your words what happened. You and Ian were
together, right? - A. We went into pen 3, sort of like
got through the crowd, took up positions to the right
of the gate.
Fairly near the front, were you? - A. Fairly near the
front, yes, and then we sort of like, I think it was
like a surge, we sort of like just got pushed over a
bit and then it just started getting tighter where you
                                              J. GLOVER


couldn't move. You were just crushed against people,
where you couldn't move at all. ThenIan was, you
could see as though he was choking.
Sorry? - A. You could see him as though he was choking.
As I was looking at him, he just, I couldn't explain
it, his face was changing, and I couldn't move. His
face just kept changing.

That is what you can remember, isn't it? - A. Yes.
Just changing colour in his face.

What happened after that? Was that while you were
still in the pen or had you already left it when you
saw his face change? - A. It was just before leaving
the pen. I was right by him and then there was a lad
in front of us who vomited. There was a lad in front
of us who vomited on his jumper and there was another
lad who fell onto the floor ....
Have a little drink of water. - A. Could I just have a
break for a minute?

Yes, by all means. Just leave us for a few minutes and
settle yourself down.

            (The Witness left the Court)

     THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, I should
perhaps, while he has gone, say that on the whole I do
not insist on relatives giving evidence. Basically
where a relative gives evidence it is because he wants
us. Of course this poor young boyis obviously very
distressed but I don t want you to think that I have
made him give evidence against his will and indeed, if
he were to say to me now, "I have had enough, I don't
want to say any more", I would stop because we have
plenty of evidence from other people and we can piece
it together.
     On the other hand, it is only fair that if
somebody was there whois a relative and he wants to
give evidence, that he ought to be given that
opportunity, otherwise quite rightly he will feel, "Why
wasn't I allowed to speak?", so we will wait for him to
settle down and then I might, in fact, ask him whether
he wants to carry on. I suspect he does want to carry
on.

     While we are waiting, can I mention something else
to do with Rule 37 and documentary evidence? You will
have noticed that I was asking earlier whether Mrs.
Hammond had filled in a form which I had sent to her,
to do with names and things of that nature. What I
                                                      24



intend to do is right at the end we are going to have a
wad of these, and in fact those of you who were here in
April/May time may remember that with every single case
I referred to the form which I sent put, where I asked
people to check that we had got the names and the
spellings right. As far as I can see reading the
transcripts I don't think I actually said in so many
words, "and I admit these forms as documentary
evidence", so I think for the sake of good order, and
so that we have got a complete picture, rather than
just viva voce exchanges across the Court, right at the
end what I propose to do is to admit these documents as
documentary evidence.  I don’t propose unless you
insist that I read them all out in detail.  I will     .
probably read one so that you know the format in which
they were. They contain basically name, address,
occupation, date of birth, a little bit of information
about the GP which is not actually relevant but when we
did them we thought we might need that so we thought we
would get it.

      I am quite certain that these matters will not and
cannot actually be disputed, but I don't intend to do
it now, I will do it right at the end at a convenient
point, and finally, while I am on documentary evidence,
because of the way we took the medical evidence, you
will recollect those of you who were there, that I had -
the pathologists. Normally I get the pathologist to
produce his PM report and say, "Here it is, I produce
it", but for some reason I did not use my standard
formula and again, just as with these forms, certainly
in some cases, in fact, probably most, I did not
actually refer to the typed PM report, and again
similarly I intend to produce them as a wad, simply so
that the information forms part and parcel of the
Inquest proceedings. All the information that is
relevant was given viva voce and in fact as far as I
know everybody who has wanted a copy of the PM reports
has had one anyway, but I take it that will be
acceptable? I hope it will be acceptable to all of you
because I will be reluctant to read 95 PM reports in
full.

     MR. PAYNE:    Thank you for that information. The
procedure certainly would be acceptable to us.    I think
I can speak for everybody. I don t think anybody will
dissent from that.

     THE CORONER:   I will probably do it right at the
end, or at some point when I know that I have got five
or ten minutes, when I have got them here.  It is just
dotting "i's" and crossing "t's", so that the record
for the future is complete, rather than having little
gaps in it.
                                                 R. B. KING


I am    asking you   to look at the density of the crowd
that    you pushed   through? - A. I can't really tell you
from    looking at   the photo how thick the crowd is. All
as -I   know is it   was packed.tight.
     THE CORONER:   Okay, that is fair enough. What
you are saying is that when you started your movement
down towards the gate, you have no recollection of
anybody being on the pitch side of the ...? - A. No.
Forgive me, I just want to check this. When you, were
actually outside, when you had got through, did you say
you do remember Beardsley hitting the crossbar or riot,
I can't remember? - A. No, I don't remember.  I don't
remember anything of the game.
No, but you do remember that the game finished almost
immediately after you came out? That is what you told
me, and I just want to be sure that we have got that,
right? - A. Yes.
You     are sure about that? - A. As far as I am concerned,
all     as I seen when I got on the pitch was my two mates
and     Bruce Grobbelaar was looking back. I presumed it
had     stopped.
I see. It is very difficult with times, I know that.
That is why we like, if possible, to get the witness to
say he saw this or that, because it is much easier, but
if you did not see it you did not see it, that's all
there is to it. Okay, Mr. King, thank you very much
indeed.
     THE CORONER:   I think Mr. Glover is ready to
carry on, so we will go back to Mr. Glover.

                     JOSEPH GLOVER Recalled
                 By THE CORONER (Continued)

Okay, Mr. Glover? - A. Yes.
Now, I think you and Ian were on the terrace, you were
telling me, and I seem to remember you said that you
could not really remember what was going on, on the
field, at all? - A. No.
 But do you remember the little gate which leads onto
 the field? - A. Yes.
 You do remember that, and I think I am right in saying
 that you managed to get out of that, fortunately? - A.
 Yes.
                                                            47

                                                   J. GLOVER


Q. Were you able to walk out? Did you walk out through
   it? - A. It was more like a scramble.
Q.   Do you know whether you were one of £he firstpeople to
     get out or not? - A.  No, not the first.
Q. Can you remember it   opening? - A. Yes, it     opened, I
   think about ten people got out, and closed.    Then it
   opened again and I got out.
Q. What was the time interval between the two openings,
   can you remember? - A. I can't say, no.
Q. Okay. I can't remember, as soon as you got out you
   turned round to look for your brother, didn't you? Is
   that right? - A. By the gate, before I got out the gate
   I could feel myself   standing on someone. There is like
   steps, I got out of   the gate but after standing on
   someone. Then I got onto the pitch and just went
   straight for my brother because I knew where he was,
   then I climbed on the fence, just trying to pull the
   fence down or reach over, shouting to him to move. He
   was saying he couldn't.
Q.    Youwere actually shouting to him, you were talking to
     him? - A. Yes. He was just talking back dead faint.
     You could see his eyes just closing in front of me.

Q.   Did he speak to you at that point?   Was he speaking   to
     you? - A. Dead faint.
Q. Pardon? - A. Dead faint.    His voice was sort of like
   going, yes.
Q. In fact, you have looked at a lot of photographs and
   you have found yourself on a lot, haven't you? - A.
   Yes
Q. Did you start calling to your brother as soon as you
   got out or was there a little time while you had to get
   your breath and sort yourself out? - A. Just a matter
   of seconds.
Q. So almost immediately you .... - A. I knew where he was
   straightaway, yes.
 Q. Yes, because you had been with him, of course. - A. ^
    Yes. Before I did get out there was a lot of shouting
    to the Police at the gate, not the gate, sort of like
    the fence, we were shouting for help. He was just
    looking and just waiting for something, something to
    happen, waiting for an order over his radio or
    something.
                                                J. GLOVER


Sorry? - A. As though he was waiting for an order to
corae to him over the radio, to do something.
Can you speak a little bit slower because I am having
difficulty hearing. - A. Before I got out of the gate
there was a lot shouting to the Police Officers, sort^
of like on the track, for help, to do something, but it
was as though he was waiting for an order to come
through before he would act.
Was it just one Officer who was there or were there
several Officers at that point? - A. I think there was
one or two. There weren't many.
There weren't many. Did he have a radio, can you
remember? - A. I couldn't remember.
You can't remember. Is there anything else you want to
tell me, at least that you want to tell the Jury, that
is? - A. As I was on the fence more Police Officers
came round then. I was just interested in my brother
and one pulled me off and just dragged me away, told me
to get off the fence.
Mr. Glover, can I say how sorry I am that you lost your
brother. It is obviously a very distressing time. I
think you have also been very brave. I   know, because I
have been told, that this was not going to be an easy
session for you so you have done well, a credit to
yourself and to your dad, and of course I am sorry for
him as well. Thank you very much for coming.
     MR. HUMPHREYS:     Sir, I am sorry ....
     THE CORONER:      Have you got a picture of 15.03?

     MR. HUMPHREYS:   This is PR1/12A - C354. Perhaps
Mr. Glover could identify himself on that for the Jury.
     THE CORONER:   Yes. Did he mark a plan, I can't
remember? We will get him to do that at the  same time.
What time is that one?
      MR. HUMPHREYS:     The time is 15.02.

      THE CORONER:     The number again?

      MR. HUMPHREYS:     354.
      THE CORONER:   Go ahead, Mr. Humphreys. Ask him
 what you wish with regard to this photograph?
                                               J. GLOVER


           Cross-Examined by MR. HUMPH REYS

Mr. Glover, could you go up to the screen?    Is that you
being pointed out now? - A. Yes.

It is.   Thank you.
     MR. HUMPHREYS:   Nothing more, sir, except that
the time of 15.02 should be recorded.
     THE CORONER:   Can you show us where you were with
your brother within the pen, on a plan? (The Witness
marked his position on Exhibit C402)
     THE CORONER:   Did you say you had a time?    I
can't read it on mine?
     MR. HUMPHREYS:   Sir, I have a schedule of timed
photographs from album 2. I don't know if that is the
list before you or one compiled by our team.. The time
shown on the photograph would be 15.03, but the tru®
time would be 15.02 because the clock was slightly out.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, we have accepted that as being
an accurate representation of time. Mr. Glover, thank
you very much indeed.




           HENRY JOHN CLARK Called ....
RICHARD JONES



1.   Richard Jones,             the son      of the     Applicants Leslie              and
     Doreen Jones          was born         on 5th     October, 1963,              and was
     twenty five           years of age           \^en he died     at Hillsborough
     football ground on 15th April, 1989.



2. He    was       accompaniedto            the    stadium    by            his     sister
     Stephanie          and a        woman named      Tracey Cox.            All     thre'e

     entered        enclosure 3          of the      Lepping Lane           end of     the

     stadium.           Stephanie        Jones became        separated from            her

     brother and Tracey Cox                 after a surge and pressure from
             i

     the crowd in          the enclosure forced her                forward towards

     the front of the terracing.



3.   During       the    course         of inquest the           jury       heard     from

     Professor Usher that               inhis view the cause of death was

     traumatic asphyxia.               Photographic       evidence showed that
     Richard Jones was standing with Tracey Cox in enclosure

     3 at 2.56          p.m.     The only evidence of            what happened to

     Richard Jones after this time came from Police Sergeant

     John        Killoch       who     disclosed that,       some       time        later,

     Police        Constable         Paul    Bromley      joined        a     group     of

     supporters who            were carrying Richard Jones                  across the

     pitch        to the       north     stand on      a makeshift           stretcher.

     Once there          the Constable attempted to                resuscitate him

     but was       unsuccessful.             He then     assisted in           carrying




ANNAAG
     Richard into the temporary                   mortuary where at 4.00 p.m.

     he was certified dead by Dr. Nicholas Seivwright.


4.   The jury heard no evidence relating to what happened to
     Richard Jones either             between 2.56 p.m. and          the moment

     when he was          carried across the pitch, or             after he had
     been taken into          the mortuary prior to           being certified

     dead.         The    Applicants        are    extremely concerned      that
     nothing in the evidence that was put before the inquest
     discloses that Richard Jones                  received any medical care
     whatsoever.          The facts        of his being carried across the

     pitch by supporters alone, and resuscitated by a police
             j
     officer        point     to     the    opposite     conclusion.         The

     Applicants also believe that such a conclusion would be

     reinforced had the evidence                  of Dr. Glynn Phillips, Dr.

     John Ashton and          Mr. F. Eccleston, in           particular, been

     put before the jury.              During the course of the resumed

     inquests the Applicants wrote to the Coroner requesting
     that these people be            called as witnesses together with

     a Dr. Burns          (Pathologist), and that their            evidence be

     put before          the jury.      This evidence, a large         part of

     which concerned events taking place after the 3.15 p.m.

     cut-off point,          demonstrated the          woeful inadequacy      of

     the     organisation and          provision       of emergency    medical

     care.       The Coroner refused the Applicants request.                 Had

     such        evidence     been     placed       before   the    jury,    the

     Applicants          submit that       good grounds      would have     been




ANNAAG
     established for a jury      to draw the conclusion that the
     death by    traumatic asphyxiation       of Richard    Jones was
     aggravated by lack of care.


5.   In   addition,   that there   was no     evidence of    medical

     intervention     prior to   4.00    p.m. when    Mr. Jones    was
     certified dead, means that         no conclusions can be drawn

     as   to   when   death actually     occurred    and   hence   all

     evidence of what happened      to Mr. Jones     after 3.15 p.nf.
     is entirely relevant to the question of how he died.




ANNAAG
   HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH Y O R KS H I R E
                       (WEST D I S T R I C T )



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                   STADIUM DISASTER

               ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



             I NQUEST INTO THE DE AT H OF


                      RICHARD JONES




                         Before

DR. S.L.   POPPER,   LL.B,    B.MED.Sci,    B M , B S , M R C GP

               (Her Majesty's C o r o n e r )




                             At

             The Medico-Legal Centre,
                  W atery Street,
                     Sheffield.

                             On

                     3rd May,     1990.




             TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     Fro m the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
           O ff i c i al Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Shef f i el d SI 2DX



                                                                   114
    A
                                                                                     • p .r e   : o,

        ?'    #        >T    ;•• •      f7         Q p l    ] JJfT



                  *>..      n v ‘* 'x        r*r    '* ■)
                  m. i \     %. * . V              -j- w    •   •   •   <




    B

        :-rLJc : 3«n.rri3AKT j o t i n                                      ail ed

                  2 v TTTo C O R O N A

    C   pcljcc             T?:r>;\-:cT0i? h i c h a t c l t .
                                                            -
                                                            a y t o i ; called

                  7 W T T R C O n O M S R ..................... .




    D




i   E




    F




    G




                                                                                                       114
3rd ?;p".    l ° nr)


                          X7-
                            TT O T TT'-- DD/.T!T HP ~?ICTI\71D JOZTOo

          1TI, FP-AS'^ll: Sir, tho cnddcncc that y o u vilj. now
h e a r rclo.to s to Richar d Jones.          R i c h a r d ’s p a r e n t s a to
in Court w i t h social wor kers and m e m bers of the family.
The p a r en ts are re p r e s e n t e d b y a prac tice w h i c h is a.
m e m b e r or m y Group and I a p p e a r on t h e i r behalf* as agent
through the us u a l S t e e r i n g Committee arrangement.

       TP13 CCROIJIDIi: Now, I think, Mr. Jones, y o u were he r o
on the first day, wore 3'ou not, so y o u l:nov th? general
form so I am n ot g o i n g to go over that ground n o w and
we w i l l start straightaway.

          This is a r e s u m e d Inque st w h i c h was opened on the
18th April, 1S'S? • On that oc casio n Nei l A n t h o n y Parkin,
A c t i n g C o r o n e r ’s Officer, said:

           "The b o d y w h i c h is the subject of this
           I n q u e s t has b e e n i de n t i f i e d to FC 2220
           S r o m l o y of tho South Y o r k s h i r e Police as
           that of R i c h a r d Jones b y L e s l i e Jones,
           his father.            He was 25 y e a r s of age h a v i n g
           b e e n b o r o on the 5th October, 1 9 6 3 a "k
           L i v e r p o o l.    He was a single m a n and ho
           lived at                               ~                   I
           lie w a s an office r/orlcer b y occupation.
           Tie d i e d at H i l l s b o r o u g h Foo t b a l l G r ound
           f o l l o w i n g an incident there o n Saturday/,
           1 5 th April, 1 9 8 9 . F C B r o m l e y caused tho
           b o d y to bo remove d to the M e d i c o Lega l
           Centre and there ho i d e n t i f i e d it to
           Det e c t i v e Constabl e Simon WeigoId who
           su b s e q u e n t l y i d e n tifi ed tho same b o d y to
           Prof. Usher.             It is the f a m i l y w i s h that
           the b o d y s h o u l d bo b u r i e d . "

         A n d X th e n a d j o u r n e d the I n q u e s t and, as was m y
normal practice, I w r o t e and c hocked w h e t h e r the i n f o r m a t i o n
wa s correct and, i n fact, Mr. L e s l i e Jones — —                 that is
you, I think, is it n o t ---- y o u s i gne d the for m and
y o u coiif5_rmed that, in fact, the names, addresses, date
and place of b i r t h w e r e correct and I t hink y o u have n o w
told me that, i n fact, y o u r son h a d a BSc w h i c h I am
h a p p y to ackn ow l e d g e but it is no t one of the r e g i s t r a t i o n
criteria w h i c h we n e e d for the purp oses of the Inquest.

     B l o o d al cohol s were e stimated i n this case as w e l l
ay, in fact, all tho others and Dr. Forres t gave the
results f or these on tho first day, i n fact, I think y o u
wore here tho first d a y so y o u h e a r d him, and tho result
in tho case of R i c h a r d was loss than 10 m g / 100 nil.


                                                                                    114
            /



                                              p^o?.    m ,m :    uyr:^ cn..iicr»;
                                                    3?v. Til'-

                        "i. Al a n Usher,     is it not? - A. Yes,            it is.

                        Q. Prof. of Forons ic Ko di c i n c at Sheffield and I;or.:o Office
                           Pa tJologist? - A. Yes,
                    B
                        Q. And you are g o i n g to tell in3 about a lad w ho v           rv.s -
                           identified to y o u as I>ichard Jones a nd y o u also had
                           an. i d e n t i f i c a t i o n nuriber 6 3 , I believe? - A, Yc£, that
                           is i-ight.

                        Q. C*ui y o u tell me then w h a t the p a t h o l o g i c a l findings
                           arc r e l a t i n g to this manV - A, Yes, sir, tho b o d y that
                           I ex amined was that of a h e a v i l y - b u i l t , b r o v n - h a i r o u
                           y o u n g ’./hite nan, 1 7 9 ens in height, ■weighing 0 7 kgs.
                           There wer e obvious signs of tra\imatic a s p h 3rxia both
                           e x t ernal ly and internally,          Th e r e vas v e r y slight
                           dilate-tion of tho he a r t a n d some e n l a r g e m e n t . I
                           think that is p r o b a b l y p h y s i o l o g i c a l b e c ause ho was
                           not at an ago w h e n h y p e r t e n s i o n is l i k e l y to have
                           catisod that.        I n m y v i e w ho h a d a n a v e rage e xpe ctatio n
                    D      of life and was n o r m a l l y developed.              I give the ca\ise
                           of de a t h as t r au matic asphyxia.

                        '1. And this was a n o t h e r y o u n g m a n wh o h a d a trie ostate
                            valve d ilated? - A. Yes, I think that m a y be terminal
                            r e a l l y in he a r t f a i lure right at the end.

                        Q. I n fact, b o t h the v a l v e s w e r e m a r g i n a l l y d i l a t e d but
                            y o u w o u l d say the same f o r b o t h - that y o u think it
                            is l i k e l y to h ave b e e n terminal? - A. Yes,

                        Q. Nov/, we have a l r e a d y h e a r d this but loss of
                            consciousness.          T/hat w o u l d y o u s a y w i t h r e g a r d to
                            that? - A. This y o u n g m a n d i e d e s s e n t i a l l y becau se
                            he could n o t mov e h is chest in or out a n d that meant,
                            of course, he co u l d n o t b r e a the a nd that m e a n t oxygen
                            was cut o ff to h is v i t a l organs and, onc’o that chest
                            was fixed, he w o u l d ha v e b e e n u n c o n s c i o u s ’i n a m a t t e r
                            of seconds, p r o b a b l y b e t w e e n 10 a n d 20 seconds, and
                            ho w o u l d be c o m p l e t e l y u n k n o w i n g of a n y t h i n g that
                            hap pe n e d s u b s equen t to that, t h o u g h he w o u l d take a
                            m a t t e r of minutes, p e r h a p s b e t w e e n 4 a n d 6 minutes,
                            to d i e .

                        Q. But once he w a s u n c o n s c i o u s he w o u l d n o t k n o w a n y t h i n g
                           more about it? - A. That is right.

                                                  1W   HR. FRA 31" v;

                            Prof. Usher, can y o u h e l p a little a b o u t the alcohol
                            content.      It is r e c o r d e d in this y o u n g m a n as "less
                    H       than 10 m g tt     is that becatise the level is so small
                            that it    is  d i f f i c u l t to meas ure it a c c u r at ely? -
                            A . Ye s , it i s .
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                                                114
                                             r.\"ii mr.v have had r-o alcohol at "11 but,
                                   t?*o apparati'S that they c'o uso - t c.r.s‘ r.ot a
                           bio che m i s t " - it it qu i t e c u sto mary to e:r;ross it
                           in that way.            "Loss than 10" n a y m e a n a ^ ' t h i n g up
                           to 10 ’>ut it m a y m e a n none at all.

                           T'.ut if it were n o n e at all, p r e s u m a b l y it w o u l d show
                           r.3 a d ist i n c t n e g a t i v e ? what I hov e in nincl is tho
                           evidence that w o h o a r d on the first clay about some tines
                           w h e n so mebody loses their life there is almost a
                           spontaneous p r o d u c t i o n of* alcohol -within tho b o d y
                           one! could the o p e r a t i o n of that produce a r e a d i n g of
                           a v e r y small a l c o h o l level w i t h i n tho body? - A. Yes,
                           - sxippose it co u l d b u t onl y a v e r y snail level.

                           A nd that could be less than 10? - A.                  Ch, yes.

                           Tbanlc you, 1'rof. - A. There is r.o evidence at all to
                           show that this b o y h a d in him a n y a mo unt of alc ohol
                           that -would have a f f e c t e d his judgment or b a l a nce or
                           any thing1 lihe that at all.


                           arc aware? - A. A b s o l u t e l y right.

                                            Further by THE C0R0H3R:

                           1'rof. "Usher, I do w a n t to just clear this u p b ecause
                           Dr. ?orrost de a l t w i t h the ques t i o n of y e a s t
                           p r o d u c t i o n of a l c o h o l and in his opinion, m y r e c o l l e c t i o n
                           is, because the h i g h alcoh ol levels w e r e not p r e se nt
                           ho rsaid that he w a s satisf ied that indige nous p r o d u c ­
                           tion of alcohol h a d n o t occurred becaus e he covild not
                           find any of the h i g h e r alcohols? - A. Yes.

                           iiOK, I wa n t to be quit e sure - do y o u disag ree w i t h
                           2)r. Foirost? - A. Ho.

                           Cr not, w i t h r e g a r d to tho p o s s i b i l i t y .... - A, No,
                           X do not dis agree w i t h him.        He k n o w s a bout the h i g h e r
                           r-lcohols.     J d id n o t k n o w that.      I h av e o n l y b e e n
                           gi ven tho figures w i t h regard to ethyl a l c ohol but I
                           w o u l d accept that ar gu m e n t from him.

                    '- •   *.;ould it b e right that w h a t y o u are r e a l l y s a y i n g is
                           that it is true that ind igenous p r o d u c t i o n of
                           alcohol can occur in the body? - A. Yes, I agree w i t h
                           that.

                           Y o u are no t s aying that, in this p a r t i c u l a r          instance,
                           it did occur? - A. Ho, X could n ot say that.

                           ’.That y ou arc saying is that m e a s u r i n g less tha n 10
                           mi ght mea n a n y t h i n g fro m tho m i n u t e s t a m o u n t up to
                            1^ basically? - A. Or to nothing.




J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                                            1148
                                   T*?. CCnc-rsIi:        TJianZc you,       rof.   Usher.       .o '.’ill
                                                                                                             lr


                    B
                                                                   CO^CT-rv1.:

                        :1. Yos ? - A. Police Sergeant J o h n f l H H B S f t sir, of the
                            '■cut '■.'idlands police. I have p r o ^ S S l y talcon the oath.
                           Cr -2 1 3'ou trJco no through the sumr.:ar}r, plcr.so? -
                           A. At 1h10 hours on Saturday, 1 3 th Ai->ril, i9^9»
                    C      nj-chard Jones left his hono in Shef field w i t h his
                           sister, Iliss Stephanie L i n d a Jones toget her w i t h
                           Trr.cey ’Cli^abeth Co::.          The Court h a s a l r e a d y heard,
                           ^ir, that T r a c e y also lost h e r life at ITills'borough.
                           It was th e i r i n t e n t i o n to attend t h e Seni Final foo tball
                           n’.i'.tch w h i c h wr.s to bo p l a y e d at the H i l l s b o r o u g h
                           Stadiur .1 that day. A ll three per sons h a d tichets f or
                    D      the terraces at tlB Ves t Stand.

                           Cn arri val at the stadium th e y joined a large crowd
                           outside the L-eppings Lane turnstiles.                   A f t e r soroe
                           minute s the:/ entered, the sto.diurn v i a Gate C and w a l k e d
                           1 0 5 0 thei" o 1 ong "^he tunnel b e n e a t h the 17e st Stand and
                           onto the terraces.               Stephanie is tillable to say which
                           o n c l o s u r c .they entered but it ha s n o w b e e n establish. cd
                    E      as Jiiclosure No. 0, Stephanie was w i t h h e r b r o t h e r
                                   T r a c e y as t h e y entered the terraces and, a f t e r a
                           few seconds, T r a c e y was subjected t o a surge of
                           pre ssure w h i c h f orc cd h e r towards the front of the
                           terracing.           In       > crush thrt f oll o w e d she was separated
                           fror.i b o t h I-or b r o t h e r and Tracey.

                           Followin': the severe c rus h i n g in the 'Jest Stand
                    F      terracing, Police C o ns table Faul lirotnley wont onto
                           the p i t c h and a s s i s t e d a n u m b e r of i n j ured persons.
                           The officer saw that a n u m b e r of supporters were
                           car rying a nan, n o w k n o t m to be Richard, across the
                           pitch, on a h o a r d i n g w h i c h w a s b e i n g u s e d as a t e m p o r a r y
                           stretcher.          The o f f icer ass i s t e d to ca rry H i c har d to
                           the ro a r of the N o r t h Stand wh ere h e atte mpted
                           resuscitati-on-but w5.th.out success.                   The o f f icer was
                    G      a ssi sted to ca r r y 1         15.chard into the gymnasiur.i whor e
                           a t e m p o r a r y m o r t u a r y h a d b e e n set up.

                           At   1600 hours Dr. Nicholas A n d r e w Soivenwright                   ....

                        0. J. thinlc it is a c t u a l l y Seivewright, 7. thinlc it is a
                           typing error.     The •n* should not bo there. - A. Sorry,
                           sir.
                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                               ©                                                  114
                                                                                   J.    VTTTP-;V




                           .... c:.:ciirinoc! R i c h a r d ir>. the tor.iporc-ry m o r t u a r y a m 1
                           ccrvifr.o-.’
                                      . life orxtiuct.

                           .‘.t 02-’:-5 ho u r s on o U i i c ' r y , 16th April, "*9-'9 i:r. Leslie
                           jor.orj i d e n t i f i e d the b o d y of his son to I'olicc-
                           C or.;'table ^ r o n l o y c-.t the tenjporf.ry >-ertuai*y.

                           The o f f i c e r l a t e r oscortocl R i c h a r d 1s b o d y to the
                    B      1'edico L e g a l C e ntre and confimocl that i d e n t i f i c a t i o n
                           to Doto c t i v c C o nsta ble "Jeigold.

                           Or. "!7th. April, 19 G 9 » f ollov.'ing the i d e n t i f i c a t i o n b y
                           Dotect ivc C o n s t a b l e Ueigold, Prof. Alcoa U s h e r c n r r iod
                           out an a u t o p s y raid s u b m i t t e d a re port g i v i n g caise of
                           death.

                           j Vidence is included, sir, re Bardins' the analy sis of
                           the b l o o d sample ta k e n from R i c h a r d whore the pres e n c e
                           of ethanol vcis detected.              The w i t n e s s e s p r o v i n g
                           c o n tinui ty of that sample are D e t e c t i v e Con s t a b l e Green,
                           Detec tive Se rgeant T u r n e r and D e t e c t i v e S ergea nt
                           Fletcher.           Th e analy sis i/as car ricd out b y Dr.
                           A l e x a n d e r R o b e r t Forrest.

                D          Found in the p e r s o n a l effects of R i c h a r d w e r e three
                           full m a t c h tickets.      This supports the evidence,
                           sir, that he e n t ered the stadium v i a Gate C together
                           •with Stephanie a n d Tracey.

                                That concludes nry evidence,                sir.        T h e r e is v isual
                           evidence.

                                  T H 2 CCRCNER:      No quest ions f r o m me,            Mr. Fraser?

                                  MR. FRASER:         No,   thank you,       sir.

                                  ITv. H M D :      No,   thank you,      sir.                       ‘ ,

                                  MR.   CATCTIPOLE:         No,   thanlc you,      sir.

                                         POLICE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON C a l l e d :

                                                          By THE C O R O N E R :

                        0., Yes? - A. Sir, M i c h a e l Layton, D e t e c t i v e Inspector,
                            Vest M i d l a n d s Police.  Sir, a n e x a m i n a t i o n has b e e n
                            made of v i d e o film and p h o t o g r a p h i c ev id e n c e and
                            Richard ha s been' id e n t i f i e d alive o u t si de the ground
                            and also in E n clo sure ITo. 3, and then s u b s e q u e n t l y
                            later ly i n g on the pitch.

                            Sir, a pho t o g r a p h ref erenc ed >n.T.10/34A, R i c h a r d is
                            shown, togcthox* w i t h his sister, Stephanie, anti T r a c e y
                            Cox a bout'to enter the g r ound v i a Gate C and that
                            p ho t o g r a p h is timed at 1^55*
                H
                            O n a BI3C v ideo tape, r e f e rence d MAP 1, timed at
                            1^56:31:0^, R i c har d is shown alive in E n c l o s u r e No.
                            3 and, at this point, he is,             act, t o g e t h e r ,
                                                                                          v/ith
                                                                                          .r-j+-h              11
J. I. Harpham Ltd
                                                            -5-
Trvccy Cor:.

Sir, there arc three p h o t o g r a p h s , i n c l u d i n g a
pliotograph ref e r e n c e d T
                              jIZ1/6, which show Jiichard
ly ing on the pi t c h b e i n g tended to b y supporters.

?*r. and Mrs. Jones have, in fact, v i e w e d v i sua l
evidence, sir, a nd th e y have b e e n able to as sist us
in c onfirming that evidence.

FC B r o m l e y lias signed a pl a n of the p i t c h i n d i c a t i n g
where ho first saw Hichard and that p l a n is r e f e r e n c e d


Sir, if J can, f i r s t of all, refer y o u to a p l a n w h i c h
h.-'.s b e e n given the reference n u m b e r fv./JL 16 7 •

That vill         be C228. -A. A n d t hen a f u r t h e r plan,
IH.'JL 113,       whic h is a p l a n of the terraces.

That w i l l    be C 2 2 9 . - A. And, sir, P13/1 , w h i c h is PC
Brol•lle3'',s plan.

That vi l l be C230. - A. Sir, first of all, in respect
of the p l a n jr.ML 167, r e g a r d i n g the i d e n t i f i c a t i o n
outside the ground, r e f e r r i n g to this plan, the point
at w h i c h that p h o t o g r a p h is shown is i n this loca t i o n
hero, which, as y o u h ave a l r e a d y heard, is, in fact,
v e r y close to Gate C.            I n respect of the v i d e o
i den tifica tion inside the ground I r e f e r to plan
??.-.\TL 113*    This is Enclosure Ko, 3 ^-rid the vi d e o
ide ntifi cation on B BC tape MAP 1, we believe, is in
this p o s i t i o n h e r e . As I h a v e said, at that time,
Richard is still alive e.nd w i t h Tracey.

Did wo use the same p l a n in Tracey's case,                   do y o u k now? -
A. 'Jo did not use the same plan, sir ....
I am sorry, I m e a n t the sane video ? - A. T h e y are
act ually together, yes.      Sir, PC Bro m l e y ' s plan,
Pit/1t the plan of the i?itch, the l o c a t i o n s hown is
in this posit ion h e r e , at the Lep p i n g s Lan e end but
further d o w n the pitch.

And r e mind me,          that is a recollection, is it not? -
A. It is, sir,            yes.      Sir, unfortunately, i n respec t of
the p h o t o g r a p h   w h e r e Richa rd is shown a c t u a l l y b e i n g
treated on the            pitch, it is not p ossi b l e to s ay from
the pho t o g r a p h     wh e r e it is on the pitch.       There is
not sufficient            d etail to i d e n t i f y it.

Yes, there is a p h o t o g r a p h show ing h i m but y o u cannot
locate it because there arc no landmarks? - A. Ko.

        Ii’ll. F7*AS:c:Rj      No   questions for the Officer,          thank
you.

        IIR. LIMB:          No,     thank you,   sir.
                                                                                  115
     'Tl. FilASliTl: 3ir, wi l l y o u just give me a minute
boforo y o u conclude thin p a r t i c u l a r Inquest?

       Tin: CGr.C:r2Rs       Yos.

          FRASER:         Sir, there are two matte rs w h i c h
co ncern the f a m i l y w h i c h clo not d i r e c t l y arise from the
summaries w h i c h h ave b e e n p r e s e n t e d but w h i c h they w o u l d
like, if at all possible, y o u to deal w i t h to 3 r.t2.sfy
thorn .

       TTTU CCIICir?'-":      Tut the first one tlien.

                  FTi\C5.
                        ’lt   Sir, it is clour from the v e r y
d e t a i l e d report of L o r d Justice T a y l o r that h i s findings
were th.-.t alcoh ol p l a y e d no s i gnifi cant part in the
d i s a s t e r on the 1 5 t h April.       That report has b o o n w i d e l y
pu b l i s h e d and this f a m i l y w o u l d like perhaps to
u n d e r s t a n d a little mor e w h y such emphasis seems to
have b e e n p l a c e d on the a l c o h o l analysis.    C e r t a i n l y on
the o p e n i n g d£>y of these «...

       Tin} CG7JCIJE3:        Can I i nter rupt you?        I th ink I did
say right at the b e g i n n i n g that we w e r e n ot goinjj to
deal w i t h the q u e s t i o n of hot/ and I think it is on l y fair
to say that w e have n o t i n t r o d u c e d L o r d J u s tice T a y l o r ' s
report into this I n q u i r y and whilst, of course, that
report is pu blic property, so to speak, I w o u l d n o t w a n t
it to bo p ut to the J u r y that that is the c o n c l u s i o n of
Lo r d Justice Tay lor's report.           It m a y be or it m a y not
be.    'Then the time conies, if it is relevant, w o wi l l
deal w i t h it .00 I ca nnot accept as a s u b m i s s i o n that
that is correct.          Y o u n a y put it forward as a v i e w b ut
I am not a c c e p t i n g it as a p r o p o s i t i o n or as e vidence
of that fact, that ho conclud ed this or that about
alcohol.     I an sorr y but I have got to say that.

        Y o u r second point, I think I have u n d e r s t o o d y o u r
second point.           If I .have not, of coxirse, y o u w i l l correct
me.     The second po int is they say w h y are w e d e a l i n g
w i t h the q u e s t i o n of alcohol levels.   That is right, is
it not?

     I-JR. FRA3IDR:        F e r haps mo r e w h y such emphasis appears
to have b e e n p l a c e d u p o n it.

          TF7S CCRCN2R:,       The d e c i s i o n as to w h a t evidence to
call, of course, is" nine.               I do n o t think w e h ave p l a c e d
a ny undue emphasis on alcohol, on the contrary, I think
at this stage w e have not because all I am d o i n g is
r e c o r d i n g the fact, not d r a w i n g a n y conclusions, becaus e
that w o u l d impinge on the issues of h o w or w h y w h i c h I,
as y o u know, s p e c i f i c a l l y excluded.          Fe rhaps I ought to
just say, lir. Fraser — and forgi ve me if I say that -
that the issue of a l c oho l has b e e n a m a t t e r of great
m o ment to a lot of the families.                  T h e y w a n t e d the figures.
T h e y w a n t e d to k n o w it.    If I had s u p press ed the
i n f o r mati on I think I w o u l d have b o o n open to v e r y serious
criti cism and so I do n ot a c t u a l l y OfiJiept the p r o p o s ition
    that vo arc g i v i n g it unduo er.phasis out X do v.ccopt
    that, with!:: or.ch ;ind ■-•vory cr-.uo, \             rc give the- fi./ur*:
    becrxoo that ic pai            O i. ‘C ilC CVXCcO l’. C C .  /hat r e l e v a n c e ,
    ir ;\ny, it Iras -   .:o '..•ill deal w i t h who.: vo ccr:c —
    '.'"on I decide, if ~     'Q gc tc any f u r t h e r hearings, what
    rurtlivr ovido-ico to call and 1 vill the i call what e v e r
    vitnsyuoc vy n e e d to deal w i t h that question.                    Jens*
    that >.2 1 / y o u or your clients?
B
                                 I h o p e so,     sir,    yes.

           The second point r e a l l y relat es to the c o ndit ion
    of m a n y cf the fans -/ho appear to have died.              On the
    day there v:crc no m u t i l a t e d — if I c an use tl’*'t v o r d -
    bodies r.Bc ’ .:e have h e a r d evidence that the m a j o r i t y of
    funs h a d cor.o blue d i s c o l o u r a t i o n but there was no
    apparent a ccura te dia g n o s i s made at the g roun d and
    Ilichard’s f'i-'ily w o u l d like to k n o w w h y perhaps their
    son was not taken to h o s p i t a l a nd just assum ed that he
    was dorr, and r e s u s c i t a t i o n attem pts m ade at the
    hospital.

           TI~v CCriCirSIi:     l!r. Fraser, I u n d e r s t a n d their
    concoiu b e h i n d the qvLcstion but I think that each and
D   every fan, as y o u 2-rnov, ev e r y one o f the p eopl e who
    died, was certif ied de a d e ith er at the h o s p i t a l or at
    the ground b y a p r o p e r l y q u a l i f i e d m e d i c a l man.   Tha t
    is the first point.          Th a t h a s to be appreciated.             It
    is not a q u e s t i o n of p eople just s a y i n g "He's dead".
    12very single one ■/as l o o k e d at m e d i ca lly.             Secondly,
    one has to thinlc b a c k to the situation*                    I n an ideal
    world it t:;i.-y be that e v e r y b o d y should f i n i s h up in
    hospital but, from a p ra c t i c a l poi nt of v i e w - I do
    not want to dca3. w i t h this a ny f u r t h e r b e c a u s e I do
     iot think v/e can - b ut f r o m a p r a c t i c a l p o i n t of v i e w
    it is, v/ith all due r e s pec t to y o u r c3.ien.ts, an
    unrealistic c::pcctation in the. s i t u a t i o n in w h i c h
    every body fcur'd t h e m s e l v e s on that d a y and it is no
    use t.’in cing wo r d s a n d s aying a n y t h i n g different.         I
    think that that is the tr u t h of the matter.

             Thirdly, I cannot say v h a t p e o p l e * s judgments
    were at the tine.             I f that is a r e l e v a n t point, and it
    might oo w h e n wo como to dea l w i t h the q u e s t i o n of how,
    then rgain ve wi l l de a l w i t h it at that stage but it
    is not a ppropriate to d e a l w i t h it n o w . I am ccr.cerr.ca,
    in a sense, about the q u e s t i o n b e c a u s e I th i n k it s h o w s ,
    wi t h the g r e a t e s t ’o f - r e s p e c t , a m i s c o n c e p t i o n as to
    the p rac tical ities of the sit u a t i o n and also the truth
    of the matter.          Ve hav e h o a r d f r o m Prof. U s h e r and what
     10 said r.bout loss o f consciousness, duration, length
       ' tine that it m i g h t take f or s o m e b o d y to die - oven
    if they h ad gone to h o s p i t a l h a l f - a n - h o u r or an ho u r
    later it w o u l d not h a v e made a n y differe nce.                        I think
     /e have got to face it.                 That is the truth.                  I an not
H   ve r y h e l pfu l but I think that that is the best I can do.
     n y v a y wo w i l l have to d oa l w i t h that, if w e deal v/ith
    it, as p art and p a r c e l of the h o w
                                                          f r S   )                         11
        T'r. Jones, X kno-.' y o u wore hero w h e n we dea lt w i t h
Tracey*o death and I a pp recia ted y o u r p ros o n c c then.
If yen ro- iorjoor X said that r.ncl, in fr.ct, that -'c.s true,
X also I.new that y ou would bo c o min j a j a i n be cause w©
!:nev       ;;o.rc rjo?.n.z to have nic hard *is cr.ce a little bit
Into?.'. X quite, quito m c o r G t a n d wha t a clro.'ic’fiu b low
this v.rant be             veil, X 2:cop on s a y i n g I cuito
U5K'.crst'.'.:i('i       I correct r.-.yo-olf - h o w can I por.sibly-
under^tand wl'at           dreadful b l o w this must be to you.
The beat X can do is to imagine it w or e one of* a y sons
and X ccn than imagine wh a t I w o u l d feel lii.ee, so I
understand, to a c e r tain c;:tont, the pai n a nd tiio
concern w h i c h y o u are feeling.

       X have tried, to a n s w e r the       points    y o u have
raised f a i r l y f i r m l y really, X thinlc, beca use X think
wbat 7 w as s pyin g has to bo said.            I do n ot see there
is a ny p o i n t in dointf a n y t h i n g else.  At leas t that is
m y judcjr.rent. Subject to that, X feel for 3'ou a nd for
the rc.-ot of yo u r f a m i l y in the loss that you hr.vo
suffered.

      Ladies and £-ontlor.3on, mo are coinQ- to rise,          X
thi~’: wo must Iiavc a re asonable time.        Shall wo say
ten-past-two?   '.JoulcI that be all r i ^ h t ? Th a n k 3'-ou
very i.:uci>.

                      (L u n c h e o n   Ad.i o u r n n e n t )




                                                (S    O     )            '   u   s
                      K   i y

3@   s s M   S t t   [p fla a a s




      Identified Alive.

£     Identified Apparently Dead.

      Unconfirmed Identification

% Identified Alive and Apparently
  Dead in the Same Location.
                                                                                                                                                    • 1
                                                                                                                                                      I

( C-.
                                                                                           Appendix I:       C 2^ JU ~ §i                           7)o
                                                                                           Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
                                                                                           Hillsborough Ground.




                                         Gymmaluffl




                                                                     LtoWlngW> V   \   \
                                           „ ,         L*   Police   Tower  w> *
                          Lighting         First Aid        Room
                          Tower            Room
        img                          NORTH STAND

                                                                              CCTv




              CCTV r
                                                                                                                           \
                                                                                                                               *
                                                                                                                                       *
                                                                                                                                               %
                Uohtlng                                                                                                   *\                    *
                Tower
                                      SOUTH STAND
                                                                                                                                   \
                                                                                                                                       \
                                                                                                                                           \
                                                                                                                                                     n
                                                                                                                                                     K>
                                                                                                                           \
                                                                                                                               \                     to
                                                                                                                                                     Co
                                                                                                                               \ 7

                                                                                                                               t
                                                - 1




                                                  C229
              y\o,    C A \ A ^ u \ w^>.
i------:
       ----          ---------- 1,    .
                                           mi
                                      "T« J CS
  MGS LANE ENO   NAME
                                                     C230
                        0   tJ   20   3 0 ft.     ??-!
                                                 pd -l x z o




                                                               MORTUARY (not to sa le )




SPIOH KOP ENO
                                                         5



                                                  S. L. JONES

     MR. PAYNE:   Before you resume, sir, the lawyers
present would like to thank you for the courtesy in
arranging transport this morning. Thank you very much.
     THE CORONER:   Before I say anything else I would like
to thank Mr. Catchpole and, through Mr. Catchpole, the Club
for making it available, having everything unlocked, having
people there and being more than helpful.  I am most
grateful to you. I think, although I have seen it before,
it was helpful to see it again. You must remember that it
has changed a little bit. You will have noticed that.   I
do not have to point out to you that there were no
perimeter fences and so on but one learns a lot, does one
not?
     MR. KING:   Before Miss Jones starts her evidence,
sir, can I tell you something that I have been asked on her
behalf to tell you?
      THE CORONER:   Yes, please.
     MR. KING:   She has identified herself on one of the
photographs which has already been produced to the Inquest
which is C.295.
     THE CORONER:    Yes, we will put it up at a convenient
point.

     MR. KING:   I know she wanted you to know that from
the beginning, sir.
                  STEPHANIE LINDA JONES Sworn
                        Bv THE CORONER:

Q. You are Stephanie Linda Jones, is that right? - A.
   Yes.

Q.
     that is right, is it not? - A. Yes.

Q. Is it mum and dad who are here? - A. Yes.

Q. You are I think a receptionist? - A. Yes.

Q. Or you were at that time? - A. Yes.

Q. You are in fact the sister of Richard Jones, are you
   not, who unfortunately lost his life at Hillsborough?
   - A. Yes.
                                                              6




                                                        S. L. JONES
     /
Q. Of course, technically you were not related to Tracey
   but she was Richard's girlfriend, was she not, and
   she unfortunately lost her life which is very sad
   obviously? - A. Yes.
Q. I want you to tell me as much as you can and as much
   as you feel able. I will ask you questions like I
   did with all the other witnesses and we will see how
   we get on. Okay? - A. Yes.
Q. Richard was a season ticket holder I think? - A. Yes,
   that is correct.
Q. Initially he got two tickets because I think it was
   just him and you who were going to go to the match? -
   A. Yes, that is right.
Q. I think that Tracey decided she would like to come as
   well, is that right? - A. Yes.
Q. He got another ticket? - A. Yes.
Q. In fact he asked you to get a ticket for Tracey? - A.
   Yes.
Q. He was actually living in Sheffield, was he not,
   Richard? - A. Yes.
Q. It was easier for you to go to the club than for him?
   - A. Yes.

Q. You got the £12 ticket Ithink for Tracey which is
   for the stand? - A. Yes, my father got it from the
   ground.

Q. Somebody in the family went to the ground? - A. Yes.

Q. As it happens your mum came home that day and she had
   another one and so you finished up with four? - A.
   Yes, that is right.
Q.       Hers was a£14 ticket for   the stands? - A. Yes.
Q.    You took them. Did you have ail four or did you have
     just these two and Richard have the other two? - A. I
     had three and Richard had his own.

Q.    You looked after them and on the 14th April, the day
     before the Friday, in the evening you came to
     Sheffield by train? - A. Yes.
-A
                                                          S. L. JONES
       Q. Because you had somewhere to stay, that is right, is
          it not? - A. Yes.
       Q.   Tracey had also come or she may have been here
 B          already? - A. She lived in Sheffield as well.  They
            both went to university there.
       Q. You all went out that evening. Where did you go as a
          matter of interest? - A. The Broom Hill Tavern pub
          just at the bottom of the road for just one drink.
       Q.   You had a nice time? - A. Yes.
       Q.    Looking forward to the match I expect at thattime? -
            A. Yes.
       Q. In the morning of the 15th you had an extra ticket at
          that point, did you not? - A. We had to swap one of
          them because otherwise Tracey would not be with us.
       Q. You wanted her with you? - A. Yes.

       Q. So Richard had his breakfast and he went off and
          exchanged the £12 ticket with a friend, is that
          right? - A. Yes.

       Q. This was really a private arrangement? - A. Yes.    His
          friend obviously wanted to sit down.

       Q. He was getting a good deal, was he not? - A. The more
          expensive ticket.
 E
       Q. It seems to me the sensible thing to have done. He
          then came back and so you had three tickets for the
          terraces? - A. Yes.

       Q. What happened to the fourth one? - A. Before we went
          to the ground we went and apparently Richard knew
          some friend who wanted the other ticket and he was
          going to sell them the tickets.
 F
       Q. He knew somebody, did he? - A. It was a friend of a
          friend.

       Q. Again it was a private arrangement? - A. Yes, it was
          just to get rid of the ticket rather than sell it at
          the ground.

       Q. Then I think you had something to each for lunch.
          You had a light lunch. - A. Yes.




 TLT
                                                  S. L. JONES
Q. At about 1.15 or so did you set off for theground?     -
   A. No, I think we had lunch about that time.
Q. I am sorry? - A. We had lunch at that time.   It was
   after that. Just after two some time.
Q. Just after two? - A. Yes.
Q. Did you walk or drive? - A. No, we drove.
Q. Because it was too far? - A. Yes.
Q. How long did it take you to drive to wherever you
   parked? - A. We drove to meet somebody at a pub to
   give them the tickets which was on the other side of
   the ground.
Q. I am sorry? - A. It was to the other side of the
   ground, the public house. I am not sure of the name.
Q. You do not know which pub it was., do you? - A. No.

Q . Did you then park in that car park of the pub or did
    you park somewhere else? - A. No, we parked in the
    car park.

Q. When you say the other side of the ground, are you
   saying he was at the Nottingham Forest side? - A. No,
   it was right over the other end of the city really.
Q. It was a long way away? - A. Yes.

Q. Were there supporters in that pub? - A. No, it was
   very empty.

Q. Richard's friend's friend was there and you got the
   tickets? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you stop for a quick drink? - A. Yes, we had one
   drink.

Q. What did Richard have? - A. He had a pint of beer.

Q. That is all he had? - A. That is all.

Q. What time was it when you got to that pub? - A. I am
   not really sure. It was only about fifteen minutes
   away from the house.

Q. From home and you left about two I think you said? -
   A. Yes.
                                               S. L. JONES

So we will say you left about quarter past. We do
not have to be to the second. Then I think you
stayed at the pub for about another fifteen minutes
or so? - A. Yes.
So in round terms that would be about 2.30, would
that be fair? - A. About.
We are not pinning you down to a minute or two or
anything like.
How did you then get from this pub to the ground? -
A. It was Tracey's car and she drove to the ground.
She doesn't drink at all really.
How long did it take to drive to the ground would you
say? - A. About fifteen, ten or fifteen minutes.
Then you had to park? - A. Yes, in Far Lane.

Which is quite close to the ground? - A. Yes, not far
away.
You were fortunate then to find a space? - A. Yes.
From where you parked you then walked to the ground,
is that right? - A. Yes, that is true.
That would have taken you how many more minutes? - A.
About ten minutes.

Again if we add it all up we get to about ten to
three? - A. Yes.

Would that be about right? - A. That would seem about
right.
Would you agree? If you do not agree please say
so? - A. Something like that. I am not sure but
something like that.

I am just adding up the times with ten minutes here
and ten minutes there. Did you see lots of fans
first of all on your drive to Farndale Road? - A. No,
not on the way to Far Lane, no.

When you parked and got out? - A. The nearer we got
to the ground the more fans.
                                                           10


                              S . L . JONES

Q. ' Are you a football supporter yourself, generally
     speaking? - A. Not on a regular basis. I have only
     been to Anfield maybe 4 or 5 times, and not away at
     all.

Q.   So you are not really an experienced football
      attender? - A. No.
Q.   You had not been to Hillsborough before, had you? - A.
     N o.
Q.   So you were not there in 1988? - A.      No, Richard had.
Q.   Richard had but you had not? - A.     No.
Q.   As you were walking towards the ground you were
     walking down Leppings Lane, or up Leppings Lane, I am
      told, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q.   Firstly,  I want to make sure we have got the right
     road. What is the map number? Is it 284? Yes,
      C.284. Just put it up. I will just make sure I have
     not misremembered the road - Farndale. - A. Far Lane.

Q.   I thought perhaps I was getting it wrong. Do you know
     where it is on that map? - A. I didn't know at the
     time. It was only afterwards I found out where it
     was.

Q.   It is Far Lane - F-A-R did you say? - A. I think it is
     double RR - F-A-R-R, is it?

Q. In that case, I was thinking of the wrong road. Iwas
    thinking of Farndale. I do not know where Far Lane is
    either. Is it off the map?

          MR. HALE:   I can show it to you, sir.

          THE CORONER: Mr. Hale, thank you very much. I
     see. It is what I would call below Wadsley Lane, not
     that far from the ground, you are right, but not the
     one I had in mind anyway.
Q.   You are saying that you walked from that road all the
     way to the ground? - A. Yes.

Q.   I do not suppose for a minute you can remember the
     names of the roads you walked down? - A. No, I cannot.

Q.   I will have to go over the ground again. Were  you on
     your own when you were walking there, or were there
     other supporters walking with you? - A. To begin with
     there wasn't many at all.
                                                          11


                              S. L. JONES

Q. ' At one point did you start picking up other
     supporters? - A. I don’t know. After 5 minutes we
     started seeing a few and then it just got more and
     more.
Q.   They were all walking down towards the ground as far
     as you were concerned? - A. Yes.
Q.   What was their behaviour like? - A. Happy;   they were
     singing. It was just normal. I did think there was
     an awful lot of people but it was just normal.
Q. Just as a matter of interest, did you see people
    carrying any cans? - A. No, I didn't.
Q. None at all? - A.    No, none.
Q.   You have told me they vere singing and other people
     have described that I think as jolly. Would you use
     that word or not? - A. Yes.
Q.   But you were not frightened in any way? - A. No. I
     did think there was an awful lot of people but I
     hadn't been to that many matches so I just assumed it
     was normal.

Q.   Nobody did anything to you. I do not mean in the
     sense of hitting you, but did people swear at you, or
     anything like that? - A. No, there was no problem at
     all.

Q.   Good.   Then you approached the ground - right? - A.
     Yes.

Q.   As you got towards the turnstiles, which-you had not
     seen before, this was the first time? - A. I didn't
     see them at all.

Q.   You did not see them at all? - A. The whole time.

Q.   Tell me what you saw? - A. Nothing, just a mass of
     people as they went towards the ground.
Q.   I see, so the nearer you got, the thicker the crowd? -
     A. Yes.

Q.   And right at the ground it was an absolute mass of
     people? - A. Yes.

Q.   Did you see any police officers, just as a matter of
     interest? - A. I had noticed I had hardly seen any,
     and then like once I got near the ground I saw one
     officer directing traffic, that was all, and then
     nearer the ground, or once we were in the mass, I saw
                                                           12


                                S. L. JONES

     ' one policeman on horseback and then further back there
       were two more on horseback amongst the crowd.
Q.    So what you are saying is as far as you remember, you
       saw one officer who was directing traffic?-*-. A. Yes.
Q.    Was it near a traffic light, a little bit higher up? -
      A. Yes.
Q.    Then as you got nearer to the ground your recollection
       is of a police officer on horseback? - A. Yes.
Q.    Where was he? - A. That was more when we got right
      into the crowd, right near the gates.
Q.    Then a little bit further in there were another two? -
      A.No, there were two quite far out, out of the crowd.
Q.    Do you mean towards the roadway, that is what I am
       trying to find out? - A. On the outside of the crowd,
      where the bulk of the crowd was.
Q. I see. When you saw all this crowd of people there
   what did you think? - A. I just wondered why there
   were so many people there really.

Q.    Was the crowd at that point moving, as far as you can
      remember? - A. Sort of shuffling. They didn't seem
      to be going in any sort of direction.

Q. When happened?   Did you, Richard and Tracy join in      at
    the back? - A. Yes, there seemed no other place to      go.
Q.    Did other people join you behind? - A. Yes.
Q.    I think that as the people joined you behind, you
      started feeling a push forward, is that right? - A.
      The pressure of people, yes.

Q.    So there was pressure behind you? - A. Yes.

Q.    Which was tending to make you go forward? - A.    Yes.

Q.    That presumably meant that you were getting closer and
      closer to people ahead of you all the time, is that
      right? - A. Yes.

Q.    You and Tracy and Richard were trying to hold hands
      because you wanted to stay together but people tended
      to separate you, is that right? - A. Yes.
Q.    How did that happen? Just tell me how that happened.
      Did they push between you, or what happened? - A. It
      is just normal. People are just moving along. You
                                                            13



                              S. L. JONES

     can't seem to stay in a whole bunch together,        It is
     just impossible. That always happens.
Q.   When this was happening, can you remember - you may
      not be able to remember - at the ground the outer
      perimeter gates, the sort of blue gates with railings
      on them? Can you remember those at all? - A. No, I
      can't remember going through those. I did go through
      them but I can't remember.

Q. What I am trying to find out is when you are saying
   you were being pushed, do you think that you had gone
    through these outer gates, or had you not reached them
   yet? - A. I think I had probably gone through them by
    then.

Q.   Okay. Were you going through on the right-hand side?
     - A. Yes.

Q.   Was that because Richard said, "That's the turnstiles
     that we need", or what? - A. I didn't see the
     turnstiles at all. It was just the movement. That
     was the only way sort of thing.

Q.   But he had been before so presumably you were relying
     to a certain extent upon his knowledge, were you not?
     - A. I suppose so.

Q.   Yes. At some point I think you saw some blue metal
     gates. Can you remember that? - A. Yes.

Q-   What sort of gates were they? - A.     Large like.

Q.   We have called them concertina gates      - A.   Yes, that
     is right.

     I will just show you a picture of one. I am not
     saying this is the gate you saw because we have not
     yet established which gate you saw, but I think it is
     259. I think there are two of them on. No, it has
     only got one of them on. This is probably not the one
     that you went through, but that sort of gate, is that
     right? - A. I would say so, yes.

     If you look at 261, that is a close-up of this sort of
     gate - yes? - A. I think so.

Q.   Something of that sort? - A.   Yes.
Q.   I mean that type of gate. It was not a gate with
     railings or anything like that? - A. There was such a
     mass of a crowd, you couldn't really see.
                                                       14



                               S. L. JONES

Q. ' Okay. At this gate was there a policeman? - A.   Not
     that I saw.
Q.   You did see a policeman on horseback, I think, did you
     not? - A. He was in the middle of the crowd, yes.
Q.   He was not at this gate; he was further away from you
      then? - A. No, I think he was towards the second
      gate, yes.
                      Q.   Which second gate
                                                            15


                                                S. L. JOilES



0. which second gate are we talking about? - A. Gate C.

Q. Gate C? - A. Yes.
Q. That is that gate over theret in fact? - A. Yes.
Q. what was he trying to do as far as you coul'l tell? - A.
   He was trying to split tne crowd.
0. Was he having any success? - A. No.
0. Is that because nobody took any notice of hir.i? - A. No,
   it was just the sheer amount of people there vas. i!e
   just had no chance on his own, and there was just
   nobody else around. It was just it was an impossible
   task for him to perform.
Q. So the only way he could have succeeded would have been
   if everybody had obeyed him instantly? - A. No, I think
   if he had had more manpower it would have helped,
   rather than if everyone had obeyed him.

Q. I agree with you there, obviously the more people you
   have the easier a task becomes, but are you saying that
   if people had obeyed him he would still not have had
   any success? - A. I can't really answer that. I mean,
   I tried to get over to the right because you don't want
   the horse trampling on you, but the sheer amount of
   people you couldn't move that far across anyway.

Q. In fact, did the crowd pressure, if anything, become
   even stronger at tnat point? - A. Yes, it did.
Q. Did you feel uncomfortable at that point? - A. Yes.

Q. Uere you a bit worried about yourself? - A. Yes, I got
   pushed right up against the gate and my arn was
   trapped.

0. So really you were in quite a difficult position then,
   weren't you? - A. Yes.

Q. Tracey was still near you and so was Richard, is that
   right? - A. Yes.

Q. And I take it they were in tne same sort of condition
   as you were? - A. Yes.

0. There were another two Police Officers, weren't tnere,
   whom you mentioned? Where were they? - A. They were
   out of the crowd towards the back, I did notice.
Q. Could you see what they were trying to do? - A. i*o, I
   couldn't see.
                                                             16


                                                 S. L. JOiiES




Q. You might not have been able to see because of then
   being too far away or because of the crowd, but you
   just saw them because they were elevated, is that
   right? - A. Yes. I just noticed because this one was,
   the first one, was right in the middle of the melee of
   the crowd, but the other two were right outside where
   the crowd was.
Q. While you were approaching this gate, before you had
   actually got hard onto it, had it opened at all? - A.
   It was opened once. I saw it open once.
Q.   You saw it open once? - A. Yes.
Q. On that opening you didn't get through on that
   occasion, did you? - A. No.
Q. That is presumably because you were too far away from
   it, is that right? - A. Well, yes.

Q. And also was that opening - it didn't last very long,
   did it? - A. No, only a couple of seconds.

Q. On that occasion, just help roe on this because I am
   just trying to fix the openings, did people come
   through, did people actually go through the gate? - A.
   I think three or four, perhaps, people went through -
   not many though.

Q.   Some did - it wasn't opened wide at that tine? - A.   Ho.
Q.    And I think having got up against this gate, I think
     Richard said, "If it opens again we are going in?" - A.
     We had no choice, otherwise it would have been a lot
     worse.

Q. In fact, a little while later that is exactly what
   happened, it opened? - A. Yes.

Q. But it opened wide out, is that right? - A. It opened
   right across.
Q. And you could see that it was a Policeman who was
   opening the gate? - A. Yes.

Q. Certainly it was an official person? - A. Yes.

Q. Did he open it all the way by himself or did he begin
   to open it and did fans then assist to open it
   further?- A. The fans helped because everyone had been
   screaming for him to open it because we could see
   something was going to happen outside if he didn't,
   because everyone was screaking for hi.-n to open it-
                                                    S. L. JOrtES



0. So what you are saying is that the gate began to open
   and you could see it was a Policeman, and then the fans
   started opening it with him? -A. The fanson the
   inside - tnere was fans 011 the inside.
Q. In fact, what happened then with regard to the fans and
   that gate? - A. They pulled it wide open and we forced
   ourselves sort of to the side and iny and got into the
   clearing, then I think a whole load came right through
   all together with the force.
Q. There was initially quite a rush in, because people had
   been squashed tight against it, would that be right? -
   A. Yes. It was like taking a cork out of a bottle,
   sort of thing.
Q. Anyway, you managed to get into what is called the
   concourse area and it was a bit better in there, wasn't
   it? - A. Yes, it wasn't packed at all.
Q. Because there was a lot      of space, relatively speaking?
   - A. Yes.

Q. What happened then? - A. Me and      Richard had both gone
   through together because he had      been just in front of
   me, and we got through together      and then we just waited
   for Tracey and she came through      just in a matter of
   minutes, and joined us.

Q. Where did you go then? - A. We just - I could only see,
   well, we could all only see the tunnel, and Richard
   said to just go down the tunnel, so we just stood there
   for a minute or so, and I thought everything was okay
   then because it was pretty clear in there, and then we
   just started to walk down the tunnel.

Q. So by the time you went down the tunnel, you are saying
   it was reasonably clear, is that right? - A. Yes, it
   was.

          MISS ADDLEMAK:   Sir, we are having difficulty in
     hearing the witness at this end.

         THE COROWER:       He or the witness?

         MISS ADLiLEHAil:    The witness, sir.
0.        THE CORONER:   Can you sit a little bit further
     forward? You have got to get quite close to these
     mikes. You were saying that when you went into the
     tunnel it was reasonably clear? - A. Yes, it was.
Q. But there were people walking down? - A. Yes, nor:.ially.
                                                              18


                                                 S. L. JJuES




Q.   A normal walk? - A. Yes.
Q.   In fact, you did actually see one or two people, not.
     that many, who were passing water down the side of the
     tunnel, is that right? - A. Yes.
Q.   That wasn't something which you would have necessarily
     approved of but you weren't too concerned at that
     point? - A. I wasn't surprised.
Q. Can you remember - you may not be able to remember but
   were you walking down the tunnel in the niddle, the
   left side or the right side? - A. I can't really
   remember. We were probably spread right out. Me were
   probably walking together.
Q.   Yes, because there were three of you? - A. Yes.
Q.    When you got to the end of the tunnel, the tunnel goes
     along and then it has got a dip, hasn t it, and you can
     see the pitch, when you got just to exit of the tunnel,
     was that part of the tunnel clear of people? - A. Yes,
     it was.
Q. So you were able to get onto the terrace without any
   particular obstruction at that point? - A. Yes.
Q. Tell me, because obviously you were interested in the
   match, what was happening on the field at that point? -
   A. 1 didn't look. Ue were just going to try ana get a
   place and then look. As far as I was concerned the
   match hadn't started.

Q. You don't think it had started? - A. No.

Q. Can you recollect whether any players were on the
   field? - A. Ho, I didn't look at the pitch.
0. So you don't really know? - A. No.
Q. You then went on the terraces. I think you can't
   actually remember which terrace you went onto, that is
   right, isn't it? - A. That's right.
Q. But I think I am right in saying that on the
   photographs you four.d Richard in Pen 3? - A. Pen   3,
   that's right.

0. And you can say that you were with him? - A. Yes.

Q. I mean, you entered the same pen as he did, that    is
   right, isn't it? - A. Yes.
                                                            19


                                               S. L. JONES




Q. So it is a reasonable supposition that that is the pen
   you entered, isn't it? - A. Yes.
Q. You said to me just a moment ago that the tunnel was
   clear, the exit of the tunnel was clear, you managed to
   get onto the terrace and you were going into the right
   hand pen. Did you take up a viewing position? - A. No.
Q. So what happened? - A. We just started to walk down and
   then there just seemed like an awful lot of people came
   behind us and we started to get slowly moved forward
   then, sort of stumbling down the steps sort of thing.
Q. So when you initially went onto the terrace, it sounds
   to me from what you are saying that at that point you
   were not apprehensive. You were saying, "I want to
   find a viewing position", and you were walking down
   looking for some convenient spot? - A. Yes.

Q. That's right, and at that point how crowded would you
   say it was? Can you say anything about that? - A. Just
   a normal amount really. I wasn't really worried. My
   worries had gone after we came off the clearing.

Q. Sorry? - A. My worries had gone when we came out into
   the clear part, and the tunnel, because I was
   frightened outside.
Q. It was outside that you were scared? - A. I was worried
   that it was going to be the same inside but I didn't
   think it was.
0. So once you got on the terrace you were relieved? - A.
   Yes.
Q. It looked better than it had been outside the gate,
   that's right? - A. It did.
Q. And then you say -- was there some crowd that came
   front behind and pushed you, a sudden push, or what was
   it? - A. First of all it was a gradual move.nent, sort
   of thing, just moving down as though tnere was a lot of
   people coming in behind us.




               /C. Behind, yes ....
                                                          20

                                         S. L. JONES



Q. Behind, yes. - A . Yes, and then it started to get more
   and more surges, sort of thing.
0. In your statement you have put it a little more
   graphically.   You said:                        —
        "Then I was suddenly shoved from behind and I was
        thrown forward down the steps."
   I haven't said this to you, but I have said it to one or
   two of the witnesses, it doesn't actually matter what
   happened.   All I am trying to find out is as far as you
   can remember what happened and you tell me now so the
   jury can get the picture of what you can recollect.    Can
   we just go over that again?   I am interested to know
   whether this was, as you put it, a sudden shove, that you
   were shoved from behind, or whether it was just a very
   gradual pressure? - A. To begin with it started off
   gradually and then a shove came.
Q. How far down the terrace were you moved, if that is the
   right word, can you say? - A. I have got no idea really,
   probably three-quarters.   I really don't know.

Q. I think this particular surge actually stopped at that
   point and there was a little bit of relief is that right?
   - A. Yes.   Well, Tracey had fell down behind me and
   there was a gap where she had fallen.   A lot of
   supporters picked her up but she had lost her shoe.
Q. She had lost her shoe at that point? - A. Her shoe, yes.
Q. Can you remember what was going on on the field at that
   point? - A. No, I was turned round looking at her.   I
   really hadn't paid any attention.
Q. Did you look at the field at all at around that time? -
   A. No.

Q. So you can't help me at all on that? - A.   No.
Q. In fact somebody picked her shoe up, is that  right? - A.
   Yes.   I couldn t reach it so they picked it up.

Q. But somebody managed to get down and give  it to her and
   so she was pleased about that at the time? - A. Yes.

Q. Then what happened after that? - A. Really big surges
   came.   I didn't see Richard or Tracey dgain after- that.
   In fact I don't even know whether she put her shoe on.

Q. You just managed to get it and then there was another big
   surge? - A. Yes.


                          (Too)
                                                          21



                                         S. L. JONES


Q. That surge split you from Tracey and Richard, of course?
   - A. Yes.
Q. You never saw them again after that until much later of
   course.   Were you pushed against any barriers? - A. No,
   not at all.

Q. Where did you eventually finish up, you yourself? - A.
   Right at the very front, turned round facing the back.
Q. Facing the wrong way, so to speak? - A. Facing the wrong
   way, yes.
Q. When you got down there can you remember what was
   happening with the match?   You may think I am being
   cruel in keep asking that, but it is a convenient way of
   timing things, you see, that is why I am asking you. - A.
   No, I can't because I was turned round the wrong way.    I
   have no idea.
Q. So really you never saw anything at all of what happened
   on the pitch? - A. No.

Q. If you did you can't remember any of it? - A. Well, until
   I got out.

Q. At that point you were pretty squashed, is that right? -
   A. Yes.

Q. Were you calling out at all?   Were you able to call out?
   - A. Yes.

0. Can you remember more or less what you said? - A. "I've
   got to get out."

Q. Was this in a loud voice or in a little-gentle voice? -
   A. Yes, I was screaming.

Q. Were you able to repeat it? - A. Yes, a few times.

Q. How did you get out? - A. There is a bit of confusion.    I
   am not really sure.    I was faced the wrong way.   I was
   literally face to face with another boy, like nose to
   nose.    I couldn't see anything.   I thought I was going
   to faint and I just heard somebody say at my side, Here
   you are, love," and I sort of stepped on to the pitch, or
   somebody pulled me.    It is not been found exactly how I
   got out.

Q. So your recollection is that you just stepped out? - A.
   That is what it felt like to me but I think somebody must
   have pulled me.

Q. In fact I think we have seen you on the video? - A. Yes.
                                     S. L. JONES


Standing near the perimeter fence.   Do you remember
seeing this young lady?   Having got out did you look at
the pitch at all? - A..Yes, I was facing the pitch then.
What was going on at that point? - A. They were playing.

So all this you have described happened before the match,
and including your exiting out of...   You weren't pulled
over the top? - A. No, out of the gates.
Definitely out of the gates before the match ended, or
was stopped, rather? - A. Well, it had probably just
started as I was getting out.
You don't know that, of course? - A. Well, all I can
assume is that it had already started because as I got
out of the gates I turned round and I was facing the
television camera and the match was playing.
Was the television camera looking at the match or at the
stand? - A. No, it was turned round to me.

It was already taking pictures of what was going on?   - A.
I just looked and it was just right on me.

That is why we have got it, of course. - A. Yes.
So that shot of you which is on the television was taken
almost immediately after you got out, is that right? - A.
Well, immediately, yes.

That shot is timed so we will be able to look at it
again.   I can't remember what time is on it but we will
be able to time what time that was, but do you remember
from your impression how long the game carried on after
that? - A. Maybe five minutes at the most.

A short period? - A. Yes.

I don't want to go into this in great detail, but when
you were standing outside did you notice some fans come
past you and go into another part of the ground? - A.
Yes, that's right.
Which pen did they go into? - A. The corner one on the
right.
Is it the one underneath the police control box?   If you
were standing with your back to the fence, did they come
past you towards the right or towards the left? - A. They
were walking past me from the right.   I think they came
out of the gate after me because I think I was...
                                                           23


                                           S. i. JONES


Q. Hi'gh up, and they were coining past you going to the south
   stand side, would that be right? - A. Well, I am not sure
   of the layout of the ground, but the corner.
Q. Can we put the plan of the ground up for a moment.   It
   is not that important but I am just interested.  (C.274)
   Mr. Griffiths could you just point to enclosure 3?   That
   is gate 3?    That is the one where you... - A. Came out,
   yes.
Q. Thenpoint to pen 4.    That is pen 4. Are you saying
   they came from that part and were walking past you
   down... Is that right? - A. I don't think they were
   coming out of pen 4.
Q. No, but there were people who were walking past you in
   that direction? - A. They were coming out just behind  me,
   out of the gate I came out of.
Q. Oh, I see.    I understand you now.  You are saying there
   were people coming out... - A. Yes, because I think I was
   the first or second person out of thegate and then a few
   more followed and then the police were taking them across
   to. the corner.
Q. I just want to go back one moment.    You know the big
   gates that opened when you came outside the ground, the
   concertina gates.    Can you recollect whether you were
   one of the first people to come through on that occasion?
   - A. Through the gates?

0.    Yes, through that big gate. - A. No, not the first
     person.

Q. No, I didn't mean the first.   What I meant was were you
   in what I would call the first group of people who came
   through do you think? - A. Yes, possibly.
Q. You then waited for a little while because Tracey had to
   join you, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. You don't know how long you waited? - A. It was only a
   few seconds really. She just didn't get in with our
   surge, sort of thing.

Q. There wasn't any delay.   You didn't go to the loo or
   anything like that? - A. No.

Q. As far as you were concerned, we know what time that gate
   opened, the big concertina gate, you had a fairly rapid
   passage right through that? - A. Yes.
                                                              24


                                             S. L. JONES


Q. Inx fact there was a very nice man who came up to you at
   some point and comforted you and tried to help and look
   after you? - A. Yes.
Q. Are you still in touch with him? - A. Sometimes, yes.
Q. He was a supporter? - A. Yes, a Liverpool supporter.
Q. Shall we give his name, do you think? - A. If you want.

Q. Was he Phil Bickley? - A. Yes.
Q. We are not calling him as a witness but it is nice to
   acknowledge what he was doing.   Now what is the number
   of...
         MR. KING:      C.295, sir.
        THE CORONER:   Can we put C.295 up?   Now this is
   the photograph you are on and we will just show it to
   you.

        MR. KING:   Sir, if it helps, the time of this
   photograph is 14.54.

         THE CORONER:     That does help:
Q. Are you able to see yourself on that projection? - A.
   Yes

Q. Go and show us where you are. - A. That's me, that's
   Tracey and that's Richard.
Q. So you are in fact in line.    You have just heard - in
   fact you can read the time on the bottom ofit, that is
   six minutes to three, or possibly five.

        THE CORONER:       Is it one   minute wrong?   Which way
   is the minute?

        MR. KING:   Sir, the actual time is 14.54.         Printed
   on the photograph is a minute too long, sir.
         THE CORONER:     So it is 14.54 - six minutes before
   the

Q. At that point you were still outside, weren't you? - A.
   Yes.

0. The gate I can tell you was opening because people were
   coming through and presumably this is when you were
   following them in, is that right? - A. It seems so.
                                                         25




                                                 S. L. JONES .
   ✓
Q. If you look at that photograph you can see it. That
   is exactly the same photograph and it saves you
   turning round every few moments. That gate I will
   tell you had been opened at 14:48 for a moment or two
   for just a short moment and then it had been
   closed? - A. Yes.
Q. Then it had been fully opened at 14:52. That is two
   minutes before this photograph is taken. The
   question T want to ask you is this; looking at that
   photograph and thinking about what you told me you
   said that you were pushed hard up against the gate
   when it was shut. You are sure about that, are
   you? - A. Yes, I was sure.
Q. There was another opening of this gate. This gate
   was shut at three minutes to three. Do you remember
   we had a schedule. 14:57:40. At 14:57 this gate was
   shut again and then it was re-opened at about 14:59,
   in other words just a minute or so before kick-off.
   What I want to establish is which opening you went
   through? - A. Yes.

Q. Because if that is where you are on that photograph
   you could not have been right up against the gate at
   14:52 because you did not walk back, did you? - A.
   No. That is right, yes.

Q. So in fact your movement throughout was forward, is
   that right? - A. Yes.

Q. It was not that you got up against the gate, didn't
   like it, walked away and then re-approached it. I
   just want to be quite clear? - A. We carried on
   forward, yes.

Q. It was opened for the last time at 14:59:12
   approximately. Of course you did not look at your
   watch? - A. No.

Q. The reason I ask you this is that by the time you got
   out of the gate at the front the match was still in
   progress? - A. That is right.

Q. If you in fact came through   at 14:59, which you might
   have done because you might   have come through the
   last occasion from what you   tell me, your progress
   would have been even faster   than I would have
   expected? - A. I would have   thought, yes.

Q. Did you get the impression you went through the
   ground, if I can put it like this, in minutes or did
                                                          26




                                                  S. L. JONES

  you have the impression that it took any length of
  time? - A. It seemed like forever but I think it was
  fast.
     MR. MAXWELL: I have not got any questions, sir, but
on behalf of all of us, that is all the parties and all
those concerned in investigating this appalling tragedy, I
express our sympathy.
     THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed.   That is
very kind of you.
                Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE:
Q. Stephanie, can I just follow up the questions which
   the Coroner was asking you about the timing of this
   photograph to see if we can get any further? You see
   in the bottom right hand corner of the photograph in
   red there is the time printed at which it is said
   that photograph was taken which reads 55 and we are
   told that is one minute wrong and it should be 54? -
   A. Right.
Q. We are also told that the gate which on the
   photograph is just off to the right where the people
   seem to be heading as they go off the photograph do
   you see that? - A. Yes.
Q. We are told that gate was opened at 14:52:06 which is
   just two minutes before the time of the photograph,
   do you see that? - A. Yes.
Q. We are told that that gate was then kept open until
   14:57, that is to say another three minutes after
   that photograph was taken? - A. Right.

Q. So it appears those are the times.  I am not
   criticising you at all? - A. I can only presume that
   I went through when it was opened the next time at 59
   because I know I definitely went through and it was
   closed at first and I was pushed against it. So it
   must have been the 59 time that I went through at.
   It is not a great deal of time in between, is it? It
   is only four or five minutes?

Q. Yes, but it would not take you three minutes to walk
   from where you are in the photograph to the gate? -
   A. I know, but there was a huge amount of supporters
   there and it took some time to get to the gate.

     MR. PAYNE:    Sir, I do not honestly think that can be
taken any further.
                                                           27




                                                     S. L. JONES

     THE CORONER:   Perhaps Mr. King will be able to take
it further but I do not know whether he will or not.
     MR. PAYNE:       Mr. King may have some ingenious method
of doing it.
     MR. KING:   Sir,, I have a theory which I will put to
the test in a moment.
       THE CORONER:     It is an interesting matter, is it not?
Q.        MR, PAYNE: While that photograph is on the
     screen, you have told the Coroner from what you saw
     you actually only saw a total of three mounted
     Policemen, did you? - A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. There is obviously a lot more to be seen on that
   photograph? - A. That is right.
Q. But you did not see them? - A. No.

Q. I want you to look at another document please, and
   that is the map, 284, and I think you will find it
   further on in your bundle. I appreciate you do not
   probably know the roads and so on yourself but I just
   want to see how far we can get. First of all, can
   you find Far Lane where you parked the car and if you
   can find No. 2 which is in the black circle? - A.
   Yes.
Q. You parked your car there and then you walked from
   there in the direction of the ground, did you? - A.
   Yes, that is correct.

Q. On the map that would take you down to the junction
   of what we can see is Wadsley Lane? - A. I have got
   it.

Q. That is going in the direction of the ground and so
   that is probably the way you walked, is it? - A. I
   cannot honestly say. I have got no idea.
Q. Whichever way you went it would then take you on to
   Middlewood Road, that is the big road with the black
   writing, above the No. 2 I have pointed out? - A.
   Yes.

Q. A little way down Middlewood Road you then cross over
   Catch Bar Lane? - A. Yes.
                                                             28




                                                     S. L. JONES   *
     /

Q. Then you are into Leppings Lane and over the bridge.
   You can see the river just passing under the e of
   Leppings Lane, do you see that? - A. Yes.
Q. And turn right into the ground. Do you think you
   probably did go down Middlewood Road and over Catch
   Bar Lane? - A. I really wouldn't like to say. I am
   absolutely hopeless at directions and I have got no
   idea.
Q. I am just trying to put you on the map before I ask
   you about the crowds because you have said you
   thought there were an awful lot of people? - A. Yes.
Q. What I want you to help the Jury about is this;
   about how far back from the ground was it when you
   first started to notice? I am not asking you to be
   exact but just give us an idea of about how far away
   you were from the ground? - A. Maybe two roads away,
   one road.

Q.   That was an awful lot of people all walking in the
     same direction as you? - A. Yes.
Q.        THE   CORONER:   I am sorry, I missed theanswer.
     What did   you say?- A. About two roads away.
Q.        MR. PAYNE: For instance, when you cross over
     Catch Bar Lane that is quite a big junction. You
     must have crossed over somewhere about there from the
     direction you came. So when you crossed over what
     was the scene like? Put the Jury in the picture as
     to what the scene was like as you crossed over that
     big road? - A. There was just a mass of people at the
     ground. You could not see the turnstiles or anything
     like that.
Q. I am trying to get you a little bit further back from
   the ground. Were there people walking on the
   pavement as you approached the ground? - A. Yes.

Q. Were they walking in the roads as well? - A. I can't
   recall.

Q. That is as far as I can take that. The next thing
   was that when you got into the ground and were going
   down the tunnel there were some people passing water
   on the sides of the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Q. You said you were not surprised at that? - A. No.
                                                          29




                                                    S. L. JONES
    ✓
Q. Why is that? - A. Because I have been to Anfield
   Football Ground before and it happens all the time.
Q. There.was nothing special about the occasion? - A.'Oh
   no. ifou just don't look. You just look away.



                Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING:
Q. I have got a theory too. I wonder if we can look
   back at the photograph we had up before, C295, and I
   wonder whether the gates that you remember being
   pressed up against were the blue gates? If you look
   behind you there are two or three chaps have got red
   sweaters or shirts on. You can see some blue gates
   behind them. I wonder if those were the gates you
   were pressed up against? - A. I don't think so.
Q.   You donot think so? - A. No.

Q.   Having got through there your way was free to come
     through this gate when it was open? - A. No.
Q. Theory exploded! Let me take you back to the
   beginning. You say you have been to Anfield and
   obviously you are used to large crowds at football
   matches? - A. Fairly used to them, yes.
Q. This was to be a very large crowd. I     think   youknew
   it was an all-ticket match? - A. Yes.
Q. I do not think there is any secret about the fact
   that a lot more people would have liked to have gone
   to the match than there were tickets available? - A.
   Probably.
Q. Were you not a little concerned about the time you
   were actually going to be arriving at the ground? -
   A. Richard didn't seemed concerned and so I wasn't.
Q. Did it not seem to you to be cutting it fine to be
   getting there at ten to three or five to three or
   thereabouts? - A. I really don't know.

Q. But you were surprised by the    numbers of people who
   were still outside the ground    at that time? - A. Yes.

Q. Were you aware at all of a Police Land Rover parked
   outside the ground? - A. No.
                                                           30




                                                 S. L. JONES
   ✓
Q. Did you hear any announcements on a PA system of
   somebody saying not to push because everybody would
   get in? - A. No, I didn't.
Q. Did any of the Police Officers that you saw try to
   indicate either by what they were saying or by what
   they were doing that they did not want people to
   push? - A. Not really. The only thing was the one
   Police Officer on horseback who was telling everyone
   to get to the right and that was it.
Q. That was some effort although you thought that was
   doomed to failure because there was only one of them?
   - A. Yes.
Q. I do not imagine for a moment at all that you were
   doing any pushing? - A. Probably the person in front
   of me thought I was pushing but I wasn't. It was
   just the sheer pressure.
Q. Because you were being pressed from behind? - A. Yes.

Q. When you came up on to the back of the queue there
   was a moment when, if you like, you were the last
   person in the queue? - A. I don't think so. There
   was always someone behind me.
Q. Was there a moment that you stopped and thought,
   "That is as far as we can go at the moment" as the
   shuffling forward continued? - A. Yes, sometimes you
   were just in a bunch and it wasn't moving but there
   was always people all around you, behind you, in
   front of you.
Q. The pressure at that time was coming from behind you?
   - A. Yes.

Q. That was the pressure of people trying to get closer
   to the entrance points? - A. I presume so.

Q. After that when you got into the ground itself from
   thereon into the tunnel, through the tunnel and on to
   the terrace, all of that is something that you would
   put under the word "normal". What you saw in the
   tunnel, although it is pretty despicable, was
   something you had seen before at football matches? -
   A. I wouldn't call it despicable really.
                                                         31



                              S. L. JONES


Q. ,You have seen   it before andyou were notsurprised    to
    see it again?   - A. No.

Q.   When you got onto the terrace itself, it seemed to you
     that that was a normal scene that you were seeing in
     front of you? - A. To begin with.
Q.   Until the pushing started? - A. Well, until the crowd
     came up.

                Cross-Examined by MR. KING
Q.   Miss Jones, I was interested in your answer that the
     person in front of you might have thought you were
     pushing, but you weren't; it was because of the
     pressure behind you? - A. Yes.
Q.   I want you, if you can, to give some idea to the Jury
     of what it is like being in a crowd. I am sure we
     have all had that experience, but you had that
     particular experience that day. Do you know what I
     mean by an involuntary movement? I will explain what
     I mean by that. That is a movement of somebody who
     hasn't said to himself, 'I'm going to make a
     movement', but somebody who is carried along by the
     momentum of everyone else around them. Do you
     understand? - A. Yes.

Q.   Is that what you were trying to explain to us of being
     in that crowd, that that crowd had a momentum and you
     were being carried along with it? - A. That is right.
     You have got no choice of where you are going. It is
     just the way the movement carries you. If you want to
     go one way and the crowd is going the other way, you
     have got no chance of going that way.

Q.   If somebody had put the finger on you and said, "Miss
     Jones, wait a minute, what do you think you are doing
     pushing forward?" what would you have said to them? -
     A. "I'm not pushing".

Q.   What was happening to you? - A. It is just everyone
     behind me, and it is just the sheer pressure of the
     amount of people.

Q.   You described the police officer on the horseback, and
     you were asked very properly by the Coroner about
     obeying what he was trying to do, and.you gave this
     answer, that you yourself tried to get over to the
     right, but couldn't. Why was it that you couldn't? -
     A. Because of all the people on the right and all the
     people on the left, and just can't move like that.
     You would very much like to if it means getting out of
     the way, and also the horses coming near you. You
                                                            32



                                  S. L. JONES


     ' don’t want to be trampled on but you haven't got much
       choice.
Q.    At that stage when the man on the horseback was there,
      what was the depth of the crowd around the horse?
      What was it like around the horse? - A. There was
      just no room at all. The horse was just enveloped.

Q.   Have you been yourself to a football match, perhaps at
      Anfield, when you have seen a mounted police officer
      putting people into queues? - A. Yes, there are
      always mounted police at Anfield.
Q.   On those occasions is there space for the      people to
     move into? - A. Yes, the queues.
Q.   So on this occasion - I am not criticising the
      officer, he was doing his best, I am sure - that
      officer on that horse was in the middle of a mass of
      people? - A. Yes.

Q.   Do you think that one police officer on that horse
      could really do anything about what was happening
     around him? - A. No, he couldn't have done anything,
     he couldn't.

Q.   At that stage when you were there, you are in this
      crowd with its momentum. I just want to pursue the
      same theory as Mr. Manning about the gates. I just .
     want to show you, if I may, 258 which is in the
     bundle, C258.

Q.          THE CORONER:   Can you find it? - A .   Yes, I have
      it.

Q«         MR. KING:  Do you see, Stephanie, that before you
      get into the area in front of the turnstiles you have
      to go through what we call blue perimeter gates, do
      you see that? - A. Yes.

Q.   Do you   seethey have gateposts? - A. That is right.
Q.   Do you see there is a sort of wall or fence on the
      left which seems to cut the turnstile area into two,
      do you see that? - A. Yes.

Q.    When you were describing before - and I know you have
      described on another occasion what was happening to
      you at the time, and this is the statement which you
      gaveto the Police not long afterwards and, in fact,
      you have been very good, you know, you have said
      almost word for word what was in your statement so it
      is not a question of anybody saying that you have not
      been getting it right, you have been doing very well
                                                       33



                               S. L. JONES


     indeed after this length of time. But I was
     interested in something you said you could see.
          MR. KING: Can I just remind you, sir, it is on
     page 3 of her statement.
Q.   This is before you had got through the blue gates, and
     you say this:

          "I could see some fans sitting on top of the wall
          behind the gates inside the ground."
     Do you remember seeing fans sitting on the wall inside
     the ground? - A. Yes.
Q.   Which wall do you think you were referring to? - A. I
     really don’t know.

Q.   If you go back to the photograph which is up and have
     a look at that, and then let us go back to the one
     which has you on it, C.295, do you see that behind you
     are those blue gates I have been pointing out to you?
     - A. Yes.

Q.   People are coming through, and do you see to the
     right, as you look at the photograph, a lot of people
     sitting on that dividing wall or fence which is
     between the two halves of the turnstile area, the one
     I pointed out to you when we were outside the
     perimeter gates on that first photograph? Do you
     think those are the fans you could see inside the
     ground sitting on the wall? - A. Possibly.
Q.   To help you, there is no mystery, so that the Coroner
     knows, there was a time on the evidence when those
     perimeter gates were also closed for a short time.
          THE CORONER:   Yes, we know that.

          MR. KING: Then they were opened and people came
     through.
Q.   I wondered whether you were one of those who was in
     that group immediately pressed against the perimeter
     gates which had been closed at a certain stage and
     then you had got through? - A. But the tunnel is not
     right in front of those perimeter gates, is it?
Q.   No. - A. That is why I am sure it must be the other
     gate, because when we came out of the other gates the
     tunnel was right in front. That is the only way I can
     think of it because I am not sure of the layout.

          THE CORONER: So be it, that is right. It is very
     firm in her recollection.
                                                ’ * • * * * ''' ~ . ■ s o w ^ i a i %<w^rtU:TN;U^ ■fc tin :. i• •




                                                                           34




                               S. L. JONES


          MR. KING: Indeed.
Q.   Let me just go back slightly in time, so again we can
     get the picture when you arrive, because you are
     talking about choices the whole time, about the choice
     of someone arriving at the ground. In your original
     description, again I say it is so very close to what
     you have told us today, you have said this on the
     second page:

           "We got to the ground together and I think the
           ground was on our right-hand side."
     That would be correct because you were coming from the
     direction Mr. Payne was talking about. You said:
           "We turned into the entrance to the ground and I
           was quite surprised to see such a large crowd of
           people standing at the front of the ground".
     A.   Yes.
Q.   Was that the impression you had, that you were coming
     so that the ground was on your right and you turned
     into the entrance? - A. Yes.

Q.   Because if we look on our model, you would be coming,
     with the help of our friend with the pointer, not from
     Leppings Lane, but from the opposite direction. The
     ground would be on your right and you would turn into
     the entrance, would you not? - A. Yes.
Q.   You probably came over a bridge but      you probably would
     not remember that. - A. Right.
Q.   Because, as the Jury will know, you could come from
     two directions. There were people coming down
     Leppings Lane from one direction and people were
     coming from your direction and everybody converging
     from two directions to the entrance to the turnstiles,
     do you see? - A. Yes.

Q.   When you arrived, was the picture of a great mass of
     people? - A. Yes, just as we came down, yes.

Q.   The moment you joined it,  from that moment onwards did
     yOu really find that events had really taken over from
     you after that? - A. Yes, because we didn't give our
     tickets in, we didn't go through any turnstiles.

Q.   No, and you have already described the police officers
     you had seen, which to you were few in number at that
     stage? - A. Yes.
                                                         35



                                 S. L. JONES


Q.' Now let me take you through onto the concourse, and
    you got through the big gate and you are relieved and
    you see the tunnel? - A. Yes.
Q.   Did you on that concourse area, that is the large area
     behind the turnstiles when you got through, see
     anybody, be it a policeman or a steward, directing you
     in any way? - A. No, I didn't see anyone of that
     nature.
Q.   Did you see any signs indicating where you should go?
     - A. No.
Q.   So you made for the tunnel as the natural way to go?     -
      A. That was the only way I could see.
Q.   I am just finally interested in this. When you got
     through the tunnel, and you are someone who has been
     to many crowds by the sound of it, were those terraces
     to you empty-looking, the terraces you were going
     into? - A. No, they weren't empty-looking. They just
     looked as they normally do.

Q.   In a normal crowd we have heard that there is swaying.
     You know what I mean by swaying, don't you? - A. Yes.
Q.   You go back and you go forward, back and forward? - A.
     Yes.

Q.   You have described to us a number of what you have
     described as surges? - A. Yes.

Q.   Am I right in saying that that is not a sway? A surge
     is when the crowd goes forward and does not go back
     again? - A. Just gradually forward all the time.

Q.   Because you talked about first it was a gradual
     movement of people coming on from behind, and then
     more and more surges? - A. Yes.

Q.   And the surges are the movement of people forward and
      then stopping? - A. Yes.
Q.   And you were being propelled forward from the pressure
      from behind, and that is what was happening more and
     more to you as you were on the terraces? - A. That is
      right, yes.

            MR. KING:   I have no further questions, thank
     you.

               Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE
                                                         36'



                              S. L. JONES


Q.' Miss Jones, please understand I am not at all
    suggesting there is anything wrong with your evidence.
    1 think I speak for all of us that we are
    exceptionally impressed with the way you have given
    your evidence today. I just want to focus on that
    photograph that is behind you.
          THE CORONER:   It is the one, I think, in front of
     you as well.
Q.        MR. CATCHPOLE: Do you remember that there was a
     Preliminary Inquest into Richard and Tracy's death,
     and I believe the family may have viewed some video
     evidence and some photographic evidence, and you
     identified yourself on that photograph, and then
     Richard was identified inside the ground on a video?
     Do you have any recollection of that? - A. No. I am
     not quite sure which one you are talking about. We
     saw that many photographs and videos looking for them.
Q.   If I could just read you a passage from the evidence
     that was given by Inspector Layton at Richard's
     Inquest. For your note, sir, it is page 1,150, and it
     just says:

          "On a BBC video tape, reference MAPI, timed at
          14.56, 3104, Richard was shown alive in Enclosure
          No.3", that is inside the ground at 4 minutes to
          3.

     Do you have any recollection of that? - A.    Not
     really, no.
Q.   It does not matter, but if that is right, you would
     agree with me, I presume that whatever gate you were
     up against, it looks likely that you were in the
     ground along with Richard at 4 minutes to3, if that
     video reference is right, do you agree? -A.    I don't
     think it can be, because we were seen outside at 4
     minutes to 3, weren't we?

Q.   No, that is 6 minutes to 3.   So it looks as if it took
     2 minutes from when we see you on that photograph for
     you to get down into the tunnel onto the terraces, or
     at least it took Richard that long, and we presume
     that you were with him throughout that time? - A.
     Well, I would presume so.
                               Q.   Please understand
Please understand, everyone here has seen enough
witnesses to know that things get very confused,
particularly when you go through something like that.’
There is -absolutely no criticise at all - we all know
you are trying to help us as best you can, but it does
seem tnat Richard was inside the ground, and I am right
in understanding that as far as you remember you were
with him right the way into the terraces? - A. Yes.
Thank you. Just one other small point tnat I should
raise with you. Can I remind you of the evidence you
gave in answer to the Coroner on the question of once
you were inside the ground? You actually said you
could only see the tunnel, and that Richard said, "Just
go down the tunnel", and you went down and it was
reasonably clear. Is that, in fact, what happened? -
A. Yes.

Thank you very much.

           Cross-Examined by ?iRS. McBRIEH
Stephanie, I am trying to unravel this mystery about
when you actually went in there, and this is how I see
it. You say when you were in the crowd, when there
were a lot of people around you, that you did see a
large metal gate, a concertina gate? - A. Yes.
So there is no confusion about the perimeter gates and
 that gate, that does seem to be the concertina gate,
it’ow, when you were there you saw it opening once, you
said, and you were too far away at the time to go
through it, but you did mention that it wasn't opened
very wide at the time? - A. No, it wasn't.

Just a few feet? - A. Just a few inches really.
     MRS. McBRIEtf:    From evidence tuat we have it
seems to me that it was the 2.48 opening, tnat, because
I don't think the other openings, it was opened wide
the next time, ’./asn't it, sir?

     THE CORONER:   You are quite right. 2.43 was a
partial opening, more than a few inches but it wasn't
opened very wide, and then at 2.52 it was opened
widely. You are quite correct in your recollection.

     iJRS. HcBRIEN:  So it seens to rae that tnat was
the first opening that you saw. Mow, when you saw that
you said that Richard said, "If it opens again we're
going in", that is correct, isn't it? - A. Yes.

And of course it was opened like you said, and you do
rernenber going through it with the crowd. Fro.-n what I
                                                                33


                                                  S. L. JOMES




     can work out it seems that you went through on the
     second opening, and i.iaybe the photograph has got the .
     wrong time on it.
          MRS. McBRIEN:   That is the only thing I can think
     of, if you don't mind ray saying so. I think Stephanie
     has given very good evidence, absolutely -- it is so
     clear, and yet we have got this mystery here. That is
     the only way I can work it out.
          THE CORONER:  Well, Stephanie can't answer that
     question. In fact, I can't answer it either.
          MRS. McBRIEN:   It is just a real puzzle.
     Everything seemed so clear, sir, apart from that.
          THE CORONER:   It is highly unlikely actually that
     the times are wrong except for this minute, because
     there is a photograph, and that is why one knows the
     time, where the time is printed on it and the clock is
     on it as well, so you can time it twice by the number
     printed and by the clock face, and it is a minute out,
     that is where this minute is coming from. It is an
     interesting thought, I agree, but I don't think it
     works.
          MRS. McBRIEN:   I think it is a aystery because
     Stephanie did say that when she went down the tunnel
     and got to the terrace end of the tunnel it wasn't
     crowded. If she had gone in the final ti:ne it would
     have been. It is not really adding up properly.
       THE CORONER:  I think that we can't take it any
 - further. I can see tiiat there is a problem here.

Q.         MRS. NcBRIEN:   Thank you very much, Stephanie.

           THE CORONER:    Yes, Mr. Hale.
           MR. HALE:   I am sorry, a crucial point, which
      this witness has to bear because it has been put to
      her, and I would like to ask her about the crowd
      pressure.

               Further Cross-Examined by MR. HALE
0. It has been put to you that with crowd pressure you had
   no choice, that is right, isn't it? - A. That is ri^ht.

Q.    But is it right that a crowd like tnat is not like a
      river, is it? A river only goes one way, doesn't it?
      If you were in a river in those circumstances, a strong
      current, you could only go the way the river takes you,
      tnat is right, isn't it ~     Yes.
                                                             39


                                                 S. L. JONES




Q. But that crowd was made up of individuals like
   yourself, that is right? - A. Yes.
Q. .All tiaving a thinking brain, is that right? - A. Yes.
Q. Suppose fire had suddenly broken out in front of you,
   which way do you think the crowd would have gone then?
   - A. It is difficult to say, because the people at the
   front who are by the fire are going to-want to go back,
   but the people at the back who maybe can't see the fire

Q.    No, the people at the back can see the fire, see the
     danger. - A. Well, you are all going to go the other
     way if everyone can see the fire.
Q. You are all going to go the other way, that's right.
   So the way in which a crowd moves depends upon the
   individual will of the people who make it up? - A. It
   depends on everyone if it is a large crowd.

Q. That's right, but if everybody in the crowd .... - A.
   You can't have half and half though.

Q. Well if you had half and half you might have a
   stalemate, neither going forward nor going backward? -
   A. Exactly.
Q. That is right. - A. And with the large amount of    people
   you find you are having problems.
Q. In the circumstances there were more people wanting to
   continue pressing forward than there were who were
   afraid for their lives like you, and would have liked
   to stand still or hold back a bit, is that right? - A.
   Everyone was there for the one reason, to go and see a
   match, so everyone wants to go forward.
Q. Yes, but some of you were getting rather concerned ....
   - A. At tnat time I was slightly worried but I didn't
   think that anyone was going to get killed.

Q. Yes. We have heard from other witnesses who would have
   liked to have stopped and to have got out but they
   couldn't. - A. Yes.
Q. That is because there were more wanting to go forward
   tnan were wanting to stop and co.-ie back? - A. Yes.

                    Further by THE CONQUER
0. The problem it is not that anybody is disbelieving you
   - on the contrary everybody is believing you. - A. It's
   okay.
But everybody is fitting the account to the tines*   You
can see wnat I am saying? - A. Yes.
Because if it is right that Richard was seen on the
terrace at 14.56 then it is impossible for you to have
entered at 14.59, isn't it, because that is trtree
minutes earlier? - A. I think that must be wrong, the
picture, to be honest with you. I think the picture
must be wrong.
Which picture? - A. Of Richard on the terraces.
     TilE CORONER:  That is something that I t h i n k --
we will have to get the family to review that bit of
evidence because it would obviously be helpful. Ladies
and gentlemen, Mr. Catchpole knows this because he was
there, and indeed Mrs. HcBrien was - the problem of
identification is a very major problem. It isn't half
as easy as we think and I know that many families spent
hours and hours and hours trying to do it, and
sometimes they succeeded, sometimes they have done an
identification and then sometimes they have reviewed it
at a later date. In fact, I think Hr. Traynor was
mentioned on the first day - we haven't yet corrected
that - so it is a difficult problem.
Don't worry. The fact that one has to look at it again
is neither here nor there, all I ara concerned about and
interested in, if you like, is to try and get the facts
as near as we can. What you are saying is you are sure
that you were pressed against the concertina gate,
right? - A. Well, yes.

And you based it, because you know that once you got
through that gate you were in the concourse area? - A.
Yes, the tunnel was in front.

The tunnel was in front of you, and not 20 or 30 yards
away and negotiate another huge crowd, that is rignt,
isn't it? - A. Yes. I agree about the fans on the
wall, it may have been by the perimeter gate, but I can
only assume that I meant that before, about seeing the
fans on the wall.

That was, in fact, how I read your statement, that
there was pressure before, tnat you saw tha fans, that
you then moved in - and in fact, I asked you this, "Did
you see the gate open", and Richard then said, "ilext
time it opens we are goin§ in"? - A. Yes.

 And you gradually got nearer to the gate and then it
 opened and you went through, that is rignt, isn't it? -
 A. Yes.
                                                                         41


                                                           S. L. JONES




      (|. Sorry, I haven't quite finished. There is something
          else I wanted to ask. Mr. Hale to a certain extent has
          dealt with the point, but it is right, isn't it,
     B Stephanie, you have explained to me that you couldn't
          do anything about it because people were pressing
          behind? - A. No, you couldn't.

           That is right, but you would accept, wouldn't you, that
           a crowd is made up of individuals, isn't it? - A. Yes.
           And if each individual person had stood still - if, I
           am not saying that they did - if they had stood still
           outside the gates, you too would not have been pushed
           forward, that is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, but that is
           just not going to happen, is it?
         3. Okay, that is fair enough, but I ara just asking you
            whether that is correct? - A. Yes.
         Q. This is a question which we haven't broached yet and I
            just want to ask you this, did you know, and would it
     D      have made any difference to you if you had known, that
            the ground had a licence to hold football snatches? - A.
            Had a ...?

         Q. A licence, that it had been licensed for football
            matches. - A. It wouldn't have made any difference.

         0. You didn't know it? - A. Uhat do you mean?
         Q. That is all right, you have answered my question. I an
            trying to find out - this ground was licensed, there is
            a procedure for licensing football grounds, and what I

yi          am trying to find out from a few of the fans is whether
            the fans knew this, and I haven't found one yet who
            did, and you didn't know it either? - A. No.
                 THE CORONER:     Kr. King, yes.

                 MR. KING:      Might I ask a question arising out of
            your question?

                 THE CORONER:   Which one, the momentum one? Yes.
            I aa not trying to undermine you, Mr. King, at all:
                 MR. KING:    No, no. It is an important, not only
            interesting but an important point on crowd behaviour
            and expectations.

                     Further Cross-Examined by MR. XI?1G
         0. Stephanie, you were asked "If everybody had stood
            still, clearly the crowd would have stopped", and the
            answer to that has to be yes, but then you gave this
                                                       42


                                            S. L. JONES




answer, "It is just not going to happen". Could you
explain why you say that? - A. When you want to go
somewhere you are not going to get anywhere if you
stand still, are you?

Yes. You have been to many football matches. How
realistic is it, from your experience, to put forward
the proposition that a football crowd going .into a
game, shortly before kick-off, it is all suddenly going
to stop still? How realistic does that seeai to you? -
A. It is stupid. It is not going to happen.
     THE CORONER:   Mr. King, I will just follow it up
with another one and I will give you an opportunity
because it is actually very convenient because
Stephanie is (a) a good witness, if I may say so, (b) a
relative.

               Further by THE CORONER
I think as you are so helpful and kind we are taking
advantage. Have you been to the theatre? Do youever
go to the theatre? - A. Yes.

Or the cinema? - A. I go to the cinema all the time.
You do? - A. Yes.

And do crowds go into those areas as well? - A. Yes.

Do you find that the behaviour of those crowds is any
different to the behaviour of a football crowd? - A. I
wouldn't say the behaviour. I go to the match more for
the atmosphere, because of the great atmosphere in the
Kop, and that is why I go to the natch, so it is
different in that way, I would say.
But for example, you would be surprised if you went
down the corridor in the cinema complex and people were
urinating against tae walls there? You would think
that that was a little unusual? - A. There is plenty of
toilets there.

Yes. Have you found that people when they want to go
in and see a film are also pressing forward in the sane
sort of way as you have described tne pressure which
you were experiencing? - A. Hot really. You don't get
that sort of people, amount of people going to tne
theatre.

You don't get as many, of course, I agree, I accept
that, but of course you have got a smaller space as
well because the stadium seats 55,000 and the cinena
might seat 500, I don't know, so obviously you are
                                            S. L. JONES



   /

going to have different proportions, I agree. - A. They
have a queuing system at the cine:aa so it is different
totally.




            Further Cross-Examined
                                        S. L. JONES



 '       Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

This is probably unfair, but if you had been in charge
yourself, given the task of preparing for a big fo.otball
match and you were having to say to yourself, What can I
expect?" - you haven't been yet and you have got to try
and think what it is going to be like.   Do you think it
would be sensible to go to the cinema and say to
yourself, "Well, I will go to the local cinema.   If I
was in London I would go to Covent Garden, because we are
going to find a situation which is roughly the same as a
football match."   In other words, from your experience
is it a fair comparison - a football crowd and a football
match on the one hand and a queue of people waiting to go
into the cinema - is it the same thing? - A. No, it
isn't.   It's not a comparison at all, I don't think,
sorry.
Let me explore this slightly. At a cinema, is it right
you have a queue, often just one queue coming out of the
cinema going along the pavement? - A. Yes, normally.
Have you ever known in a cinema 4,000 or 5,000 people all
being asked to go through the same small number of
entrances? - A. No.

     MR. KING:      I could develop it, but I won’t:

The point being made - and I am not being rude to the
learned Coroner, it is an important point - is is it
sensible to view matters by reference to a cinema crowd
or a football crowd? - A. No, it isn't.
     THE CORONER:      I think we will leave this point.
         Further Cross-Examined by MR. HALE:

What if the Rolling Stones were performing at the
Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground? - A. I really don't
know.   I wouldn't go and see them anyway!

But that would be a more apt comparison, wouldn't it? -
A. Perhaps.   I don't know how many fans they have.   Not
as many as Liverpool Football Club have.
     THE CORONER:   This is a very difficult problem, Mr.
King, because the problem is sorting out whether football
crowds are intrinsically different.   You know, are they
made up of a different category of person from other
humans beings and, of course, there are implications
whichever way you answer that.

     MR. KING:      It is very important when one...
                                                           45


                                          S. L. JONES


           THE CORONER:   This is what I was trying...   I took
     thfe opportunity because we had a charming witness and I
     thought we would just explore it a little bit.
          MR. KING:   I agree, sir, because it goes very
     importantly to matters as to what one should expect,' what
     one should anticipate.
          MR. PAYNE:   I am not going to intervene in this
     discussion, but if that kind of illustration is going to
     be put to witnesses, then it ought not to be confined to
     cinemas, but it could be applied, for example, to rugby
     league matches or to rugby union matches.
          THE CORONER:   Indeed, we could go on, and I suppose
     you could criticise me for having put it to the witness
     and it may not have been entirely fair, but she has given
     quite a good account of herself on it.

            Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:
Q. Mr. Hale mentioned that if you had known there was a fire
   in front of you, or the crowd with you that day had seen
   a fire, they would have done something about it.     Now,
   Stephanie, you would not think there was danger ahead,
   would you, that day? - A. Well, if   youcould not have
   seen it.   He said I could though.
Q. There was only a hidden danger ahead, wasn't there?      A
   hidden one? - A. I suppose so.
Q. There has been a lot said about the behaviour of the fans
   waiting to go into the football ground.   Now it was
   close to kick-off time, wasn't it? - A. Yes.

Q.   And it was a semi-final match? - A. Yes.

Q.   It could not be compared with a queue at a cinema, could
     it?    It was a different thing altogether?    A big
     occasion? - A. Yes.
0. Now the crowd as far as I can make out were not doing
   anything unusual really, they just wanted to get in to
   see the match.   Would it have made a difference to the
   crowd if someone had announced that, the game was going to
   be delayed? - A. I don't think so.      Imean,it wouldn't
   have mattered really.    It would have given everyone a
   lot more time to get in.

Q. You still think they would have pushed forward even
   though they had half an hour, for instance, to wait? - A.
   Well, no.
                                                              46


                                            S. L. JONES


Q. If you had more time - I was thinking maybe the fans were
   arfxious to get in because they were running out of time.
   That was the reason for their behaviour, not just because
   they wanted to Dush each other?     Do you agree? - A.
   Well, yes.    It s a difficult question to answer.   .1
   mean, if the match had been put back a bit more it would
   have given more time to filter people off to different
   sections perhaps. As it was the bulk of the crowd went
   in all at once and that just was no good, was it?
Q. So all they needed was time really? - A. Well, more time
   would have helped a great deal I should imagine.
                     Further by THE CORONER:
Q. Stephanie, I need to ask you this.   You have already
   told me but I need to be absolutely sure about this.
   You did not hear any announcements made? - A. No.
Q.    You didn't see a loud speaker van or anything like, or a
     Land Rover? - A. No.
Q. You heard nothing? - A. Definitely not.

0. Definitely not.       You are absolutely sure? - A. Yes.

          THE CORONER:   Thank you very much.    Now then,
     Stephanie, you have already been complimented up and down
     dale, and I am very very grateful to you for coming and
     for being here and for yesterday as well.    I am sorry
     about that. I think you have quitted yoursslf well.
     You are a credit to your mum and dad.    I am sure they
     were proud of you this afternoon.
        I think we will arrange for this video to be re-
 “ viewed, if you and the family are happy, to see whether
   the identification on the terrace is confirmed. We will
   just have a think about it.   OK?

          THE WITNESS:     OK.

          THE CORONER:   It is up to you, of course, and your
     mum and dad.   It is not for me to say that they must.
     It is just a matter of trying to sort it out:
Q. Oh, Stephanie, we want you to put a cross on the little
   plan.    Show Stephanie which is enclosure 3.   I want you
   to put a cross where you first exited on to the terrace
   where in fact you were, and you were in.fact aiming to go
   forward?    In other words, before you felt the - I think
   we have used the word "shove" - from behind.    Can you
   put a cross there? - A. I can't honestly say.




                                 ( S   )
                                                                 47


                                             S. L. JONES


Q. Can you remember where you finished up after the first
   big shove? - A. No.   The only time I can remember, it
   was just a constant shove right the way down. I didn't
   really stop.
Q. -You really only remember yourself at the gate, is that
   right?   I'm sorry, what were you going to say? - A. The
   only time I really know is when I was at the bottom by
   the gate before I got out.

0. Put your cross down there.   So just inside by the gate,
   is that right? - A. Yes, when I came out of the gate I
   came out to the right of the goal post.
Q.    Yes, that is right, I remember that.     Thank you.   We
     will give it a C" number.     (C.302)
          THE CORONER:   Stephanie, thank you very much.         We
     have finished.
          Ladies and gentlemen, we have finished today.
     Before I let you go we have been thinking about the times
     for starting and stopping on Monday and Fridays, not the
     other days.    If I were   to say to you that we would start
     on Monday at 10.30 instead of 10.00 and on Friday we will
     start at 9.30 and aim to finish at 3.30 - you will
     realise that "aim" is not quite the same thing as
     achievement - but aim to finish at 3.30, would that sound
     acceptable to you?    If   it sounds acceptable to you, then
     I will sort out whether    it sounds acceptable to the
     lawyers.    We think it might be easier because a lot of
     people have to travel, including me as well.      You
     wouldn't mind if I made those changes.

                  (In the absence of the jury)
          THE CORONER:   You heard what I said to the jury.
     We thought that might be a bit easier if we start on
     Monday at 10.30.

          MR. KING:   I have not canvassed it yet with my
     colleagues, but certainly I would have thought that was a
     sensible idea.

          THE CORONER:   Is there anybody who feels very
     strongly that would be jolly inconvenient?   If we start
     at 10.00 on Friday and finish at 3.30 we have actually
     lost a whole hour and I thought if we started at 9.30 on
     Friday we are only sacrificing half an hour, and aim to
     finish at 3.30 rather than 4.00.   Whether we make it is
     another matter.    Are you happy with that as well?

          MR. KING:   Sir, I haven't consulted any of my
     friends on this idea which I am merely floating, sir.
MICHAEL DAVID KELLY


1.   Michael       David    Kelly        the    brother     of    the     Applicant           Joan

     Sinclair      was     born     on     1st March 1951, and was 38 years old
     when he died at Hillsborough football ground                         on    15th         April
     1989.



2.   At the mini inquest the jury heard from Dr John Clark that in

     his view the cause of death was                   crush     asphyxia.         This        was

     based    on    finding signs of asphyxia in Mr Kelly's face which
     was rather congested and              had     a   bluish      discoloration.               Dr

     Clark     stated       that     these        changes      were      fairly        mild     in

     comparison to a lot of the other victims.                        He further            stated
     that    one of the other features of asphyxia is to find little
     haemorrhages on the skin.                 He remarked       that     these        in     fact

     were not present.        Mr Kelly had not inhaled vomit and had not

     suffered any internal or severe injuries                      and     there       was      no
     natural disease to account for his death.                      Dr Clark said that

     he still thought Mr Kelly died of crush asphyxia and for some
     reason the signs of this were rather mild.                         He suggested that

     it may have been the case that Mr Kelly's heart                           stopped        for

     some particular reason very very quickly and he died but that

     this is something which is impossible to prove.



3.   Dr Clark's evidence was followed by the                     evidence         of    Police

     Inspector Matthew Robert Sawers who stated that at about 3.35

     pm Police Constable Willmott made his way on to the Spion Kop
end     of the ground.              There he saw Mr Kelly lying on the pitch
on his back.            Michael appeared to be                  unconscious.       Together
with     Police         Constable              Lallyhe checked for vital           signs of

life but could not find any.                       Mr Kelly      was    carried      to     the

temporary       mortuary.             At        about    3.59    pm    Dr   Andrew        Byrne

certified Michael David Kelly dead.


At the mini-inquest visual evidence was produced by Detective

Inspector       Michael            Layton,        of    the West Midland Police             who
showed a photograph timed at 3.08 pm which appeared                                to      show

Mr     Kelly    alive         in     Enclosure 3.          When asked by the Coroner

whether he could say at that point if Mr Kelly was conscious,

unconscious,            alive        or        dead,    Detective      Inspector        Layton

replied thatMr Kelly was probably still alive butcertainly
in distress.            The Applicant isconcerned that such a question

was    directed      at       a      police        officer      and    feels   that         the

information sought by the Coroner ought to have been obtained

from a medical expert.


Inspector Layton also stated that a P C Maughan had attempted

to     resuscitate        a    man at the Leppings Lane end of the pitch

but without success.                 P     C     Maughan     assisted       spectators       to

carry     the     man     to the Spion Kop end of the ground, where he

left him with a St John's Ambulance officer who has not                                    been

identified.         He further stated that P C Maughan had met with

the Applicant and both are satisfied that it was actually                                    Mr

Kelly that P C Maughan had attempted to assist.
At     the    main inquest the jury heard from Police Officer John
Raymond Maughan that on the day he got                                on    to     the        Leppings

Lane     end        of     the    pitch       at     about       3.04 pm.          Three or four
minutes later he approached a man who was laid on his side by

the     goalposts           on    the grassed area behind the bye line.                                  He

identified the man as Mr Kelly.                       The man did not appear to be

breathing           and with          the help of some civilians he turned Mr

Kelly over and worked                    on        him for           a few minutes. He                   appeared

to     start        to     breathe.           Police Officer Maughan continued to
breathe for the man for a while.                          Mr Kelly then            appeared              to
slip     unconscious             but     he    Was    breathing.              Police           Officer
Maughan was clearly confident in                          his        recollection             that       he

appeared           to     have    won     through and used the expression, "We

have won that one".                With the help of supporters                          he     carried

Mr     Kelly        towards       a     grassed       area on the pitch near to the

gymnasium where the first aid people had set up                                     a        reception

area     in        the     corner.       They        left       Mr    Kelly in the care of

ambulancemen and went back to help at the                                  other        end.         P    C

Maughan       was confident that Mr Kelly was still breathing when

he put him into the care of the St John's Ambulanceman.



In a meeting with the applicant P C Maughan stated that after

he     had     left       Mr     Kelly    with       the        ambulancemen he ran back

towards the Leppings Lane end                        to     assist         other        spectators.

Before        he        reached Leppings Lane he received a radio message

to form part of a cordon on the half way line which                                          he   duly
did.         The     Applicant     asked him why he did this when he knew

people were dying.              He replied that he had to as             it      was    an

instruction, things were utterly chaotic and nobody knew what
they were doing.             This evidence was not put before the                  jury.
Such     evidence        was     highly    relevant to the issue            of whether

death was due to or              aggravated by    lack of care,             an     issue
which was not left to the jury.



The Applicant is concerned that Mr Kelly was eventually found
lying on his back              without    apparently    having      received           any

treatment           from the     emergency services. She contends that he

ought to have been laid in the recovery                  position.            Further,
because       of     the absence of any obvious signs of crush injury

on Mr Kelly's body she feels that he would have survived                               had

he   received         prompt     medical    treatment        once   he      had    been
resuscitated by P C Maugham, and thereafter left in the                              care
of     the    St John Ambulance Service.           Finally the applicant is

concerned that the evidence shows that                  Mr     Kelly     was      alive

beyond        the     3.15     pm cut off time imposed by the Coroner and

that the facts of the case present sufficient material for                               a

jury     to     consider whether to return a verdict that the death

of Michael David Kelly was due to or aggravated                        by     lack      of
care.
U F P MA TE STY *S CO RO N E R FOR S O U T H Y O R K S H I R E
    "        ’    (WEST D I S T R I C T )



         I NQ UESTS INTO THE D E A T H S O F THE

   V I C T IM S OF THE H I L L S B O R O U G H F O O T B A L L

                   S T A D I U M D I SA S T E R

              ON THE 15TH APRIL,                  1989



             INGUES.i 'INTO. THE D EA T H OF

                 MICHAEL DAVID KELLY




                            Bef ore

. S.L.    POPPER.      LL.E.     S.MED.Sci.          B M , E S . MRCGP

               (Her M a i e s t v ’s C o r o n e r ')




                                At

             The Medico - L e g a l Centre.
                  Water y Street.
                    Sheffield.

                                On

                      1st May 1990




             T R A N S C R I P T OF P R O C E E D I N G S




   From the Notes of J.L. Harpham. Ltd.
        Officia l Sh or t ha nd Writers.
    55. Que en Street. S h e f f i e l d Si 2DX
              B


                                                         \
                                                                 INDEX


                  DR .   JOHN CLARK -         Called

                     By THE CORONER           --   •-   _- •


                  P O L IC E   IN S P E C T O R ROBERT MATTHEW SAWERS -            Called




                                                                                                11) N 03
                     3 v THE COR ONER ............................................
              D      C r o s s - E x a m i n e d by MR. F R A S E R ........................
                     C r o s s - E xa m i n ed by HR. LIME . . • •          ••   ••   ••   ••


                  D E T E C T IV E   I N S P E C T O R MICHAEL LAYTON -        Called

                     By THE C O R O N E R ..........                                             V




                                                             -- oo - -o o- -




          H


Harpham Ltd
         INQUEST    INTO THE DEATH OF M IC H A E L D A V I D K E L L Y

          HR. FRASER:      Sir, the next e v i d e n c e y o u will h ea r
rel a te s to Michael D a v i d Kelly.      M i c h a e l ' s b r o t h e r and
s i s t e r and thei r sp o u s e s are present in C ou rt t his m o rn i ng
wit h the help of social workers.             I a p p e a r in a personal
capaci ty for the fa mi ly but o b vi o u s l y f or t o d a y I a p p e a r as
a mem be r of the St e e r i n g Committee, in fact, as agent for
mys e lf I s u p p o s e .

        THE CORONER:        Yes.     Is it b r o t h e r a n d sis te r,   did you
say?

       MR.   FRASER:      Yes,     sir.

      THE CORONER:       Whi'ch are the b r o t h e r a n d s i s t e r ?    Yes,
thank you.     Good afternoon.       Let me b r i e f l y d e s c r i b e to you
the general format of the Inquest so t ha t y o u c an follow
what is goi ng to happen.        I am go ing to r e a d to you in a
moment the ev ide nc e I took on 18th April 1989.                 T h e r e are
one or two mi n or err o r s which I will c or r e c t when I have
read it.    Then I am g o in g to tell you wh at Dr. F o rr es t said
with regard to the b l o o d alcohol and t h e n Dr. C la rk is go i ng
to come, that is the P a t h o l o g i s t , and he will tell us the
relevant parts of the pathological findings.                  W hen he has
completed his ev id en c e the West M i d l a n d s P o l i c e O f f i c er will
present the su mm ary and Inspector L a y t o n will deal with the,
visual side of the evidence.          As I said, t h e Jury must be
getting ti red of th i s because I say t h i s in n e a r l y every
case.   The visual ev i d e nc e when it is first p r e s e n t e d is
very conf usi ng be ca u s e it ref ers to p l a n s a nd n u m b e r s and
things, but hold on because he is c o m i n g r o u n d h e r e in a
moment and he will de mo n st ra t e to you on t h e bi g p l a n s what
he is t alk in g about and then the w ho le t h i n g b e c o m e s very
very much clearer.       So don't d e s p a i r w h e n y o u h e a r all the
numbers.    We need th e m for the r ec or d s o t ha t we can find
our way around the p ap er wor k later on if we s h o u l d have to
do it.   Is that cl e a r ?   Then when I ha ve d o n e that we will
take no fu rther ev id e n c e at this point-

     This then is the resumed Inquest w h i c h w as o pe n e d on
the 18th April 1989 and on that o c c a s i o n Neil A n t h o n y
Parkin, Acting Cor on e r ' s Offi ce r said:

       "The body wh i ch is the subject of t h i s Inquest has been
       identified to DI Timms of the S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e Po li ce as
       that of Michael David Kelly by S t e p h e n Paul Kelly, his
       brother.      He wa s 38 years of age h a v i n g b e e n bo rn on
       1st March 1951 at Liverpool.           He w a s a d i v o r c e d man and
       he lived at                          .                                He
       was a w ar eh o u s e m a n by occupation.    He d i e d at
       Hil ls bor ou gh Football Ground f o l l o w i n g an incident
        there on Saturday, 15th April 198'?'.          PC 1791 Wilmott
        caused the body to be r em o v e d to t he M e d i c o Legal
        Centre and ther e he i de n ti fi ed it to D e t e c t i v e
        Constable Simon Weigo ld who s u b s e q u e n t 1y .ide nti fi ed the
        same body to Prof. Usher and DI Timms.             It is the
        family wish that the body s h o u l d be c r e m a t e d . "

Just bear with me for one moment.      S i m o n W e i g o l d did not as
such identify the bod y to DI Timrns.      I t h i n k t h e y were
probably togeth er at the same t i m e but that is not s t ri c t l y
right as I have read it out to you.        In fact, Dr. Clark, who
is the Pathologist, was present w hen Prof. U s h e r was t he re
and Dr. Clark, perha ps you will deal w i t h t he i d e n t i f ic a t i o n
                                                                          % v~"~.
in a little bit more detail on t his o c c as io n .                      ’

      I wrote to Step h en Paul Kelly.       Is that y ou ?
(indicating agreement-) On 13th M a y y o u s i g n e d a f orm w h ic h
I sent to you and, in fact, you c o n f i r m e d that the
information that we had was correct w i t h r e g a r d to name,
address, age, date of birth, o c c u p a t i o n and that is*still
so, isn't it?   Dr. Forrest did the b l o o d alcoh ol levels in
the case of Michael and gave us th e e v i d e n c e on the first
day, on the Wednesday, and in fact in the case of Michael
none was detected.    It was negative.         Dr. Clark.

     MR. F R A S E R : Just before you call Dr. C la rk there is a
question which may not ma tt e r for y o u r r e c o r d s but the
family are keen to c l ar if y it and that is the q u e s t i o n of
the legal next of kin.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, we sent you a c o p y of that sheet
but we aren't using it-      It is r e a l l y a s u m m a r y sheet for me
but I understand tech ni c a l l y the next of k i n is Joanne
Kelly, isn't it, the d au gh ter ?

       MR. FRASER:   Mi ch a el ' s d au gh te r. S t r i c t l y speaking,
yes.    She is a minor but she is the legal next of kin.

     THE CORONER:      I quite accept that.             It isn't releva nt
to my proceedings but I do know if t h e r e           wa s a ch i ld she
would take pre cedenc e over the mother.

       M R . FRASER:    Thank y o u .

     THE CORONER:         You   are happy for me to r e c o r d that,
aren't you?

       MR.   FRASER:   Yes-

     THE CORONER:          I believe you r e p r e s e n t   that    firm on an
agency basis?

       HR.   FRASER:    It is a bit c o m p l i c a t e d but,      yes.
                                                                                     DR.   J O H N CLARK



                        • THE CORONER:           Right.      Are yo u h a p p y now        if we go o n to
                    Dr. Clark?

                           MR. FRASER:        Yes,    sir.

                                           DR.    JOHN C L A R K - C a l l e d

                                                  By THE C O R O N E R :

              Q. Yes. - A. Dr-         John Clark,        F o r e n s i c Pacholoi
                 of Glasgow.

              Q. Dr. Clark, can you just tell m e h o w t h i s lad        ,d was i d e nt i f i e d ? ..S
                 Kell, he isn't a lad he was 39.           We will call     11 h i m g e n t l e m a n
                 I think? - A . As I recall he was i d e n t i f i e d to me by P o l ic e
                                                                           mes
                 Of ficers of South Y ork shi re P o l i c e w h o s e n a m es I d   o n 't k n o w .
                                                                                    don't
                 at the moment but also with c e r t a i n i n f o r m a t i ion
                                                                              o n w h i c h was 1     * '
                 with the body, a nam e with the b o d y an d a number. .

              Q.    In fact,    the serial       n um b er was 72    I b e l i e v e ? - A.    Yes,   72.

              Q. You are quite sa tis f i e d you are t e l l i n g me about Michael
                 David Kelly, aren't you? - A. Yes.

              Q. On that basis can yo u tell me what y o ur f i n d i n g s w e r e ? -
              A. Cause of death was crush asphyxia.              T his was b a s e d on
                 f i n d i n g sign s of asp h y x i a in his face.    H is face was ra t h e r
                 congested and had a bluish d is c o l o r a t i o n .       These changes, I
                 have to say, were fairly mild in c o m p a r i s o n to a lot of the
                 other people and one of the o t h e r f e a t u r e s of a s p h y x i a is to
                 find little hae mo rrh a g e s on the skin.         T h e s e w e re n' t in fact
                 present.

              Q. Were not presen t? - A. Were not p r e s e n t on the skin.          They
                 were present internally.      So r e a l l y what I am s a y i n g is that
                 there were signs of asph yx ia but it was r e a l l y r e l a t i v e l y
                 mild in com parison to other p eo p l e but it w ou l d n e v e r t h e l e s s
                 be consistent with p r es su re on h is chest p r e v e n t i n g him
                 breathing and the reb y being able to get a i r into the body.
                 There was no .other o bv iou s cause of death.       He hadn't
                 inhaled vornit and he had not s u f f e r e d any internal or s e v e re
                 injuries and there was no natural d i s e a s e to acc ou nt for his
                 death and so I still think he d i e d o f c r u s h a s p h y x i a and for
                 some reason the sign s of that w e re r a t h e r mild.

                          It may be with some people who die an aspnyxial de at h
                   there is an addition al element in that t her e can be p r e s s u r e
                   on nerves, pa rt ic ula r l y in the neck, w h i c h can s t o p the
                   heart very quickly and it may be an element.                      It is
                   something which is impossible to p ro ve but it may be his
                   heart sto pped for so m e p a r t i c u l a r r e a s o n very v e r y q u ic kl y
                   and he died.    In any event there wa s n o t h i n g to indi ca te he
                   suffered for any great length o f time-                  He p r o b a b l y lost
                   co n sciousness wit hi n a short p e r i o d of time, t en or fifteen




Harpham Ltd
                                                                D R . JOHN C L A R K ”



      seconds or so, and C hen k ne w n o t h i n g about        it a f te r that.
      As I said, there wasn't any m a j o r in ju r ie s         internally.

            He did have a n u m be r of g r a z e s a n d b r u i s e s on h is body,
       his face, his arms and his legs, some c a u s e d by fingers, by
       people grippi ng his arms, and the o t h e r is p r o b a b l y c a u s e d
       by pressure against o th e r pe op le or some s u r f a c e like the
       ground.   Again these may well h ave o c c u r r e d aftisr he lost
       consciousness.   So the cause o f death, as I said, was c r u s h
     . asphyxia.

           The only other fin di ng wa s e v i d e n c e o f a past
      operation, probabl y an u lc e r o p e r a t i o n on his stomach.  I
      don't know but I s us pe ct that is what it was.           That had no
      bearing at all on his death.

           MR. FRASER:         The family have no q ue sti on s.           T ha nk you,
      Doctor.

Q.         THE CORONER:      I' believe t his is, in fact, the last
      Inquest you are gi v i n g e v i d en c e at, isn't it? - A. That is
      right.

Q.    It is right you have given e v i d e n c e at 20 I n qu es ts and have
      done 20 post morterns? - A. i'es, that is right.

Q.    I know and we all k now that you c ome f ro m Glasgow.  Pe op l e
      might won der why you were here but, in fact, you w er e on     a
      private visit last Ap ri l? - A. That weekend, yes-

Q. You very kindly agr e e d to h e l p and, in fact, you did agreat
   deal of work and if I may say so you have g i v e n y ou r
   evidence in a most a dmi rab le manner, c l e a r l y u n d e r s t oo d by
   the Jury and also by the f a m i li e s a nd also I b e l i e v e you
   have done it in a c o m p a s s i o n a t e and help fu l way-       I wou ld
   like to thank you very much indeed both for y ou r a s s is t a n c e
   at the time and since, and in p a r t i c u l a r at t he se Inquests.
   Thank you very much indeed. - A- Can I say in t u r n as
   someone dealing with this sort of work and i n v e s t i g a t i o n of
   death very re gularl y how i mpr es se d I have been with the
   professio nal ism and s e n s i t i v i t y w ith w hi c h the p r o c e e d i n g s
   have been carried out here, in p a r t i c u l a r y ou r h a n d l i n g and
   explanations to the r e l at i ve s of the b e r e a v e d people.             I
   think it has given comfort to e v e r y o n e who has w o r k e d here
   and I felt it a ver y a p p ro p ri a te at mo sp he re .

          MR. FRASER:     Co ul d I add my t h a n k s on b e h a l f of my
     Committee and my cl ie n ts for t h o s e w o r d s you have e x pr e s s e d
     to Dr. Clark.   I ha ve c er ta i nl y s p o k e n to many f a m i l ie s who
     have spoken to Dr. Clark and t h e y h a v e v e r y much a p p r e c i a t e d
     the time he has spe nt with t h e m p er s on a l l y .  It is very much
     appreciated.

            THE WITNESS:       Thank you very much.


                                          4
                                             P. I . M A T T H E W   ROBERT   SAttERS*MfegS


      THE CORONER:   Mr. Fraser,             is it likely the f am il y will
 want to speak to Dr. C la r k ?

        MR. FRASER:       T he y rnay do, sir.

       THE CORONER:   Dr. Clark, will you s t a y ?       O n c e you h ave
 spo ken to the family, sho ul d they wish to do so, t h en of
 course feel entirely free to leave us.         T ha n k you again.      I
 take it none of you have q u es t i o n s of Dr. Clark.

       MR. CATCHPOLE:         No,   sir.

       MR. LIMB:       No,   sir.

       POLICE    INSPECTOR MATTHEW RO BER T S A U E R S - Cal le d

                             Bv THE C O R O N E R :   '

Yes, Mr. S a u e r s . - A. M a tt he w Robert Sawers,              Inspector,   West
Midlands Police.        I am a lr ea dy s w o r n / sir.

Would you take me thr o ug h the s um m ar y pl ea se when yo u are
ready? - A- On Saturday, 15th April 1989, Michael D av id
Kelly travelled to Sh e f f i e l d on the Avon, S o u t h West and ^ "
South Wales Liverpool Sup po rt er s Club c o a c h . ’ He met Dean
Wi ll iam Mace y and a n u m b er of o t h e r s u p p o r t e r s on the coach.
It was their intention to watch the FA Cup Semi Final
football match at the H il l s b o r o u g h Stadium.

      The coach party a rr i v e d in S h e f f i e l d at about ‘1400
hours-   Michael made hi s way t o war ds the g r o u n d t o g e t h e r
with Alan Warden, Karl Th om a s and Dean Macey.              W ith the
exce ption of Michael the others s t o p p e d at          a shop and
Michael co ntinued to the ground alone.

     Paul Kelly, a Liverp oo l supporter, e n t e r e d the
Hillsborough football gro un d thr ou gh Gate C.      He s t o o d in
the concourse wai ti ng to meet frie nd s a nd whilst s t a n d in g
there saw Michael, who m he knew, and he saw him e n t e r the
ground through a turnstile-    The two men sp o ke b r i e f l y and
Michael stated he was going to the terracing.

      At about 1535 ho u rs Police C o ns t a b l e Wilmott          made his
way on to the Spion Kop end of the ground.                 There he saw a
man whom he now knows to be Michael JLying on the pi tc h on
his back.   Michael ap p e a re d to be unc on sc io us .      T o g e t h er
with Police Constable Lal ly the O f f i c e r c h e c k e d for vital
signs of life but coul d not find any.           Michael was p l a ce d on
to a temporary st retc h e r and c a r r i e d to the g y m n a s i u m w he r e
a temporary mortuary had been set up.            Po li c e C o n s t a b l e
Wilmott remained with Michael.

     At about 1559 hours, Dr. And re w By rn e e x a m i n e d Michael
in the temporary mort u a r y and c e r t i f i e d life extinct.
      At -about 0530 h o u r s on Sunday, 16th April, Pol ic e
 Constable Wilmott e s c o r t e d M i c h a e l ' s b o d y here to the M ed i co
 Legal Centre where he c o n f i r m e d the i d e n t i f i c a t i o n by
 reference to De tec t i v e C o n s t a b l e Weigold.       At th is time
 Michael had not bean identi fi ed by name.

     At about 2110 h o ur s on Sunday, 16th April, S t e p h e n Paul
Kelly attend ed at the Me di co Legal C e n t re wh er e he
identified the body of his b r o th e r to D e t e c t i v e Inspec to r
Timms.
                                                                               . .;V . :   ■.

     On Monday, 17th April 1989, f o ll o w i n g i dent i fi cat ion :by
DC Weigold, Dr. John Cl ar k c a rri ed out an a ut o p s y and
submitted a report g iv i ng cause of death.
                                                                                   .■r.v-a, ...
     No match ticket was found in M i c h a e l ’s personal e t t e c t s
but Paul Kelly saw him enter via a t ur nstile.             Further, sir,':"*
I would add that M i c h a e l ' s jacket has n e v e r b een £ound
despite exha us tiv e e n q u i r i e s to trace it and, of course, it
is possible that the match ticket c o ul d have been c on t a i n e d
in that jacket.

As we have al ready s a i d on many o c c a s i o n s in c i r c u m s ta n c e s
like this the p re se n c e or abse nc e of the ticket itself
doesn't prove - w e l l , it may help in c e r t a i n c a se s but you
can't draw too many c o n c l u s i o n s from it, p a r t i c u l a r l y in a
case like this.    Now, Paul Kelly w h o m we are t al k i n g about,
that is no relation, is it? - A. None wh at soever, sir.

It is just co in ci de n c e he h a p pe ns to have the s ame name ? -
A complete coinciden c e, sir, yes.

Paul had an unf or tu n a t e e n co u n t e r with a horse, is that
right? - A. Ce rt ai n l y he had an injury to his right foot and
toe which he a t t r ib u t e s to the a c ti on s of a horse.

From our point of v i e w we are not too c o n c e r n e d with how he
got the injury but it meant he w an t ed to get into the g ro u n d
rather more qui ckly and r at h er more c o m f o r t a b l y than going
through the t u r ns ti l e ? - A. That is so, sir, yes.

That is page 15, isn't it?   Paul K el l y isn't here, is he? -
He refers to it first on page 13 and d e s c r i b e s the same
injury on page 15 w ith the horse.

In effect, what he s a y s is that he wa s t old the gate was
going to be opened which we take it to be the c o n c e r ti n a
gate, or one of the big gates, and he w ou ld be able to get
in? - A. He does r e f e r s p e c i f i c a 11y , sir, to Gate C.

Yes, that is right, he does. - A. It was c e r t a i n l y brought
to his at tention he may be a d mit te d t hr o ug h that gate.



                                      6
                                                            P. I.   MATTHEW    ROBERT SAUERS



     Q . I chink he s a y s , "I wa lk ed in che gate",                d oe s n' t   he,     on p age
         15? - A. Yes, sir, he does.

     Q. He says, “ I wal ke d in che gate an d I w a l k e d b e h i n d the
        turnstiles and I s a w Michael D a v i d K e l l y c o m e t h r o u g h che
        curnscile? - A. He does, sir, yes.

 ,   Q. You have not got ic in fronc of you but we have.              Up co now
B|      we have onl y r e f e r r e d to chree gace o pen in gs , che ear li es c
        being che 144:3 opening?' - A. Yes.

     Q.    You can remember        t h a t , c a n 11 you? - A. Yes.

     Q.    Would 1 be righc     in chin ki ng thac c he se g a c e s w e re o p e n e d on
          earlier occ a si on s as well for shore p e r i o d s of t im e ? - A.
          That is true, sir, yes.

     Q. We don't know whic h ope ni ng Paul r e f e r s to,                do w e ? - A.        We
        have no precise information.

     Q. He gives no time? -= A. He gives no time that                       we can
        attribute to the o p e n i n g of the gate.

 I                THE CORONER:   Can you deal             with the o p e n i n g s of the
          gate,    Inspector Layton, or not?
                                                                                                        5-
                  INSPECTOR LAYTON:            Only in general        terms.
                                                                                                        I
                  THE CORONER:          Yes,   Mr. Fraser.                                              &
                                                                                                        I
                  MR. FRASER:         Would you give me a m o me n t          p l e a s e?              I

                  THE CORONER:        Yes.

                             Cr os s - E x a m i n e d bv MR.   FRASER:

     Q.   .Just to deal very q u i c k l y with the q u e s t i o n of the fact .that
          there wasn't a ticket with Michael, y ou s a y he w as seen
          going through the turnstile which is s u g g e s t i v e of the fact
          he almost c e r t ai nl y h ad a ticket.     C o r r e c t me if I am wrong,
          but I believe it is the practice of t hi s p a r t i c u l a r c o a c h
          operator, you may not know, not to- a l l o w a n y b o d y on the
          coach who hasn't got a ticket of the game.                  T he m o t i v e s
          behind that are fa i r l y obvious.      Is that s o m e t h i n g wh i c h has
          come up in your in ve st ig at io ns ? - A- It is c e r t a i n l y w i t h i n
          my knowledge that the coach o p e r a t o r s who o p e r a t e on b e h a lf
          of the Liverpool S up p or te r s Foot ba ll C l u b are q u i t e s t r i c t l y
          administered and t i ck e ts are u s u a l l y c h e c k e d on b o a r d i n g the
          coach.   People aren't usua ll y a l l o w e d to travel on a
          Liverpool Supporte rs' spons or ed coach, if I m ay use that
          term, without a ticket.

                MR.   FRASER:       I am grateful         for that
                                                      P.I.    MATTHEW      RO BERT SABERS



         THE CORONER:           Can I just e x p l a i n t hi s to yo u because
    it is o b v i ou sl y a m a t t e r which c o n c e r n s y o u ?   T h e s e O f f i c er s
    can only say what is in the st at e me n ts .               T h e y can guess like
    all of us can but it would be u n f a i r to ex pe c t an O f f i c e r to
    hazard a guess on Oath.             So he ca n o n l y s ay what is in the
    statement ana if t he r e is no bo dy t h e r e w h o saw h i m hold a
    ticket and can say, "I saw him h o l d a t i c k e t " and if w e ’h av e
    not found it, he can't say s o m e bo d y s aw it or that we found
    it because both of those things w ou l d be g u e s s e s but that
    doesn't me an to sa y you need to be too concern ed .                        I am not
    particu lar ly co nce r n e d about t hi s point, not with rega rd to
    Michael.     All right.

         THE    WITNESS: It might be helpful,               sir, if I make one
    comment.   The re are sta te me nt s in the file wh ic h I               have s e e n
    from three su pp ort e r s who t r av e l l e d on the same coach and
    each suppo rt er re f e r s sp ec if i ca ll y to b e i n g in p o s s e s s i o n of
    their own ticket.       It is an a s s u m p t i o n that the ScTme a p pl i es
    in Michael Kel ly's case but that, t a k e n t o g e t h e r with the
    evidence of Paul K e ll y through the t ur ns t il es , leaves us no
    reason to sup pos e he didn't h ave a ticket.

                          Cro s s - Ex a mi n ed by MR.      LIMB:

Q. Paul Kelly states he went through G at e C but he is unc le ar
   as to time.   Does he give any e v i d e n c e as to w h e t h e r he was
   part of a cro wd or a party of p e o p l e g o i n g t hr o u g h Gate C or
   he found h ims elf on    his own in the e nd ?

           THE      CORONER: I think you will             f in d it on p age       15.

           THE    WITNESS: Yes.          Wou ld    it a s s i st you,     sir,     if I set
    this   in co nt ex t?

Q. Yes, go ahead. - A- Briefly, Paul K e l l y ha s m ad e two
   s tatements and re f e r s to this incident in both, sir.               He
   refers to ha vin g ac q ui re d an injury to hi s foot in the
   vicinity of the en cl o su re b et wee n the o u t s i d e g a t e s on
   Leppings Lane and the turnstile e n t r a n ce s .       He r ef e rs to
   speaking to a Poli c e m a n and b ei ng led to b e l i e v e the gates
   may be opened at s om e time in the future.            He r e fe r s to a
   witness whom he was standing with who s p o k e to the Of fi c er
   and said words to the effect that the g ate is opened, "Can
   you get this pe rs o n in because he has inju re d his foot'?"                 He
   does not re fer spec if i ca l ly to how m a n y o t h e r pe op l e e n t e r e d
   through the gate at the time he e n t e r e d t hr o ug h Gate C.

           MR.   LIMB:      Th an k you.

        THE CORONER:      You will see in a m om e nt why we are
   stressing this bec a u s e it comes up in t he visual evidence-
   We can come back to it if n e c e s s a r y •
                                                              D.I.   MICHAEL LAYTON



           HR. CATCHPOLE:        Sir, I o n l y rise as a m a t te r of
     c larification.      I d o n ’t think we h a v e got the wr o ng
     impression brat     it w ou ld be right to ■sa y 1 thi nk that: the
     only two op en in gs of the gate, in w h i c h a su bs t an t ia l n um b er
     of people went through, were those y o u h a v e re f er re d to
     previously.    If there were any e a r l i e r o p e n i n g s for a very
     short pe ri od of time, if there is a ny e v i d e n c e of people
     going through,      itis o n l y one or m a y be two people.

             THE CORONER:        Yes, that is a v e r y g o o d point.        We
     haven't m e n t io ne d any of the e a r l i e r part b ec a u s e what was
     happening was that the gate, I wa s g o i n g to say, was
     c o nt in uo usl y being opened.    That is not true but it was
     being o p e n e d intermittently, u s u a l l y to thr ow p e o p l e out and
     not to allow them in.          For example, one is t im ed at 1438, an
     opening, and there is another one t i me d at 1439 where, in
     fact, s o m e b o d y was actually taken in on that one, one boy,
     on the picture.         There were o t h e r o p e n i n g s but t he y haven't
     been te rr ib ly relevant until this p a r t i c u l a r Inquest and you
     will see in a minute why it is relev an t.                  Shall we leave it
     at this st ag e with the gates and we c a n c ome back to it in a
     minute wh en we have heard I ns pe c to r L a y t o n ?        Any more
     quest ions?

           MR.   LIMB:      No thank you,        sir-

Q.      THE CORONER:     In f a c t , it is o nly f ai r to say that
   Paul Kelly does ment io n a time, I ha ve just noticed, but the
   first time he mentio n s is that he s a y s it is af ter th re e
   o'clock and then he gives a s u p p l e m e n t a l s ta te m en t w he n he
   says that can't pos s ib ly right or w o r d s to that effect- -
A- That is true, sir, yes-

Q. His ti mings c a n ’t be relied on? - A. His t i m i n g s c a n ’t be
   relied on.   I am sa ti s fi ed the w i t n e s s is d o i n g his best to
   recollect but certa in l y his i nf o r m a t i o n a b o u t t i m i ng can't
   be relied on, sir.

Q- There is an interes ti ng sentence here.        T u r n to page 1o
   because this may actua ll y help.   The last paragraph, Paul
   Kelly says, "Once I was inside t he g r o u n d I saw the gate
   open again.    This was about five m i n u t e s a f t e r I e n t er ed the
   ground.  This was the last time th e gate o p e n e d and
   everybody came in and went down th e t u n n e l . I now know the
   gate was op e ne d at this time about 1450." - A- Yes.

Q. As I say, I wouldn't be too reli an t on his t i mi n gs but that
   is what he sa ys? - A. He does s a y that, sir, yes.

                 DE T ECT IVE   INSPECTOR M I C H A E L L A Y T O N - Ca ll e d

                                  Bv THE C O RO N ER

Q. Mr.   Layton.     - A. Sir,     Michael Layton,        Detective      Inspector,


                                            9



                                                                                          r-.
                                                                                      ■• » v
                                                             D .I . M I C H A E L L A Y T O N



      West Mid la nd s Police-     Sir, an e x a m i n a t i o n ha s b ee n made of
      video film and ph ot o g r a p h i c e v i d e n c e a n d Michael has been
      identified alive in E n c l o s u r e No. 3.           S t e p h e n Kelly,
      Michael's brother, as you have h e a r d is in Court, has v i ew e d
      visual evidence and i de nt if ie d h i s b r o t h e r alive in
      Enclosure No- 3 on a nu mb er of p ho to gr ap h s.

           Photograph ref e r e n c e d D B I 6 / 3 0 is ti m ed ac 1445 and
      that, sir, is in En c l o s u r e No. 3.        I wonder, sir, at that
      point whe ther you w ish me to e l a b o r a t e s l i g h t l y in r e l a t i o n
      to Paul Kel ly's evidence.

Q.    Yes, please. - A. As 1 have said, that p h o t o g r a p h is ti me d
      at 1445.       Paul Kelly is seen in a E 3C v i d e o tape o u t si d e the
      gr ound which was tak en b e tw e en 1437 a n d 1450.          As you h av e
      already heard, he cannot be s p e c i f i c an d his d e s c r i p t i o n is
      he is e nte ri ng via G at e C and f r o m my k n o w l e d g e of the g a t e s
      d o e s n ‘t accord with the two o p e n i n g s at 2.43 and 2?52.        So
      we can be sure he w a s - o u t s i d e the grouno. b e tw e en those two
      times but we can't be sure at what time he a c t u a ll y entered.

Q.   This is7* - A- Paul Kelly, sir.           Sir, on a p h o t o g ra ph
     re ferenced PR2/21 w h ic h is t i m e d at 1508 that shows Michael
     in Enclosure Ho. 3 and whilst the detail ag ai n is not great
     it appears to show h i m c e r t a i n l y alive at that time but I
     can't say at what stage of the p r o c e s s m e a i c a i i y n« is at.
     I think i~ is fair to say at that point as well chat
     Michael's sister has also v i e w e d that visual ev i de n ce and -
     so, in fact, both b r oth er and s i s t e r a gr ee that the
     photogr ap hs show Michael.

Q. He looked a bit dis t r e s s e d yo u think          in that?      - A. That        is
   my impression.

Q.   You can't say w het h e r he is c o n s c i o u s or un co nscious, a li ve
     or dead, at that p a r t i c u l a r p o i n t ? - A. It is difficult.    I
     would say he is prob a b l y still .alive, sir, but c e r t a i nl y in
     distres.?.  In respect of tne p n o t o g r a p n at 1445 he is
     certainly alive and there are no p r o b l e m s at ti.«t stage.
     The' later photograph does s ho w hi'iiT.

Q. That is the one, yes. - A. Yes.          PC W il m ot t has v i e we d
   visual evidence and he was u na b l e to i den ti fy h i m se l f
   dealing with Michael but the O f f i c e r has s i g ne d a plan of
   the pitch indicating the a p p r o x i m a t e l oc a ti on at which he
   first came into conta ct with Michael at the .Spion K op e nd of
   the ground.  That plan, sir, is r e f e r e n c e d C R U 1 .

           PC Maughan atte m p t e d to r e s u s c i t a t e a mar ar the,
     Lep pings Cane ena of the p itc h but wit hou t success.              He
     assisteu spec tat or s to c ar ry the man t“o the S pi o n Ko p end of
     the ground where he s ta t es that he left h i m with a St. Jo hn s
     Ambulance Officer who has not been identified.                  The O ff i c e r
     has viewed visual evi d e n c e and feels Mr. Ke l ly may be the
                                                     D. I . M I C H A E L   LAYTON



 man lie assisted.  Sir, if I can just s a y this, in fact, I
 saw PC Maughan.   At the time of m a k i n g hi s s t at e me nt to the
 best of his belief he b eli ev ed that it w as Mic ha el but I
 r.hink it is fair to sa y that M i c h a e l ’s s i s t e r h as s i nc e met
 PC Maughan and fo ll o w i n g chat m e e t i n g I t hi n k t he y are both
 satisfied that it was a ct u al l y Micha el that h e a t t e m p t e d to
 3.ss i s c -
But in the stateme nt he    gave w h e n e v e r it was he s a i d it
might have been? - A. To the best of h is k n ow l ed ge , b e a ri n g
in mind the time an d the description.           Sir, ca n I r e f e r you
to a plan which has b ee n given the r e f e r e n c e n u m b e r N W J L 9 3?

C185. - A- And perhaps, sir, PC H a u g h a n ' s plan next, J R K 1 ,
which I think is a little bit f u r t h e r b ac k in the file.

Cl Bo.    - A. Arid do you want PC W i l m o t t ' s plan,      sir?
                                                                      m


Yes,     I think we will -have that one as w e l l ? - A. CRW1.

 C1S7. - A- (moved to p l a n ) If we ca n deal w i t h the first
 plan, MWJL93, in respect of the e a r l i e r p h o t o g r a p h at 1445,
 Michael is shown in t hi s p os i ti on here in E n c l o s u r e No. 3.
 In respect of the later p h ot o g r a p h s a g a i n it is s h o wn in
 Enclosure No. 3 at t h is     point here.        Sir,  in r es pec t of the
 plan by PC flaughan, JRM1 , on the p it c h plan, th e first
 position that is i nd ic at ed is here ( ind icat- in g ) on th e pi tc h
j3uS the LeoDings Ls n e end and the s e c o n d p o s i t i o n ne r e i er s
 to is at the Spion Kbp end h er e ( indicat- i n e ) and t hen in
 respect of PC Wilmott on the plan, C R W 1, he a c t u a l l y
 indicates a positi o n here (indi cat i n g ) .

That again is a recollection, is it n o t ? - A- Yes,                     so t h er e
is a slight varia t i o n b et wee n his r e c o l le c ti on .

         THE CORONER:      Mr.   Fraser.

         MR- FRASER:      No questions,      sir.

         MR.   LIMB:    No questions,      sir.

       MR. CATCHPOLE:        No quest ions j, sir-

     MR. FRASER:     Again, sir, b e f o r e you c o n c l u d e the
evidence in this case, M i c h a e l ’s mother, who as it were is
the head of the family, is una bl e to be wi th us to day               She
is in Liverpool but through her son a n d d a u g h t e r they
specifically want me to thank t hr ou g h you e v e r y b o d y who
helped Michael on the day obviously.         Everybody's efforts
are very much appr e c i a t e d and they want to o f f e r their
thanks to the Offi c e r s of the West M i d l a n d s P o l i c e as well-

     THE CORONER:   Thank you very m uc h indeed, Hr. Fraser-
Would you make sure that you pass my t h a n k s o n to y our mum-
                                                     h er   say that a n a it is much
                               very kind
               app re cia te d by ~                 on «M t« b.h.1* a n d I « ~ ~ by a i i ^ e
               people•
                                                                                 w h y we w e r e t a l k i n g
                                 I just finish. t h e r e a s o n
                              Before
                                         .    . . ; A u -rUhi <
                                                        »     a=
                                                               » £graa t
                                                                       r Pe> s
                                                                             « is
                                                                               1     that this young m a ^
               a b o u t the o t h e r tirnes             t ]h *                   Just r e m ind me ofjfetift.
               has been ide nti fi ed visually at
          6    posi t i o n •
                              INSPECTOR. LAYTON:                  In this p o s i t i o n h e r e    (j_ndicatin£>^||



               s    i r   '   THe c o h o n e h :       i.    »                     »                        o n f i r ^ l
               as y o u c a n see. T h e r e are                                  e*pl.%,a u j               is, b u t he
               tha t Hr. Kelly m a y ^ - m a d e ^ a                                             ^       ^       and he       1
               does say quite '-lea ^ y _ a__ rhroueh- So a l t h ou g h w e can t
               gives a reason why. he                     way to make it make            _
               say with absolute C&? Z * 1 'J     z h ave com e in thr ou gh one ot
               sense is to assume t a         Limb> is that r e as o na bl y cl ea r
               the earlier op en ing - 0 ’ r e a iise we a r e d r a w i n g a iew^
               and satisfactory to you^         ^     ^    o<.h e r „ ay of d o i n s .t
               conclusions her«j but
          D                   MR * LIMB:
                                                    Mos t    definitely,         sir,     yes.
                                                                                                        is that w e
                              the CORONES:              I .uppo..                         and    visual e v i d e n c e * ;

                   ^ n ^ a ^ s e n s e ^ t h a t ~ is " f i x e d     point,     isn 't    it?

                               I a m v e r y s o r r y that we                             so m u c h
                   about t i m e s a n d so on bu             1            Y                    know, who
                   about.          W e a r e h e r e to try      d e n t i f i e d a n d w h e r e t h e y died,
                   p e o p l e are, w h e r e t h e y                                  & d i s c r e p a n c y we
                   a n d o b v i o u s l y it we S e                   v»,,r , -r d o e s set a bit
                   n e e d to try a n d * h i n k a k ° “ \ J , ink u n n e c e s s a r y 'bearing i n m i n              d
                   c o n f u s i n g a n d a l a o yo         brother          y o u r m u m ' s son, an d ot
                   we are t a l k i n g a b o u t y o u r b r o t h e r , yo
                   c o u r s e J o a n n e ' s dad.
                                                                        l ea st for a mome nt , in e a c h
                              I c r y to b e c o n j c i o ^ a ^ l * B ^ k . n n G t a bout s o m e
                    Inq ue st o f t h e ta                       . v e r y v e r y s p e c i a l to the
                   numb e r , a n y b o d y , bu t s ome          *       *       a r e a n d i w o u l d like
                    f a m i l y wh o y o u r e p r e ^ e o c ain          Y ^ c o n s c i o u s of t h e los s
                    y o u to k n o w so fa r as I a m «*                  Michael-          Thank you          for
                    J h i c h y o u s u f f e r e d w h e n yo u lost W i c h a e i
                    being here            t h i s mor ni ng -
                                                                                           and h a v e       lunch a n d we
                                Ladies      and gentlemen,                we now n . e     and
                    resume           at t w o   o'clo c k .
                                                                                  Mich a e l David Kelly
                              (The    I nq ue st    into t ^ ^ d e a 11")            fixed)
                                                                 date


           H


„ Harpham Ud
                                                                  0   *    5
                                                                    69
                                                             S. HARRATT


Q. It was definitely the radial fence, was it? - A. Yes.

Q. Hasit got spikes    or    not? - A .   I don't know.

        THE CORONER:  I do not think it has got spikes in
   the conventional sense.

        MR. CATCHPOLE:   It is the sort of fence which has
   a number of metal railings going up which is spiked at
   the top and a metal bar runs about two or three inches
   across from the/ top and so there are straights rails
   going up to the top but they are not the angled ones
   that we see in the picture.
       MRS. McBRIEN: I am very sorry about that but I
  had to come in on this.

       THE CORONER: I was puzzled as well which is why I
  got him to show us which fence it was. We wanted to be
  sure we were talking about the right one.

        MRS. McBRIEN:  I just thought I would be helpful.
   I did not want to interfere in any way at all.

        THE CORONET: No, Mrs. McBrien, it was a helpful
   intervention I am quite sure.

      MR. GRIFFITHS:        I think C.521 might help, sir.

        THE CORONER: Just stick it up on the screen and
   let us have a look. This is dealing with the railings.

Q. Just turn round, Officer. That is the top end of one
   of those radial fences. Is that what you mean? - A.
   Yes, that is what I am referring to, sir.

        THE CORONER:     There is nothing else, Mr. King?

       MR. KING:      No, sir.

        THE CORONER: I wish we could do better but we
   cannot. Thank you.

                   JOHN RAYMOND MAUGHAN Sworn

                            Bv THE CORONER

Q. You are John Raymond Maughan I think? - A. Yes, that is
   correct.

Q. You are a PC and what is your number? - A. 2105.
                                                                  70
                                                        J. R. MAUGHAN

Q. Mr. Maughan, I have asked you to come because I want
   you to deal with a specific matter? - A. Yes, sir.

Q. I think you had some dealings with a gentleman on the
   pitch, is that right? - A. That is correct, sir.

Q. Am I right in thinking you eventually identified this
   gentleman as being Michael David Kelly? - A. That is
   correct, sir.

Q. That was from photographs? - A. Yes, sir, that was from
   photographs.

Q. How confident are you about your identification? - A. I
   am pretty sure it was the same man.

Q. You are pretty sure about that? - A. Yes,   sir.

Q. Is it right that your duty was off the field initially.
   You had to go somewhere else? - A. That is correct.

Q. You got on to the field just after three, about four
   minutes past three, is that right? - A. Yes', OftS"
   players Wei.e i>cxxx on the pitch.

Q.    Pardon? - A. The football players werestill     on the
     pitch when I came on.

Q. We are not too concerned about what you thought was
   going on but eventually you came upon a man on the
   pitch, is that right? - A. That is correct.

Q. He did not appear to you to be breathing at that stage?
   - A. That is right.

Q. He also looked blue, is that correct? - A. That is
   right.

Q. I think you then positioned him and started
   resuscitation, is that right? - A. That is correct,
   sir.

Q. In fact, you thought you were successful, is that
   right? - A. I did think I was successful.

Q. What actually happened? - A. When I approached the man
   he was laid on his side by the side of the goalposts.

Q. Just speak up and lean forward. - A. He was laid on his
   side by the goalposts on the grass part of the area
   behind the bye line and he did not appear to be
   breathing and with the help of some civilians we turned
   the man over, worked on him for a few minutes. He
                                                            71
                                                  J. R. MAUGHAN

  appeared to start to breathe again and then we got a
  hoarding and carried him to the ambulance area at the
  other end of the pitch.

Q. Before you tell me about that you came on to the pitch
   about three or four minutes past three. How long was
   the time interval before you got to this chap? Have
   you any idea? - A. Probably three or four minutes.




                                    /Q. Not very long....
                                           J. R. MAUGHAN


It was not very long, in other words? - A. No.

Then you worked on him with the help of some
supporters? - A. That is correct.

Did he, as far as you remember, actually breathe
spontaneously on his own, or did you have to continue
breathing for him? - A. We continued breathing for him
for a whiijg_*_ then he appeared' to slip unconscious but
he was' breathing, this was just before we took him away
to the other end of the pitch.

So then you picked him up on a stretcher or hoarding? -
A. On a hoarding.

And carried him across the field? - A. That is correct.

Towards the gymnasium, is that right? - A. That is
right, where the Ambulance Service, or there were some
Ambulancemen there who had sort of set an ambulance
station up, just on the pitch itself, on the corner.

What did you do with him when you got to that position?
- A. We handed him to the ambulancemen and he was left
in their care, and we came back down the pitch for a
second time.

That was the last you saw of him? - A. That is correct,
sir.

Of course, you can’t help me as to what happened to him
subsequent to that? - A. I can’t sir, no.

             Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Officer, I on behalf of the family of Michael Kelly am
seeking to investigate as much detail as the family can
obtain about the last moments of his life, and you will
bear with me on that? - A. Yes.

I want to see if I can pinpoint the time slightly more
as to when you went to Michael at a time when he was
not at first breathing, then you worked on him and he
appeared to be breathing. You say the players were
still on the pitch when you got onto the field? - A.
That is correct, sir.

Were they actually playing, do you remember, or just
standing around? - A. Nottingham Forest was attacking
the Liverpool end.

Can I show you a photograph - I don’t want to deal with
anything as regards wordings ....
t
                                                                  73
f      A
                                                       J. R. MAOGHAN


                MR. KING:   Sir, so you know, it is from the
           Sunday Mirror newspaper of April 23rd, 1989.  It shows
           a photograph, and I am going to try and ask the Officer
1          if it was the sort of area where he found Michael
           Kelly.  I am going to point out someone on the ground
       B   who it is believed by Mrs. Kelly ....
I               THE CORONER:      To be him.

                MR. KING:      Yes.
I
           Officer, do you see that newspaper, and it shows a
           photograph which we are led to believe is of the scene
           on 15th April/ 1989? (Passes newspaper to Witness) - A.
           That is correct, sir.

I •        It shows the Leppings Lane goal and it shows, I think,
           a well known goalkeeper, Bruce Grobbelaar, clearly in
           the picture, doesn't it? - A. That is correct.

           He is clearly still on the pitch there. Do you see
           somebody on his back in white? - A. That is correct,
           sir.
           Is that the sort of position you found Michael Kelly
           in? - A. Looking at the photograph I would say the
           position was probably two or three more to the right of
           the gentleman lying on the ground.

           As you look at the picture? - A. Yes.

           Does the gentleman on the ground you see, I know it is
           very difficult, does it jog any memories, such as you
           can see on that photograph, as to whether it looks very
           similar to the person you were dealing with? - A. The
           chap who I found and approached on the ground had a
           blue jacket with him. If I could be certain he had the
           jacket with him I could say that was the man.

           When you say he had the jacket with him, do you mean he
           was wearing it or it was simply on the ground? - A. It
           was beside him on the ground.
           So he was not wearing a jacket.   I think the photograph
           shows that gentleman has a white shirt on of some sort,
           doesn't he? Does that tie in with your recollection? -
           A. I would not possibly say that.

           Certainly, give or take a few feet, the sort of
           position and the sort of timing looks about right? - A.
           It is about right, sir.
                MR. KING:      I don't know whether you want to see
I          that, sir?


(     TT
                                           J. R. MAUGHAN


     THE CORONER:   Yes, could I just glance at it? If
it is shown to Sergeant Killoch the chances are we will
be able to find this photograph and then if need be we
can exhibit it.

     MR. KING:   That is helpful.   I am obliged, sir.

I know it is difficult, but you say you worked on the
man Michael Kelly for a few minutes, I think you put
it, didn't you? - A. That is correct.
You are clearly confident in your recollection that you
appeared to have won through, if I can put it that way?
- A. Yes, sir,- I was.
That was an expression which you used when you were
describing it - I think you have spoken to Mrs. Kelly
about it, haven't you? - A. Yes.

And you used the expression, ''We have won that one'', or
something like that? - A. That is right, I did.

So it does sound as if you were quite confident in your
own mind when you took the man over to where you put
him into the care of the St. John's Ambulance, that he
at that stage was still breathing? - A. I was quite
confident he was, sir.                     ?

How did you actually deliver him to the St. John's
Ambulance? Did you lay him on the ground, did you
actually hand him to somebody or what? - A. No, we
carried him on a hoarding across the pitch to, as I
have described, as you come out of the gymnasium onto
the pitch itself, the first aid people had set a sort
of reception area up in the corner, and we put the
hoarding down on the floor and what they were doing,
they were moving them off the hoardings so that we
could have them to carry back to the other end of the
Ground.
Did you actually receive back the hoarding on which you
had carried Michael? - A. Not the same one.

Did you actually yourself see him being taken off the
hoarding? - A. No.
So the last you saw of him was when he was laid down on
the ground in the way you have described? - A. Yes.

It looks then, it is fairly obvious from your evidence
but I will put it to you and ask you so the family can
hear me, there is from the summary of evidence which
they have been provided with, evidence that at 15.35
(sir, this is paragraph 4 of the summary), at 15.35 an
                                             J. R. MAUGHAN


Officer, Police Constable Wilmot, made his way into the
Spion Kop end of the Ground, and he says apparently
that at 3.35 he saw a man who he believes to be Michael
David Kelly lying on the pitch on his back, who
appeared unconscious, and IT is said that with another
Officer, that is Police Constable Lalley, the original
Officer, Wilmot, checked for vital signs of life but
could not find any, and Mr. Kelly was placed onto a
temporary stretcher and taken into the gymnasium, and
at about just before 4 o'clock, 15.59, Dr. Byrne
certified life extinct. You have no knowledge at all,
do you, as to what happened to Mr. Kelly, what
attention he received or otherwise, from the moment you
laid him down,' and you presumably went back to help at
the other end? - A. That is correct, sir.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I always regret mistakes on
sensitive matters.  I have referred throughout to Mrs.
Kelly - it is his sister, and I am sorry.  I hope the
family will forgive me for that:

It was Mr. Kelly's sister you had been speaking to in
the way you have described to me? It is Mrs. Sinclair,
the lady we see there who you were speaking to, wasn't"
it? - A. That is right.

     MR. KING:   I am sure she will forgive me if I
have mis-described her.

     THE CORONER;   Yes, I knew about that and I
overlooked it too, I am sorry.

     MR. KINGs   You have been very helpful, Officer,
because you can obviously see the concern of the
family.

     Sir, subject to the photograph being found I don't
think I can take that any further.

     THE CORONER:   We have not got the photograph
here. It is either in Birmingham or it may be in our
office. What I propose to do is to try and retrieve it
and make an acetate of it in the usual way.

You did not actually identify Mr. Kelly on that
photograph, did you? - A. No.

       THE CORONER;   Do we need it?   Is it going to help
us?    I don't mind doing it.

       MR. KING:   Sir, I think the witness could go this
far:
                                             J. R. MAUGHAN


I think you could say that'it could be Mr. Kelly? - A.
Yes.

There is nothing in it which makes you say that it
definitely isn’t? - A. That is correct.

I think you can say that subject to moving a few feet
to the right in your recollection, it is the sort of
area of the goal where you saw him? - A. That is where
he was found, yes.

Given that we see Bruce Grobbelaar on the pitch it is
the sort of timing you would be expecting from your
evidence? - A.'That would be about right.

     MR. KING:      Sir, it may be helpful for the family.

     THE CORONER:   I am very happy to do it, it just
may take a little while.

     I think that is the sum total of the cases where
we needed to do urgent things, so to speak. We will
pause for a little while and have a cup of coffee.  Did
you want to say anything to me, Mr. King?

     MR. KING:   Sir, there are one or two matters I
would like to mention to you.

     THE CORONER:   Yes. Leave us and you will have a
slightly longer coffee break.

            (In the absence of the Jury)

     MR. KING:   Sir, in relation to the witnesses
Bichard and Goddard, are they in Court now?

     THE CORONER:     They may well be, so if they could
just leave us?

    (Mr. Bichard and Mr. Goddard left the Court)

     MR. KING:   Sir, I have taken the opportunity
during the lunch adjournment to read through as best I
can the evidence they gave, certainly to Lord Justice
Taylor, and certainly two matters, sir: I would invite
you to call them but I would invite you to call them to
give a full witness account of the events in the
Control Room during the relevant period, that is to say
on the day of the match.

     Sir, having read through what they have said in
those accounts they clearly have eye witness evidence
as to the circumstances leading up to the request for
the closure of the gates. Their evidence is not on all
                                          J. R. MAUGHAN


fours with the evidence which we have heard at all from
Mr. Duckenfield as to what was said in the Control
Room, what was believed in the Control Room as to the
gates which were to be opened, the circumstances in
which Gate A came to be opened are dealt with, the
circumstances in which kick-off was or was not to be
delayed are dealt with and the decision to refuse the
request of P.C. Buxton to delay kick-off is dealt with,
the decision   to send serials round   to Gate A or onto
the North Stand is dealt with, and     sir, Mr. Bichard,
and I say it   so you can hear me so   I do not in any way
take anybody   by surprise, actually   gives evidence asto
what Mr. Duckenfield said in his presence as to how it
had come about that the problems had arisen on the
Leppings Lane end, and you know, sir, to what I am
referring in that respect.




   /All those are matters
I


I
                                                                              /3
I■m
1                All those are matters which I nave to say to you,
          sir, on b ehalf of those I reores^nt, I would want to
      B   and would submit I should be entitled to investigate
          if you .ca 11 then.  I would be f a i l i n ’ in rav duty if I
I         acquiesce d in a ruling which you have indicated you
          vo a Id oe minded to ?ive, that if you did call them,
          sir, you would restrict -hem in the way you have
I         described , because they are giving factual evidence on
          matters v hich the Jury have to determine and, indeed,
          deal with quite vital m atters relating to the
I         b ehaviour df Mr. Duckenfield.

                    In those c i r c u m s t a n c e s , sir, I in fact have two
          j p o l i c a t i o n s . One is to invite you to call then, in
1         your discretion, and to invite you, sir, to take this
          stance, that if you do call the.n you should allow
          que st io ni n g on all the matters to which I have
I         referred.

                   oir, if your ruling is that in your discre
                                                           dis   t ion
I         you will ca      :all them but restrict them to only the
          m atters you h ave re fe rr ed to, in my su bm ission that
          wou ld be the worst of both worlds and, in fact, one
          w oul d be giving a false picture to the Jury rather
I         than no picture at all, and a false picture and a
          m i s l ea di n g picture can be worse than no picture.

I                THE CORONER:     Tnat,   of course,    is the last     thing I
          want   to do.

I                   HR. KING:      Of course, sir.       But ny s t r o n .3
          s u b m i s si on to y ou is no tw it hs t an di n g the time problem
          we have, these are witnesses of substance on the vital
          events w hi ch this J ur y are particularly conce rn ed
I f       with, w h i c h are the even ts leading to and then
          i mm e d i a t e l y follo wi ng the decis io n to open the gates
          at the Leppin ^s Lane end, and it is hard to see a
I         r ationale for having i nc lud ed so ma n y other w i tn es se s
          who do not go to such vital events in the overall
          picture and not to call these witnesses.
I               If it be, sir, a m atter of convenience because of
          time, and I am not 3 0 insensitive as not to appreciate
I         that problem, all I can say on b eh al f of those I
          repr es en t is - this is not meant f a ce t io us ly at all,
          sir - 'rather like the argument that kick-off should
          not be d el aye d m e r e l y b ec au se of a reason, if, in
I         fact, they are w it n es s es of substance then they ought
          to be c a ll e d as full witnesses, even if we have to
          recognise, and I am sure I play a role in the blame
I         for this as much as a ny bo dy else, that our time ­
          tabling has gone a wr y in this Inquest.           I say that
          without m e a n i n g any di sr es pe ct to you, sir, at all
I         because I m e a n what I say about my role at all tines.


«     H                            \
I
                                                                              7n

I
I            Payne?
                   t :ie   coromzr   : Did you want   to say something,   Mr.

         B
                     :w. PAYl'JZ:  Sir, a lot of what Hr. King has said,
I            I t ^in tc I would agree vith, that once the witness has
             baa n cal led then he is at large, and it is difficult

I            rea lly t 0 sea any legitimate basis on which
             e::a minat ion can ba restricted, but I thin!c our
             pos ition would be to invite you to adhere to the
             or i ginal a ppr oa ch taat you in tended to follow, namely
I    C
             t 1 3 t on balance, having heard the evidence of the
             pri ncipa 1 occupants of the Control Box, you will
             pro babl v not need to recall the other people.

I                    I a:n onl y going to add this because I d id not
             mention it before the adjournment, but I an slightly
             concerned aboat the sequence of '-.Ti t n e s s e s . Mr. ICin^
I#           has very fairly indicated the lines of cross
             exanin at io n which he would intend to open up with
             these w itnesses and, of course, one cannot p re-jud
I            what they would say or how it would cone out , but one
             cannot help feeling that these could be poin ts which,
             in fairness, ought to have been put, or at 1 east they
             ought to have had the o o o o r t u n i t y to deal wi th it TJhen
I            the other occupants, Messrs. Ducken fie ld and !lur r a y ,
             were giving their evidence.            it would be ve rv
             u nfo rt un at e if the Inquest got into the stag e of
I            leaving natt er s in the air which could perha ps be
             dealt w ith by those other w it ne ss e s who migh t then
             have to be recalled.           This is a gha stl y pros pect which
I            c e rta in ly I think we would wish to avoid, bu t in tne
             i nterests of fairness one can see that if pa rticular
             points were to be made, or e vi dence were to be given,

I            tnen this is the kind of thing which Messrs.
             Du c ks n fi el d and M ur ra y ought to have a chanc e to deal
             with.

I                      TilZ COROiiER: I think that that goes without
             saying, but if matt er s wer e to be raised where Mr.
             Isaacs and Mr. Hanning were to say to me, "Hang on, we
I            want Ilr. D u ck e nf ie l d and Mr. M u rr a y to have an
             o p p o r t u n i t y to answer", I wo uld c er t ai n ly not raise
             a n y o b j e c t i o n if I were to call these witnesses.         I

I            think that point goes without saying, w hatever the
             effect on timing, I am not re ally interested.
             does not m a t t e r to me.
                                                                             It
                                               I want to finish this mon th if

I            I can, but if we do not, we do not, we adjourn it to a
             convenient time.

                  h r . p a y :;::: i think we w o ul d be at one with f i r
I            Xing on this, tha: one r ec o gn is es that time pressures
             do not r e al l y have any input into this d ec ision at
             all, it has to be taken on its merits.           That is why I
I            think our o os it io n wo ul d be that we would invite you


     H
I
I
I
                                                                           30

I
          to adhere to the original a pp roach that you had,
I         namely that having, heard the evide nc e of the principal
      B   paoole, and their evidence having baan thoroughly and
          lengthily gone into by all in te rested parties, it
I         would not be ne ce s sa ry t o vta:« the "natter further.

                TTZ C O R O a E'I: 1!e are .loin-* to have a coffea   b re av.
I         n   a minute.       Yes, ::r. lussell?

                    :n. R'JSSZLL: Sir, I have not risen to say
I         any: bin® in -this particular debate.          I am almost
          axel u -3i v a iy on tha sidelines in resoect o f ‘these
          vitn assas who are to be callad, save for one vary
          n Lno r mat t e r . But perhaps I could cone to your
          a s rsi stanc e to this extent.   '.Ta anpaar here with your
          1 ■»a v a, V3 as!; questions of w it n es se s with your leave,
          They are your witnesses and you call than for the
          P'i r p o ses tnat you saa fit for the purposes of these
          Im j a s t s .


I
      D           You indicated at one sta^e that it was your
          purpose to call the Officer who was rasponsilDle for
          operating the video camera, or tne console of vidao
          ca.-.iaras, to be in a position to e x pl ai n to tha Jury
          tne technical c ap ab ilities of those cameras.      That, it
          sae.ns to me, is a w h ol ly diffe ren t area of evidence
          from tne factual r e co lle ct io n of thosa Officers,
I         either the person oper at ing the c ame ra or the person
          ooarating the radio on that day.         Inasmuch as with
          so.ne of the w it ne sse s we have had today you have said,
          " In 2 3a witnesses are going to deal with a vary limited
I         a m     of ev id en ce and n othing else", and we have
          aiiared to that, I do not see w hy there is a problem
          i:i you dea li ng w it h these witnesses, these two Police
! •       Officers, in that same r es tr ic te d manner.

                C e rta in ly Inspector Jlemmingway, as you will
I         appreciate, could have dealt with all sorts of matters
          relating to the conduct of the a ft e rn oo n in question,
          not least the rescue and the role of my client in it.
          I did not seek to as!< him those q ue st io ns because I
I         u.nlerstood the v er y limited ambit and the very limited
          purposes for wh i ch you w ant ed those witn es se s called.

I              But, sir, if y ou seelc to elicit matters of fact
          and matters of reco ll ec ti on of these witnesses as to
          what they saw on the day, then of co urse I can
1         understand the p os ition that ray learned friend :!r.
          King is in and, no doubt, my lea rne d friend 21r.
          Isaacs, and Hr. Manning as well, as to what evidence

I         they might wish to elicit once you go down that road.
          But it does appear that there i3 a very claar and
          obvious c ut -o ff point in their eviden ce whereby you

I         can limit the ev id en ce of the3s witne ss es to the
I
I


I           technical c apa bilities of the paraphernalia that they
            had at their disposal, that the/ were operating, and
        B   limit it to that.    Once you open up the factual
            account of tne day in question, then you have embarked
I           dovn the road, and certai nl y within the areas tnat you
            have explored so far in these Inquests it would ?e
            very difficult to stop either my learned friend Mr.
I           ■vin;, or my learned friend U r . Isaacs, or Nr. Manning,
            from aslcin^ questions about those subjects as veil.


I                 •til. C A TC HP OL L If
                                        _ it is of
                                          __ __ __ any assistance, it
            does appear that a 11 the legal represen ta tiv es are of
            the same mind, at least in relation to the second limb

I           of Mr. king's aopl ication before you.        I make no
            co.nnent as to whet her you ought to call these
            witnesses or not, it is a matter for                    711'Jt.I
            Jo believe, as my learned friend Hr         Hussalt has said,
I           tnat if you embark on any attempt to elicit factual
            evidence, it would be inappro pr ia te to prevent any of
            iy learned friends from e xpl or in g those mat te rs and
I           putting it into it s proper context.

                   THE CORONER: I accept that point.            If we go into
            the facts, then it is only right that they should be
I           ax^lored, but it is the extent and the meth od of
            e xpl or at io n which I an c on ce r ne d about.     I have no
            objection if, for instance, I were               to a s ’
                                                                    -c the Officers
I           to recount in ex am in a ti o n- in - ch i ef what their
            rec ol lection is with regard to the events, to that
            point being e xa mined hut pu rely factually.              What I am
I           not going to have is what we have done in the past and
            ynich ve d i d at great length wit h Hr. H urra y and Mr.
            Ducken fi el d and which, in fact, I knew we ware doing
            an: I thought in the circumst an ce s            wa3 right, but I an
I•          quite e n t i t l e d to say, "You have asked en ougn
            questions o n this, next s u b j e c t ” , a3 I do qu i te often
            with Mrs. HcBrien, and that is all I am saying, and
            tnat is tha w ay I am going to do            it.   So I am going to
            call Hr. G o d d a r d and     when I have heard him            I will
            probably call Hr. Bichard and we will o b v i o u s l y be
I           sitting t o m o r r o w and if need be we will sit on Honday
            if we have not finished, and that is it.

                 HR. CAT CM PO LE :  Y ou m o ot ed the po ss ib i li ty that
    I       tomorrow m i g h t be put into a full day.

                  THE CORONER:     Yes, we will sit t as a full day.
    I             MR.   CATCHPOLE: That      is ver y helpful,     than'c you.

                 THE C OR ONER: The way I put the order was not an
            accident, t h 3 t was after some considerable thought.        I
            could have got it wrong.      Be that as it may, cert ai nl y
            if at the e nd of the av-id a n c a it would a ope ar that it
is right to aslc 'Ir. Duckan fi el d and Mr. Murray to cone
back to deal with any o ut st an di ng points, I will do
so.

     MR.   PAYI'II: Will you all ow :na to .^o last   if this
haooens?    These are Police Officers.

     TUI CORONER:   Yes.   So wa will, have a quick break.
I am afraid you will have to be back in Court as fast
as you can.

                 (Short Adjournment)
