.OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                           Date and time raised   r~~2-— c                   Number



T itle
                                  t                     60.
(include source and any document number i f relevant)


   Reiver's instructions — urgent action - Yes/No
                                                                                                              Receiver




                                                                                                              Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                          Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                              Indexer
 Indexed as indicated                    t^ c rr
 No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                     SIO
 Examined - further action to be taken




                                                                                                               Indexer
 Further action No(s)

 When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
   HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

             ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



            INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


           CHRISTOPHER JAMES TRAYNOR




                     Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, B M , B S , MRCGP

             (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                       At

            The Medico-Legal Centre,
                 Watery Street,
                   Sheffield.

                       On

            Friday, 27th April, 1990.




            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
      55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                         INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                                               Page


OPENING STATEMENT BY THE CORONER                 1


        PROF. J.C.E. UNDERWOOD Called

            By The   Coroner                     2


        G.J. McCOMBIE Called

            By The   Coroner                     3


        M. LAYTON Called

            By The   Coroner                     7


ADJOURNED                                       10


        G.J. McCOMBIE Recalled

            Further by The Coroner              11


CLOSING REMARKS BY THE CORONER                  13
                        27th April. 1990


                               INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF CHRISTOPHER JAMES TRAYNOR


                           MR. FRASER:   Sir, this afternoon you will hear evidence
                     About two brothers, Christopher and Martin Traynor, who were at
                    Bi:he game together.  We will deal, sir, first with Christopher..
                     Christopher's mum and dad are present in Court.   His wife,
                     Elizabeth, is here, and some other members of the family.    They
                     Jill obviously, sir, wish to be present through both the boys'
                      nquests, with your leave, sir.

                           Sir, the practice that represents the family are members of
                     ihy group, and I appear in the usual guise as a member of the
                    C^teering Committee as their agent.

                           THE CORONER:   Mr. & Mrs. Traynor and Mrs. Traynor and
                     everybody else, I want to explain to you first of all the format
                     :.n which we are going to do this Inquest so that you can
                     understand the sequence, and also so you know what to expect,
                     fhat is, first of all I am going to read to you the opening
                       emarks, or at least the opening which I did on 18th April, which
                    D s when I allowed and gave permission for the body to be buried,
                      las not it, in this case.  Then if there are any amendments that
                     need to be made I will deal with those.   I will tell you what it
                     ;>ays about blood alcohol, and then I am going to ask Prof.
                     Underwood to come and tell us the cause of death.   That is Prof.
                     Underwood over there.   He will deal with the post mortem
                      :indings .
                    E         When that has been finished the West Midlands Police Officer
                        jho I think you probably know personally anyway will come along
                        and tell me something about the circumstances, not only me but
                        also to the Jury.   Then Inspector Layton will deal with visual
                        evidence.   When he has described it and we have sorted out which
                        olans we are going to use and so on, he will come round here and
                         le will show us on these big plans where the various locations
                        are.   Then we will terminate the evidence at that stage.

                              Then immediately after this   we are dealing with the brother
                        of Christopher, but we will rise    for a moment or two and I will
                        =o out and everybody can stretch    their legs and compose
                         :hemselves, and then I will come   back and we will deal with
                        <evin.

                             So is that clear? Have you understood the general format?
                        [t will be a similar sort of procedure for Kevin.

                             This is the resumed Inquest which was opened on 18th April,
                        L989, and on that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin, Acting Coroner's
                        Officer said:


                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                       1
                                                                   THE CORONER


                                 "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                                 identified to PC 2828 Lighton of the South Yorkshire
                                 Police as that of Christopher James Traynor by John
                                 Michael"....

                        We have written "Raynor" but it should of course be "Traynor"):

                                  ".... Traynor, his brother.  He was 26 years of age,
                    B             having been born on 18th January, 196^. at Birkenhead
                                  He was a married man, and he lived at
                                                  Birkenhead. He was a joiner by
                                  occupation. ~He died at Hillsborough football ground
                                  following an incident there on Saturday, 15th April,
                                 •1989.  PC 2828 Lighton caused the body to be removed to
                                  the Medico-Legal Centre and there he identified it to
                                  Detective Constable Simon Weigold, who subsequently
                                  identified the same body to Prof. Underwood.  It is the
                                  family wish that the body should be buried".

                        Then the Inquest was adjourned at this time.

                             I wrote to Mrs. Traynor, you I think, is not it, and you
                        signed a form for me on 27th April.  I don't know if you can
                        remember.  I asked you to check the details, and by and large
                    D   they were right, but I think I said he was aged 26 or 27 when I
                        read this? It should have been 26, anyway.   Apart from the
                        postal code everything was correct as I have said, was not it?

                             Blood alcohols were checked by Dr. Forrest, and he gave the
                        results on the first day of the Inquest, and the level in the
                        case of Christopher was 54mg/100ml.
                    E        Prof. Underwood, would you be kind enough to come forward?

                                PROF. JAMES CRESSEY ELPHINSTONE UNDERWOOD Called

                                                 Bv THE CORONER:

                        Q. Prof. Underwood, would you be kindly give us your name and
                           Christian names as well? - A. I am James Cressey Elphinstone
                           Underwood, Professor of Pathology at the University of
                           Sheffield, Honorary Consultant Histopathologist to the
                           Sheffield Health Authority, Doctor of Medicine and Fellow of
                           the Royal College of Pathologists.

                        Q. And you are going to   tell me about a young man called
                           Christopher James Traynor who you knew by that name, and also
                           by reference No. 60.    Is that right? - A. That is correct,
                           sir.

                        Q. And you are quite satisfied that the post mortem relates to
                           this young man? - A. I am satisfied with the identification,
                           sir.

                        Q. Perhaps you would be kind enough to take me through the
                    H      relevant findings, please? - A. As a result of my examination
                           I concludsed that the cause of death was traumatic asphyxia.

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                      2
                                             PROF. J.C.E. UNDERWOOD


   Shall I briefly describe the findings?

0. Yes, please. - A. Externally the body was deeply congested
   with blood, particularly over the upper part of the body.
   There were small haemorrhages in the skin, over the lips and
   face.  In addition there was bruising and abrasion of the skin
   on the face and on both legs.  Internally the membrances
   covering the organs showed similar small haemorrhages or
   bleeding points, these being characteristic features of
   traumatic asphyxia.

O. And no natural disease of any significance at all? You did
   not find any natural disease? - A. So far as I could tell
   there was no evidence of any naturally occuring disease
   process.

0. Certainly none which could have played a part? - A. Indeed,
   sir, no.

Q. Prof. Underwood, I and the Jury have heard on many occasions
   the aeffects of traumatic asphyxia and the loss of
   consciousness, but the family have not.  So could you give us
   your opinion as to the length of time the person might be
   conscious if he was in this sort  of situation? - A. Yes, sir.
   In this situation the pressure on the chest causes the flow of
   blood from the body into the heart to be resisted as a result
   of the pressure.  The circulation of the blood slows, and
   quite rapidly the brain becomes deprived of oxygen.   As a
   result of that the individual quite rapidly loses
   consciousness and death follows shortly after.

0. Yes, shortly after.  We have been told that the loss of
   consciousness might be between 10 and 15 seconds.  Would you
   think that would be a correct sort of figure? - A. That is not
   unreasonable, sir.

O. We have also been told by some of your colleagues, and
   disagree if you wish, that a lot of the signs, the petechial
   haemorrhages and so on in fact develop after the loss of
   consciousness? - A. Yes, sir.

•3. You would agree with that? - A. Yes, sir.

          MR. FRASER:   The family have no questions, thank you,
   sir.

        THE CORONER:   Prof. Underwood, thank you very much.
   Prof. Underwood, who is the pathologist in the case of Kevin?
   Is it you? - A. Yes, sir.

                PET. SERGEANT GRAHAM McCOMBIE Called

                           Bv THE CORONER:

        THE WITNESS:   Sir, Detective Sergeant Graham McCombie of
   the West Midlands Police.  I have already been sworn on oath,
   sir.


                                 3
                                      G. McCOMBIE


Yes.  If you could take me through the summary in relation to
Christopher, please? - A. Yes, sir.  At about 10 a.m. on
Saturday, 15th April, 1989, Mrs. Elizabeth Margaret Traynor
saw her husband, Christopher James Traynor, leave home to pick
up his brother, Kevin.  I say "Kevin", sir.  His actual
Christian name was Martin Kevin, but the family and loved ones
have always referred to him as "Kevin".  It was their
intention to meet a number of friends and then travel to
Sheffield to watch the FA Cup Semi Final at Hillsborough.

     Stephen John Edwards travelled to Sheffield with
Christopher and Kevin, David Thomas, who in fact also died,
David Ledsom and Albert Ledsom, in a hired motor vehicle.
They left Liverpool at approximately 10.30 a.m. and stopped en
route at a public house where they had a couple of pints of
beer to drink.

     They arrived in Sheffield at about 1430 hours and parked
the vehicle a short distance away from the ground.
Christopher and Kevin Traynor, and David Thomas, had tickets
for the Leppings Lane terrace, whilst the rest of the group
had stand tickets.  They split into two groups and made their
way to the respective entrances.

     Mr. Norman Langley recalls entering the terraces at a
time he describes as being just before kick off.   He explains
how he was caught in several surges and pushed to the front of
the enclosure just feet from the front fencing.   Mr. langley
fell to the floor.   He was pulled up off the floor by a man
standing behind him, and was held literally round the neck in
an arm lock to support him.   When the crowd pressure relaxed a
little Mr. Langley's rescuer fell to the floor.   Mr. Langley
has since identified his rescuer as Christopher Traynor.   Mr.
Langley attempted heart massage, whilst a Police Office who
remains unidentified, gave mouth to mouth resuscitation.
Christopher was then passed from the pen to a Police Officer,
which is believed to be PC McEwen and PC Landers, who carried
him on to the pitch.   This was shortly after 3.05 pm.

     Sir, the evidence regarding Mr. Langley has been
researched for several months, and was only clarified at 7 pm
last night when he was spoken t o . He has not been shown video
or photographic evidence, but may do so in the future.

     PC McEwen commenced mouth to mouth resuscitation whilst
PC Landers gave heart massage.  The officers continued their
efforts to resuscitate Christopher for about 5 to 10 minutes,
but were unsuccessful.  PC McEwan marked the back of Mr.
Traynor's hand with his and PC Landers' collar number, which
is his Police number, sir.  The Officers then left Christopher
and assisted other people.

     PC Landers mentions in his statement being assisted by an
officer who he believes to be Police Constable Knowles.
Enquiries have been made and it has been established that the
officer was in fact PC McEwan.



                            4
                                                                 G. MCCOMBIE


                               PC Michael Robinson made his way onto the Leppings Lane
                          end of the pitch where he assisted a number of people,
                          including Christopher.  The officer saw Chris lying on the
                          pitch near to the goalmouth.  Together with PC Thorpe and
                          Stephen Malloy, who is a Liverpool supporter and a number of
                          other people who have not been identified, Christopher was
                          placed onto an advertising hoarding and carried to the Spion
                          Kop end of the ground, and eventually into the gymnasium which
                    B     had been set up as a temporary mortuary.  The officers and Mr.
                          Malloy then went to assist other persons.

                               At about 3.15 pm Police Constable Lighton was in the
                          gymnasium when he assumed responsibility for Christopher's
                          body.

                               At 4.03 pm Dr. Byrne examined Christopher in the
                          temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

                               At 2.55 am on Sunday, 16th April, Mr. John Michael
                          Traynor identified the body of his brother, Christopher, to
                          Police Constable Lighton in the temporary mortuary at the
                          gymnasium.

                               PC Lighton later escorted Christopher's body here to the
                    D     Medico-Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to DC
                          Weigold.

                               At 7 pm on 16th April, 1989, following identification by
                          DC Weigold, Prof. Underwood carried out an autopsy and
                          submitted a report giving the cause of death.

                               Sir, evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
                    E     blood sample from the deceased where the presence of ethanol
                          was detected.  The witnesses providing continuity of the blood
                          sample are DC Green, DC John Turner, DS James Fletcher and Dr.
                          Forrest carried out the analysis.

                               Found in Christopher's personal effcts were two full
                          tickets for the Semi Final match.  It is believed that one of
                          the tickets belonged to his Kevin.  Unfortunately, in the
                          circumstances it cannot be established exactly how or when
                          Christopher entered the stadium.

                        3. There are one or two little things.  Paragraph 3, and if you
                           turn to page 4.  I think we say they arrived in Sheffield at
                           1430 and parked their vehicle? - A. Yes, sir.

                        3. In fact on the statement they say:  "We eventually got to the
                           ground at about 2.40".  Is that right? - A. That is correct,
                           sir.

                        3. That Stephen John Edwards' statement? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. And then David Ledsam on page 7, about halfway down the page
                           about the fourth paragraph, he says, "The last occasion we saw
                H          them must have been about 2.45 pm"? - A. That is correct, sir.


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                      5
                                                                   G. McCOMBIE


                        ,0   So if those times are right they were outside the stadium
                             between at 2.40 and 2.45? - A. Correct, sir.

                        (p. But we can't say any more than that. - A. We have not been
                            able to tie it down any further than that, sir, no.

                      q). Can I now turn to this young man who you have already
                          mentioned - not quite so young as some - Norman Langley.       - A.
                    B     Yes, sir.  He is 42, sir

                        <J>. Still quite young.  One of the problems is this gentleman was
                             quite convinced that Christopher was the person who pulled him
                             up, and in that sense saved his life? - A. The identification
                             was actually done by Mr. Langley visiting the family home, and
                             he picked him out on a photograph of the four brothers.

                    a.       And I think what he is saying that having been helped he then
                             turned round and found his rescuer looking very poorly? - A.
                             Exactly, sir.

                        <t). And that is when he attempted to resuscitate him as you
                             described in your summary? - A. Yes, sir.

                        <t). One of the problems has been that initially Mr. Langley   said
                    D        that he was in enclosure 4? - A. Yes, sir.

                      <t). And all the   evidence we have been able to find is that
                           Christopher   was in enclosure 3? - A . There is overwhelming
                           evidence to suggest that Christopher and Kevin were in Pen 3.
                           Mr. Langley was adamant that as he came through the tunnel he
                           went to the left of the barrier.    I spoke to him last night
                           and he says that the more he thinks about it the more he gets
                    E      confused, but he did suggest that as he came through the
                           tunnel he was spun round and disorientated, and when he turned
                           to the left he was actually looking back out of the tunnel,
                           which would put him into Pen 3, sir.

                         5. In other words, what you gleened from him yesterday when you
                            discussed it with him was that he was coming down the tunnel
                            that he was   looking back out with his back to the terraces? •
                            A. Yes, sir.

                         3. So if then he was taken to the left he would in fact have been
                            going into the right-hand enclosure? - A. That is correct,
                            sir.

                         D. Which is enclosure 3? - A. Yes, sir.

                         3. And then it would make sense? - A. Yes, sir.

                                  THE CORONER:   Mr. Fraser, any questions?

                                  MR. FRASER:    The family have no questions of the
                             Officer, thank you.

                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                        6
                                                                M . LAYTON


                                   PET. INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                                              Bv THE CORONER:

                             THE WITNESS:   Sir, Michael Layton, Petective Inspector,
                        West Midlands Police.  An examination has been made of video
                        film and photographic evidence, and Christopher has been
                        identified on the pitch.  If I can mention a further
                    B   photographic identification in the terraces, and I will pursue
                        that just a little bit later on.

                             Mrs. Joan Traynor, Christopher's mother, has viewed
                        visual evidence, and in fact she initially identified him on a
                        photograph which has been given the reference nu/mber PB16/30.
                        Sir, I think it is fair to say that Mrs. Traynor tried
                        desperately hard to assist us in relation to the visual
                    C   evidence, and at the time of making the identification she was
                        reasonably sure, I think, but since that time I think it would
                        be fair to say that she has now got an element of doubt in
                        respect of that particular photograph.

                             Sir, she has also confirmed the identification of
                        Christopher on a number of photographs which show him on the
                        pitch, and specifically with reference to a photograph which
                    D   has been given the reference number T0P1/35.

                              Sir, PCs McEwan and Landers have viewed photographs, and
                        are unable to identify him as such as the person that they
                        assisted.   However, they did write their collar numbers on
                        Christopher’s hand, and as such it has been confirmed that
                        both those collar numbers were in fact shown on Christopher's
                        hand.   So it has been confirmed in that sense.
                    E
                             Sir, the Officers have signed plans of the terrace
                        indicating the approximate location at which they first came
                        into contact with Christopher, and also plans of the pitch
                        indicating the approximate position at which they placed
                        Christopher and attempted resuscitation.  Sir, there are four
                        plan reference numbers there, KJL/1, PM/1, KJL/2 and PM/2.
                    F
                             PC Robinson has identified himself on a photograph.
                        Again, it is the photograph Mrs. Traynor has referred to,
                        T0P1/35, and at this stage he is shown dealing with
                        Christopher.  The officer has signed a plan of the pitch
                        showing the approximate location at which he first came into
                        contact with Christopher, and the position at which he placed
                        him at the Spion Kop end of the ground.  That was prior to
                    G   taking him to the gymnasium.  That plan is referenced MBR/1.

                             PC Thorpe has identified himself on a photograph, again
                        TOPI/35, assisting with Christopher, and the officer has
                        signed a plan of the pitch showing the approximate location at
                        which he first came into contact with Christopher and the
                        position at which he placed him at the Spion Kop end of the
                        ground before carrying him to gymnasium.  That plan is
                H       referenced AT/1.


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                   7
                                                                     M. LAYTON


                                  Anthony Stephen Malloy has viewed photographs, and he
                             confirms that he assisted to carry Christopher across the
                             pitch, and Mr. Malloy has signed a plan of the pitch
                             indicating the approximate location at which he first came
                             into contact with Christopher and the approximate position at
                             which he placed him on the pitch at the Spion Kop end of the
                             ground.  That plan, sir, is referenced ASM/1.

                    B             Sir, if I can assist, I think there are probably six
                             plans that we perhaps may need to refer to. Can I refer you
                             to MWJL/82, which is a plan of the terraces.

                        Q.        THE CORONER:    Can I just stop you for a minute.
                             - A. Yes, sir.

                                   THE CORONER:    This bit is very confusing because you
                             have not seen the plans,    or at least you may have seen them
                             but you have not seen them here.    Members of the Jury, it is
                             confusing for you as well, of course, but you know from
                             experience that in a minute we will be showing you each one of
                             those again over here.    Don't take too much notice of all
                             these numbers.     We need them for the record so we can find
                             our wsay about the paper work if it we should ever have to do
                             it:
                    D
                        Q. I am sorry. MWJL/82? - A. Yes, sir.

                        Q. That will be C.140. - A. Then can we refer to the plan by PC
                           Lander, which is KJL/1, a plan of the terraces.

                        Q.   That is C.141. - A. Then   a plan by PC McEwan, DM/1.
                    E Q. Yes, C.142. - A. KJL/2, a plan of the pitch, a further plan by
                             PC Landers.

                        Q. DM/2 is almost identical, is not it? - A. It is, sir, yes.

                        Q. Let us use DM/2 because he is the first officer. - A. Instead
                           of KJL/2?

                        Q. Yes, instead of KJL/2. That is C.143. - A. Then I think, sir,
                           finally, MWJL/81, which is a plan of the pitch.

                        Q. That will be C.144. - A. I think that is five plans, sir.

                        Q. What is ASM/1? - A. Mr. Malloy’s plan, sir,.

                        Q. Which will be C.145.     Can you remember all these? - A. I will
                           do my best, sir.

                        Q. We are starting with the terrace, are not we? - A. If we can
                           refer first of all to the plan MWJL/82, that specifically
                           refers to the photograph that Mrs. Traynor and the family have
                           all seen now.  If I can stress again, there is some element of
                           doubt, but to indicate the position, this is enclosure No. 3
                H          on the terrace plan, and the point I believe Christopher is
                           shown is in this position here. That photograph is timed at

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                          8
                                                                   M. LAYTON


                           1445.
                        O. 1445.  That would mean one of the people outside must be wrong
                           about their timing, must not they, because Ledsom said that
                           they parted at 1445 outside the ground? - A. That is right,
                           sir, yes. Could we perhaps refer to....

                        5. Dealing with the officers now?     A. Would you want PC McEwan
                    B      or PC Landers?

                           KJL/1. - A. That is the plan by PC Landers.  Again, the
                           position he refers to is in enclosure No. 3, but I believe it
                           is correct to say he referred to seeing Christopher being
                           passed through a hole in the fence here. I say that, because
                           if we can go to DM/1, that officer actually refers to dealing
                           with Christopher in this position here. but that has happened
                           before where we have had a slight variance of people.   They
                           are from recollection.

                        3. Because this is based on what they remember of the event, not
                           on a photograph or anything like that? - A. That is absolutely
                           right, sir.

                        3. And the next one is MWJL/81? - A. Yes.  That refers to this
                    D      plan, and in respect of the video identification on MAP.7, the
                           BBC tape, there is an identification here in this position, so
                           very close to Gate 3.

                        3. In fact, it is almost halfway between the two Police Officers'
                           locations, is not it? - A. That is right, yes, sir.   Perhaps I
                           can give you a time for the identification there.   1534:19:01,
                           and that is referred to in PC Robinson's statement.
                    E
                                Sir, there is a reference to a photograph again which has
                           been mentioned, I think TOD1/35 is the one mentioned in the
                           summary.  On the plan it refers to TOD1/11, but they are to
                           all intents and purposes the same place.   That", sir, is in
                           this location here. at the Spion Kop end of the ground.

                        3. And those we usually take as an indicator that the body has
                           been moved and carried across the pitch, is not it? - A. Yes.

                        3. Then I think your next one is ASM/1? - A. Yes, sir, Mr.
                           Malloy's plan. He indicates two positions, one here at the
                           Leppings Lane end and the other one here at the Spion Kop end,
                           which again is very close to the photograph.

                        3. And this is a memory one again, is not it? - A. It is, sir.

                        3. But it ties in very well with the photograph? - A. Mr. Malloy
                           is shown on the photograph, sir.

                        3. I think that is all the plans, is not it? - A. Yes, sir.

                                   MR. FRASER:   No questions, sir, thank you.
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                         9
                                                                THE CORONER


                             THE CORONER:   I hope it did not confuse you too much
                        with these plans.  As it happens in this particular instance
                        there are a lot.  Just before lunch we had, I think, a case
                        where we could not find any or virtually no photographic
                        evidence at all.  It is just in a sense chance, but that
                        happens.

                             Now, the next case is going to be Kevin, but I am just
                    B   going to stand up, go out, let everybody take a breather and
                        come back.  It is not a long break, but we find it easier to
                        do it that way.  We will rise.

                                              (Short Adjournment)

                             MR. FRASER:   Sir, before we start to deal with the
                        evidence relating to Kevin it seems that Mrs. Traynor has the
                    C   better of all the lawyers and all the Police Officers in
                        Court.   She actually spotted a mistake that none of us
                        spotted, sir.  She is absolutely right.  In paragraph 7 of the
                        summary.

                               THE CORONER:   We are talking about Christopher?

                             MR. FRASER:   We are talking about Christopher, sir, yes.
                    D   In paragraph 7 of the summary it begins:

                               "At about 1515 hours Police Constable Lighton was in the
                               gymnasium when he assumed responsibility for the body of
                               Mr. Christopher Traynor".

                        Well, sir, in view of the visual evidence it seems that cannot
                        be correct.  I make no criticism of the presenting officer,
                    E   and it may be a typographical error, but Mrs. Traynor is the
                        only one amongst us who picked it up.

                             THE CORONER:   It is rather odd, because when that was
                        read out I thought to myself, "That's a bit early", and I
                        turned to the original statement to just check what it said,
                        and in fact the time is stated as 1515.  But I agree with you.
                    F
                             DET. INSPECTOR LAYTON:   The time we refer to is
                        1534:19:01.  That is on the pitch at the Leppings Lane end.

                               THE CORONER:   I am getting the original to see what it
                        says    in case it is a typographical error.

                             Shall we move on to Kevin and sort this point out if we
                    G   can in a moment? It cannot be right, of course.   The time
                        must be wrong.  On the other hand, what he actually says is,
                        "At 3.15 I was on duty at the gymnasium and I was instructed".
                        So it may be that he was instructed after that and we may have
                        made an assumption that that was when he was instructed.   We
                        will see what it says in the original.


                    H

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                     10
                                                                    G.J. MCCOMBIE


                                MR. FRASER:   Sir, it may not be significant in the
                           overall scheme of things.

                                 THE CORONER:    We want to get it right.   I quite agree.

                            (The Inquest into the death of CHRISTOPHER JAMES TRAYNOR
                                                 was adjourned)

                    B


                        LATER:


                                THE CORONER:   As far as we can ascertain, PC Lighton's
                    C      original statement does say 15.15, in other words, quarter
                           past 3.   In fact "about", he prefaces it.  Where is the
                           Officer who presented it? Is he still here?

                                    PET. SERGEANT GRAHAM JOHN McCOMBIE Recalled

                                                Further By THE CORONER:
                    D   Q. Can we turn to page 48.    I think the best thing to do is for
                           you to read the statement so we know exactly what he does say.
                           We c an ’t take it any further than that, because the officer
                           cannot change the evidence if that is what it says, but we
                           can make a note of it. Could you read it so we have got it
                           exactly as it says? - A. This is the statement of John
                           Lighton, Police Constable, normally based at Adwick-le-Street,
                    E      Rotherham.    It is a statement:

                                 "I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police
                                 presently stationed at Adwick in the Doncaster Division.
                                 About 3.15 p.m. on Saturday, 15th April, 1989, I was on
                                 duty in the gymnasium at Hillsborough football ground,
                                 Sheffield, when I was instructed by a senior officer to
                                 stand by a body lying on the floor of the gymnasium which
                    F            had nobody with it.  I went and stood with the body of a
                                 male person who appeared to be dead.  I remained with
                                 this for the rest of my tour of duty.  At 4.03 p.m. that
                                 date the body was pronounced life extinct by Dr. Byrne.
                                 At 2.55 a.m. the following the body was identified to me
                                 as being that of Christopher James Traynor, born 18.1.63,
                                 of                                      [Birkenhead.  It
                                 was identified to me by his brother, John Michael
                    G            Traynor.  At 3.30 a.m. I went with the body by ambulance
                                 to the Medico-Legal Centre in Sheffield, where it was
                                 handed over".

                                Sir, if I might just clarify one point.  There is an
                           exact time there of 4.03 p.m.  The reason this is done is
                           because Police Officers are always told to make an exact
                           reference to the time that the doctor pronounces life extinct,
                H          and I suggest that the 3.15 p.m. might be a guessing game,
                           sir.

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                          11
                                                                        G.J. McCOMBIE



                               THE CORONER:   We have to leave it. You are quite right.
                          He obviously could not have been with the body at 3.15 in the
                          light of the visual evidence, and I think we have always taken
                          the view that that timing you are satisfied is right?

                                DET. INSPECTOR LAYTON:         I am satisfied, yes, sir.

                    B          THE CORONER:   I think the only other thing we can is to
                          re-interview Mr. Lighton and see whether he has any
                          explanation for it, but we can't do that today.

                                DET. SERGEANT McCOMBIE:        By all means, sir.

                               MR. FRASER:   Sir, I think in fairness, the family are
                          not making a criticism of the Officer.

                                THE CORONER:   I understand that.

                               MR. FRASER:   It is just something they had noticed and
                          they were concerned about.  There is no criticism, and they
                          certainly don't wish to make an issue of it, but it is
                          something which is so personal to them that they wanted it
                          aired.  That is the point, sir.
                    D
                               THE CORONER:   If I had thought that it was a criticism I
                          would not have pursued it, but I was quite satisfied that this
                          a genuine attempt to try and get the facts right, which is
                          what we are trying to do.  I think we have to leave it there.
                          What was the time he was last seen being carried across the
                          pitch?
                    E
                                DET. INSPECTOR LAYTON:   Actually, the specific
                           reference, certainly the first reference we have, is
                           1534:19:01.

                                THE CORONER:   So it must have been some time after that.
                           I am satisfied that the timing of the certification of death
                           was right, because first of all it is very precise, and
                           secondly, we have the statement of Dr. Byrne, who does not
                           actually give a precise time, but he gives a bracket:

                        Q. Can you look at Dr. Byrne's statement.  I think it falls
                           within his bracket.  There are so many doctors who certified,
                           and they all presented it slightly differently. - A. I amsure
                           I have read somewhere, sir, in this summary about the
                           ambulance being present on the pitch when he was carried out,
                           and that would put it well after 3.15.

                        Q. Yes, I d o n ’t think there is any argument about that.  I was
                           trying to see whether we could satisfy ourselves regarding the
                           timing of the death certification time.     No, it is not in Dr.
                           Byrne's statement but it is JN/18.     I think that is where we
                           get it from.     Yes, he says 4.03, quite clearly. - A. There was
                           a Police Officer allocated to each body, and they were
                H          instructed to put the time of death being certified on paper
                           alongside the name of the deceased.

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                          12
                                          THE CORONER


. Yes,   I think there cannot be any doubt about that.

      THE CORONER:   Now, Mr. and Mrs. Traynor and Mrs.
 Traynor, and everybody else, we have spent quite a long time
 on what in some respects may seem a triviality in relation to
 the tragedy which has struck your families.   I hope you will
 forgive that, because it sounds as if we are trivialising your
 loss because we     are so worried about minutes andseconds.
 That is not true.   We are trying to establish as best we can
 the facts in relation to each and every person who has died,
 whilst remember as I have     said in other cases thatwe are
 dealing with individual people and individual families.

       Your family, of course, has suffered a double loss in
  losing two boys, and we all feel very much for you in this
  terrible thing which has happened.

       It is good of you to have come and it isgood of you to
  have helped the      Officers and co-operated, anditis very good
  of you to have been so kind in your thanks to the people there
  on the day and also to the West Midlands Police.    It is very
  much appreciated.   Thank you very much, indeed.  Our sympathy
  is with you.    Thank you,     allof you.

       We are going to rise      fora moment,   and then we will do
  the last one for today.

       Prof. Underwood is here for those of you who want to talk
  to him.

  (The Inquests into the deaths of CHRISTOPHER JAMES TRAYNOR
and MARTIN KEVIN TRAYNOR were adjourned to a date to be fixed)
