                                                                                           M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                 Date and tim e raised                               Num ber

         *-3£_<2>c5 r
T itle   I Ui
[fffklutie soured a n d an y docum ent num ber i f relevant)        (TL<2><5^ ^         2 .^ 3
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                          Receiver




                                                                                                                           Indexer
Docum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                  Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                           Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                       f/i&K     SIO
Examined - fu rth er action to be taken

                                                                                                                  c

                                                                                                                      \td > \

                                                                                                                           Indexer
Further action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master N um ber Form
  HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
               (WEST DISTRICT)



           INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                 STADIUM DISASTER

              ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



              INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                    INGER SHAH




                       Before

DR. S.L.    POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci,   B M , B S , MRCGP

               (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                         At

              The Medico-Legal Centre,
                   Watery Street,
                     S hef fi e l d .

                         On
                  25th April 1990




              TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
          Official Shorthand Writers,
     •55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                         INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT
                                                                          Page

                        DETECTIVE SERGEANT JULIE APPLETON Called

                             Bv THE CORONER ...................... ....      2
                                                                             O
                    B        By MS. NORCLIFFE....................

                        PROF. A. USHER Called

                             By THE CORONER ......................

                        POLICE INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                             Bv THE CORONER ......................

                             Bv MR. CATCHPOLE................... .
                        DETECTIVE SERGEANT JULIE APPLETON Continued

                             Further by MS. NORCLIFEE...........••<          7
                    D        Further I)y TTIE CORONER                        7




                    E




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                    A   25th April, 1990

                                  INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF INGBR SHAH

                             THE CORONER:   Ladies and gentlemen, of the Jury, we
                        have slipped one in and we will hear about it now#
                             MR. FRASER:    Sir,  the next evidence you willhear
                    B
                        relates to Inger Shall. There will be no attendance in
                        this matter by any members of her family but the
                        solicitors who represent the family are a member of my
                        group and I, therefore, appear as their agents through
                        the Hillsborough Steering Committee.

                             THE CORONER:   Thank you.

                             This then is a resumed Inquest which was opened on
                        the 19th April, 1 9 8 9 . On that occasion Neil Anthony
                        Parkin, Acting Coroner’s Officer, said:
                                "The body which is the subject of this Inquest
                                has been identified to PC 2102 Eustis ...."
                    D I hope I have pronounced his name correctly,
                                " .... of the South Yorkshire Police as that
                                of Inger Shah by Stephen John Oates, a friend.
                                She was 38 years of age having been b o m on
                                1 3 th October, 1950 in Denmark. She was a
                                divorced woman and she lived at
                                                       London. She was a
                    E           secretary by occupation. She died at
                                Hillsborough Football Ground following an
                                incident there on Saturday, 15 th April, 1989#
                                PC 2102 Eustis caused the body to be removed
                                to the Medico Legal Centre and there he •
                                identified it to Detective Constable Simon
                                ¥eigold who subsequently identified the same
                                body to Prof. Usher. It is the family wish
                                that the body should be cremated."

                        And then I adjourned it in the usual way.
                             In this particular instance I wrote, as I normally
                        do, and that form was actually signed by the lady’s
                        solicitor because her nearest are very young children.
                        He confirmed that we had got the name right - Inger
                        Shah - and the age, date of birth and the place of
                        birth as Denmark, and he also confirmed that her maiden
                        name was Agerup. ¥e might need this for technical
                        reasons.
                             Her blood alcohol had been estimated by Dr. Forrest
                        and, in the case of Inger, the result was negative.
                H
                             Now, normally w g listen to the pathologist but if
                        Prof. Usher is engaged at the moment - he will be
                        joining us as soon as he can - we will look to the
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                 - 1 -
                                      J . APPLETON



senting Officer first•
  DETECTIVE SERGEANT JULIE APPLETON Called:

               Bv THE CORONER:
     THE WITNESS:   Sir, Julie Appleton, Detective
Sergeant of the West Midlands Police.
Yes? - A. At about 05^5 hours on Saturday 15 th April,
1Q89 Daniel Shah left home with his mother, Mrs. Inger
Shah, to travel to Sheffield. They met David Lipworth,
Philip Goodman and Marian McCabe, who also died in
the disaster, and together1 they travelled from Kings
Cross railway station to Sheffield arriving at about
1130 hours.

All five persons went to Hillsborough stadium where
they met other friends, including Stephen Oates,
Gary O^ritch and Michael Woods.
Whilst there are   discrepancies in the times given by
the party, there   is no doubt that Mrs. Shah entered
the stadium well   before the scheduled kick-off time
and she stood in   Enclosure 3 at the Leppings Lane
terracing.
Shox’tly before 1500 hours Mrs. Shah was standing with
Marian McCabe, Gary Oyitch and Stephen Oates near to
the front perimeter fencing in Enclosure 3„

Following the severe crushing in the Leppings Lane
terracing, Police Constable Stephen Fairclough entered
the iDnclosure 3 and he assisted in removing a number
of persons, including Mrs. Shah. He picked up Mrs.
Shall and passed her to other police officers through
the gate in Enclosure 3«
Police Constable Mark Sowerby carried Mrs. Shah in
his arras across the pitch to the gymnasium and at one
stage was assisted by Mr. Alan Hopkins, Deputy Chief
Ambulance Officer. Police Constable Sowerby could
not find any sign of life in Mrs. Shah and he left
her in the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had
been set up.
Police Constable Michael Eustis attended the
gymnasium where he assumed responsibility for Mrs.
Shah.
At 1555 hours Dr. Mathew James Bull examined Mrs,
Shall in the temporary mortuary and certified life
extinct.
At about 0155 hours on Sunday, 16th April, 19S9»
Stephen Oates identified the body of Inger Shah
to Police Constable Eustis in the temporary mortuary
a t the gymna sium•
                                                                    J . APPLETON



                             Police Constable Eustis later escorted the bod3>- of
                             Mrs. Shall to the Medico Legal Centre where he
                             confirmed the identification to Detective Constable
                             Veigold.
                             On Sunday, 16th April, 1989, following identification
                             by Detective Constable TJeigold, Prof. Alan Usher
                             carried out an autopsy and submitted a report giving
                    B        cause of death.
                             It is confirmed that Mrs. Inger Shah did have a
                             ticket for the match and the ticket counterfoil was
                             found in her possession.

                             That is the end of my evidence, sir.

                        q.    If you wouldturn to the bottom of page 2k for the
                             moment, this is Gary Oyitch’s statement, is it not? -
                             A. That is right, sir, yes.
                        (). And I think what he says there is that, in his
                            judgment, the last time ho saw Inger alive was before
                            the final surge, as he describes it, is that right? -
                            A. That is correct, sir, yes.
                    D
                        q.   And I think if you look a little bit higher in the
                             statement he times that sometime after four minutes to
                             three when the teams were announced, is that correct? •
                             A. That is correct, sir, yes.

                        q. In fact, that was the first surge he mentions at about
                    E        that time and-then he says there was a second one, so
                             it must have been some time after that? - A. Yes, sir.

                                  Mr. Fraser?
                                  MR. FRASER:    The family have no questions, sir,
                             thank you.
                                                Bv MS. NORCLIFFE
                        Q. Belinda Norcliffe for the Chief Constable of South
                           Yorkshire. Officer, with regard to paragraph 2 I
                           wonder if }rou could just tell me what the evidence
                           is as to what time this party arrived at the stadium? -
                           A. Paragraph 3?

                        q. Paragraph 2;
                                "All five persons went to Hillsborough stadium
                                where they were to meet other friends ...."
                             A. As you can see from the following paragraph, they
                             all give different times but I can go through and tell
                             you each individual time if you wish.
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                    -3 -
                                                                    J . APPLETON
                                                                    PROF. A . USIIER

                        Q. I understood the problem in paragraph 3 to be
                           discrepancies as to entering the stadium itself
                           as opposed to paragraph 2 as being discrepancies
                           as to arrival at the stadium. Sorry about that.
                                THE CORONER:   Have you got any other questions?
                           May I suggest that we allow the Officer to sit down,
                           because it is a matter of just looking through the
                    B      statements and picking out the times, we will listen
                           to Prof. Usher because he is here now and I know he
                           has got to go somewhere else, and then we will call
                           you back and then that will answer your questions
                           and nobody will be under any pressure. Is that okay?

                                Prof. Usher?
                                               PROF. A. USIIER Called:

                                                  Bv THE CORONER:

                        Q. Now, yovi are Prof. of Forensic Medicine in Sheffield,
                           is that right, and Home Office Pathologist? — A. Yes.

                        0. You did a post-mortem on this young lady who, in
                    D      fact, 3'-ou describe in your post-mortem as *Ingar
                           Shahsides*? - A. Not any longer I do not, sir.

                           But you did initially? - A. Yes.

                        q. But you are now quite happy to accept that, in fact,
                           the true name of this lady is Inger Shah? - A. Yes.
                    E   Q. So having established that, would you tell me what
                           your findings were in relation to Inger? - A. Yes,
                           the body was that of a slimly-built, white, middle-
                           aged woman with fairish hair. She was '\5h cms. in
                           height 5 she weighed kO kgs. I can summarise my
                           findings by sclying that the appearances were typical
                           of traumatic asphyxia. There were a number of small
                           grazes and scratches about the body, none of which
                           played any part in causing her death. She was
                           normally developed and healthy and, in my view, she
                           had a normal expectation of life for her age and she
                           was not pregnant. The injuries over the knees suggested
                           at some time she had fallen to her knees whilst the
                           crush was on, I give the cause of death as traumatic
                           asphyxia.
                        Q. I think you said there was a minor head injury as
                           well? - A. Yes, there was a little bruising at the
                           back of the head and a very small amount of
                           bleeding but very small.
                        Q. No fractures of the skull? - A. No.

                H       Q. But it does indicate that there musthave been        some
                           blow? - A. Impact, yes.

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                 PROF. A. USHER
                                                                 M. LAYTON


                        Q. And whilst I do not want to cause any upset, in
                           fact she also had another injury - she had a bite
                           mark on her tongue? - A. Yes, that is not uncommon
                           in death from any form of asphyxia.
                        Q. And the only other unusual thing is that she had, I
                           think, a nail embedded in the skin of her back? -
                           A. Yes, she had a fingernail imprinted in the skin of
                    B      her back.
                        Q, lias it imprinted? - A. Imprinted but it could be
                           lifted off.
                                MR. FRASER:    No   questions, sir, thank you.

                                THE CORONER:   Clear? No questions from you?
                           (No questions from the Jury) Then I can let Prof.
                           Usher go.
                        Q. Prof. Usher, thank you for your help. - A. Very much
                           obliged.
                                THE CORONER:   Have you managed to sort it out
                           or do you want more time?
                    D
                                J. APPLETON:    If I can do it after this I would
                           appreciate that.
                                    POLICE INSP. MICHAEL LAYTON Called:

                                               By THE CORONER:
                    E           THE WITNESS:   Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
                           Inspector, Vest Midlands Police.

                        Q. Yes? - A. Sir, an examination of video film and
                           photographic evidence has been made and Inger Shah
                           has been identified alive in Enclosure No. 3 on video
                           and that is BBC video reference MAP 1 timed at 1451:22:24.
                           PC Fairclough has identified Inger Shah on a photograph
                           which is referenced DAC3/2. The officer has also
                           signed a plan of the terraces indicating where he
                           found Inger Shah and that photograph is referenced
                           PR1/15A. The photograph is timed at 150^ hours and,
                           at this stage, shows Inger in some distress in the
                           enclosure.
                           PC Sowerby has identified himself on a photograph
                           carrying Inger Shah across the pitch and that photograph
                           is referenced NGN1/51. °n a further photograph,
                           referenced PR5/20, PC Sowerby, assisted by Mr. Hopkins,
                           is shown carrying Inger Shah across the pitch and the
                           photograph itself is timed at 1528 hours.
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                    -5 -
                                                                    I'l. LAYTON



                          PC Haddock saw Inger Shah pressed against the
                          perimeter fencing and later helped to pass her
                          along the chain of officers to the gateway of
                          Enclosure No. 3 and the officer has identified
                          her from a number of photographs.
                           There are, in fact, a fair number of photographs
                           of Inger Shah in this particular case, sir.
                    B Q. Yes, that    does not mean you have to mention every
                           one? - A. The family decided not to view visual
                           evidence, sir, and, obviously, we understand that
                           decision.
                           Sir, can I refer you to a plan which has been given
                           the reference no. 1RJJL 3•
                        Q. That will be C8 9 . - A. That is a plan of the terraces,
                           sir, and a second plan, MWJL 112 ————
                        Q. That will be C90. - A. ---     which is a plan of the
                           jjitcli area.

                        Q. Perhaps we had better have Mr. Fairclough’s plan as
                    D      well? - A. Yes, is that SJF 1, sir?

                        o. Yes, we will make that C91. It is virtually identical
                           to your plan but we will just have it as well. -
                           A. Yes, sir. Would 3>-ou like me to mark that on this
                           copy?
                           Sir, if I can, first of all, refer to MWJL 3, this
                    E      in fact refers to a number of photographs referred to.
                           Specifically in Enclosure No. 3 the location referred
                           to on those photographs is at this point here, in
                           fact, adjacent to gate no. 3. In relation to SJF 1,
                           which is PC Fairclough 1s, the plan he has referred to
                           is, in fact, in the same position here. Then, sir,
                           in respect of MWJL 112 we have got a photograph
                           referred to as PR5 18 here on the pitch and then
                           there is a reference to two further photographs, sir,
                           here and here at the Spion Kop end.

                                THE CORONER:    Mr. Fraser, any questions?

                                MR. FRASER:    No questions, sir.

                                THE CORONER:   Any questions from you?        (No
                           questions from the Jury)

                                              By MR. CATCHPOLE:

                        Q. MWJL 3, is that the photograph including the photo­
                           graph PR1/15A at 1504? - A. Yes.

                H       Q. You did not give a time of where Mrs. Shah was seen
                           near the gate. You referred to a number of photographs?
                           PR1/15A is timed at 15^4 and it is in the same
                           location.
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                  - 6 -
                                                                      M. LAYTON
                                                                      J. APPLETON


                        Q. And. do you have the reference for the video
                           identification where Mrs. Shah is seen alive at
                           1451? It is MAP 1 1451:22:24? - A. Again, it is
                           in exactly the same location*
                                    MR. CATCHPOLE:    Thank you very much.
                                     THE CORONER:   If Sergeant Appleton will come
                    B           back and try to answer your question.

                                   DETECTIVE SERGEANT JTJLIE APPLETON continued

                                           Further by MS. NORCLIFFE

                                     THE CORONER:   Can you repeat the question for
                                us so that we are clear what it is you are asking?
                    C
                        q   .        MS. NORCLIFFE:    With regard to paragraph 2 of the
                                summary, what time the party actually arrived at the
                                stadium? - A. Right. If I go through this, as you
                                probably appreciate, there are several witnesses so I
                                will go through what each one of them says. Daniel
                                Shah, Mrs. Shah1s son, said they arrived at the station
                                at 10 o ’clock, 10 a.m., and then he goes on to say that
                    D           they waited for a friend for approximately 1Y hours
                                and then made their way to the ground, but he does not
                                give a specific time.

                                           Further by THE CORONER:
                        Q. Yes, lie says 1-J- hours they waited for a friend and then
                           went to the station, I think, by bus and then waited
                    E      another half-hour and then he and Philip went into the
                           ground so .... — A. They waited at the ground for half—
                           an-hour, yes, and at the station.

                        Q. As well? - A. Yes.
                        Q. No, sorry, I think they said they waited outside the
                    F      train station for another of his mum’s footballing
                           friends, they waited for about '\-\ hours and then they
                           waited for another half-hour? - A. Yes.

                        Q. So he accounts for two hours basically, does he not,
                           a minimum of two hours? — A. Yes, l-jr hours at the
                           station and then they go to the ground and wait at
                           the ground for half—an—hour. David Lipworth says
                    G      they arrived in Sheffield at 11.30 and waited for
                           about 30 minutes for some friends. They did not
                           arrive so they went to the ground. He says he
                           was at the ground about 1220 hours.




                H
                                                       -7 -
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                       J , APPLETON



                        Q. But then he says he also waited for another hour
                           for his friend? - A. Yes.
                        Q.    And then they waited a little bit longer? - A. Yes:

                                    "I went to the turnstiles to go in.     It
                                    was about 1320 hours."

                    B   Q.    Yes, read that because that actually is a    goodtiming
                             for you. I will read it to you - this is David
                             Mi chae 1 Lipw or tli:
                                    "I went to the turnstiles to go in.     It
                                    was about 1320 hours."
                              A. Yes, page 10, sir.      Philip Goodman ..•<>

                        q. Stop there because he actually says later on:
                                    "¥e were all in there together at about
                                    1 . 3 0 p.m."

                              A. That is right, sir, yes.
                    D   0   . HeNow,says:
                                      Philip   Goodman? - A. Page 10, Philip Goodman.


                                    "We arrived at the main Sheffield station
                                    at 1 1 . 1 5 a.m. vfe had arranged to meet
                                    friends. We waited until nearly 12 noon."

                    g         He said that they used the buses that had been laid
                              on
                                    " .... and the bus dropped us off at the
                                    Leppings Lane end at about 12.20 p.m."
                              and at about 1 p.m. Mr. Goodman entered the ground.

                        q. And then right at the bottom of the page he actually
                           says what time he entered the ground? - A. Yes, at
                              about 1.30 p.m. Mrs. Shah, Marian McCabe and David
                              joined them at the barrier. Page 17, sir, is Stephen
                              Oates and Mr. Oates said he met Inger and Marian
                              outside Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground at about
                              2.10 p.m. So obviously this differs. He has got it
                              a little bit later. He stood in a queue with both
                              the girls and waited to enter the ground. Page 23,
                              sir, which is Gary Oyitch, says that they arrived
                              at Sheffield at 12.25 P«m.
                                    " .... and we arrived at the ground at
                                    about 1 p.m. and made our way to the
                                    turnstiles. I arrived on the terrace
                u                   through the tunnel at about 1 .1 5 p.m.".
                rl


J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                          J . APPLETON



                           Finally, sir, page 27 is Michael Woods. He says
                           he arrived in Sheffield about 1230 hours and got
                           the bus straight to the ground. He says:

                                 "lie then got to the ground to go in at
                                 about 1330 hours."
                         Q. And, in fact, he says they went through the turnstiles?
                    jj      A. That is correct, sir. I do not know if that is
                            of assistance?
                                 THE CORONER:   Does that help you?

                                 MS. B. NORCLIFFE:          Yes, thank you.

                                 THE CORONER:   Any questions arising out of that?

                                 THE FOREMAN OF THE JURY:   The members of the
                            Jury would like to know if the time has been stated,
                            what time the crash barrier actually broke?

                                 THE CORONER:   I will deal with that after the
                            tea-break. It is a difficult question actually.
                    D            Now, we are going to rise and have our tea. If
                            there is anything else that you want to know you tell
                            me when you come back, okay? You want some information
                            about the crash barrier?
                                 THE FOREMAN OF THE JURY:          Yes.

                                 THE CORONER:   Thank you.
                    E
                                 I am sorry, let us all sit down as I have
                            forgotten something. I am not going to allow the
                            fact that Inger Shah’s family is not here to ....

                                 REP RE SENTATIVE  OF THE FAMILY: I was with
                            Danny Shah on the night so I would appreciate it if
                            you could say something and then I will pass that back
                            to the family.
                                  TITE CORONER:   Yes, I am glad I thought of it
                            before you said it. I am very sorry, I got distracted,
                            ¥e know that Inger was a divorced lady because we
                            have heard it read out. We also know that she has
                            got two children and, of course, for them they have
                            lost their mum so it is very, very hard. I believe,
                            in fact, they are coping remarkably well in the
                            circumstances and they are to be congratulated for
                            that and perhaps you will pass that on as appropriate.
                            We feel for them that they have lost their mother
                            in ver}'', very tragic circumstances and in very public
                            circumstances, particularly for this lady because,
                            whatever else may be said, she was a highly
                H           photographed person. So if you would pass our thoughts


J. L. Harpham Ltd                                    -9 -
                    A   to them, please.   Tlianlc you very much.

                             Now we will rise.




                    B




                    D




                    E




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd                                - 1 0 -
