HER MAJESTY’S COROWER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
             (WEST DISTRICT)




      INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

            STADIUM DISASTER
         ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                 Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Maiestv*s Coroner)




                   At
             The Town Hall,
               Sheffield.

                   On

            20th March, 1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J.L. Harpham, Ltd.,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                         INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT


                                               Page
SUBMISSION BY MR. KING (Cont)                    1

SUBMISSION BY MR. CATCHPOLE                      9

SUBMISSION BY MRS. McBRIEN                      17

SUBMISSION BY MR. RUSSELL                      28

SUBMISSION BY MISS ADDLEMAN                    49

SUBMISSION BY MR. HALE                         56

FURTHER SUBMISSION   BY MR. MAXWELL            57

FURTHER SUBMISSION   BY MR. PAYNE              58

FURTHER SUBMISSION   BY MR. ISAACS             68

FURTHER SUBMISSION   BY MR. MANNING            73
FURTHER SUBMISSION   BY MR. KING               74

FURTHER SUBMISSION   BY MR. CATCHPOLE          81

FURTHER SUBMISSION   BY MRS. McBRIEN           83

FURTHER SUBMISSION   BY MISS ADDLEMAN          83
PROCEDURAL MATTERS                             84
             SEVENTY FOURTH DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

                WEDNESDAY, 20th MARCH 1991

     MR. KING:   Sir, I know it is a dangerous statement
to open with but I hope to be relatively brief.

     Sir, my main point yesterday was that whatever may be
said about the number of different causes, on the evidence
it must be open to the Jury to say that an immediate and
substantial cause was that which flowed from the decision
to open the concertina gates and the influx of the crowd
into the Ground, and that concentrating primarily on that
conduct and the omission coupled with it to divert fans
from getting into the centre pens, that there was clear
evidence to go before the Jury upon which they had to
direct their attention, first in relation to Mr.
Duckenfield, secondly in respect of Mr. Murray.

     Sir, I need not break down again my submissions as to
how they should approach it, save to emphasise again they
would have to ask whether there was obvious and serious
risk as a result of introducing the crowd into the Ground,
the concourse area, without taking steps to divert, of
overcrowding in the centre pens.  I indicated that that
could be split up really into just two issues:  was it
obvious to a reasonable and prudent person in the position
of the given person the Jury are considering, that, one,
at the given time the centre pens were full, approaching
full, no room for any more people of any substance; and
secondly, that it was obvious that if they did open the
concertina gates there was a risk, and a real risk, that
people would go into those centre pens so as to cause
overcrowding.

     That is the issue for the Jury and I say, sir, that
it is not a question of your withdrawing that, saying, "I
would arrive at a different conclusion".  Obviously all
the circumstances have to be put to the Jury but the facts
are there from which they can draw their proper
conclusions, and we are not dealing with a situation as
those who were the subject of Mr. Justice Turner's learned
words, where we were dealing with a prosecution based on
system, not based on somebody who was actually present,
and participating in the very acts which, on the evidence,
one view is caused the deaths.

     I can see an argument that if one is simply dealing
with an argument based on system that one has to have some
reliable evidence from somebody who knows of that system
and could be expected to comment on the system, that that
gave rise to the given risk, but when dealing with those
who are concerned with the opening of the gates and
allowing the influx into the Ground we are not dealing
                                                      MR. KING


with system, and that was the basic point I was trying to
say, sir.

     THE CORONER:     Yes.

      MR. KING:   Sir, you asked me to consider those
observations - you did not just ask me, you asked
everybody - in the Hong Kong case, distinguishing between
somebody who creates an obvious risk and somebody who
fails to recognise an obvious risk and then fails to take
steps to avert it.   In my submission, there is no
distinction in the legal principles to be applied and
there is nothing in the suggestion in the case, in my
submission, that there is any difference in the legal
principle of unlawful killing to be applied, save of
course the person who does not create the risk and simply
fails to observe the risk has to be, on the facts of the
case and in the circumstances, under a duty to react to
the risk, and that as I understand it is the only addition
which one would bring in and in fact the Gray case brings
in, when it talks about the person who is allegedly guilty
of manslaughter by neglect has to be under a duty to care
for the health and welfare of the given individual.   As I
understand it, sir, there is no difference in the
principles of the Caldwell/Lawrence recklessness test in
either situation.   Either way one has to say was there an
obvious and serious risk to the reasonably prudent person
in the position of the given defendant?   Did he know of
the risk, the given defendant, and fail to take steps to
avert it? Or alternatively did he not turn his mind to
the possibility of the risk?   Either way it is the same
test and the only difference is whether or not there was a
duty.   I don't think anybody would suggest on the evidence
that Mr. Duckenfield and Mr. Murray were in a duty
situation.

     THE CORONER:     Were not in a duty situation?

     MR. KING:   Were --- no   one would suggest thatMr.
Duckenfield on the evidence allegedly created a risk but
also was under a duty to avert the risk.

     THE   CORONER:   I see, yes.

     MR. KING:   No one would suggest that someone in the
position of Mr. Duckenfield, or indeed I think on the
evidence Mr. Murray, could not say, "Even though I saw the
risk and even though I did not turn my mind to it, I was
entitled to have blindfolds on and ignore it because I was
not in the hierarchy sufficiently senior to concern myself
with it", if I can put it that way.

     I don't need for my purposes, in saying that there is
evidence to go to the Jury on the issue ofunlawful
                                                   MR. KING


killing at this stage of the factual events, to identify
to you any other person who in my submission might fall
into the category of someone who had a duty to act.  I say
that, sir, because it is not only not necessary, the Jury
must not bring back a verdict identifying any given
individual.  What is the case though, sir, and I accept
this as a matter of law, in order to bring back a verdict
of unlawful killing they must have had in their mind a
given individual and they must be able to say that that
given individual's conduct or omission, on the tests we
have analysed, amounted to unlawful killing.

      Sir, I also accept as a matter of law the principle
of novus actus, if I can put it that way, interveniens
on the issue of causation.   Of course, before the Jury can
consider whether or not a given piece of conduct or a
given omission amounted to unlawful killing for the
purposes of this Inquest, it has to have amounted to a
substantial cause of the deaths, and if in fact it did not
amount to a cause of the deaths, either because
commonsense says so just looking at the facts, or because
it cannot be said properly that the deaths flowed from
that conduct because of the intervention of a subsequent
act of another which broke the chain of causation because
it was totally unforeseeable, then I would accept totally
as a matter of law that that cause could not be a relevant
cause.

     I have concentrated, I don't mean this blithely, my
fire, if I can put it that way, on the decision to open
the gates and the influx of the crowd into the Ground,
because in my submission to you there can be no question
but that there is evidence there that that was the cause.




                    One can argue about other causes
    One can argue about other causes which preceded
those events and one can see the thrust of the argument
of the Sheffield City Council, for example, that
whatever their faults may have been it could not be a
cause of the deaths for the purposes of unlawful
killing because of the intervening act and the decision
to open the gates and introduce an influx of people
into the ground. Sir, I can understand that principle
totally.
    I am not going to be in a position to be able to
say, "I will answer the question for you, sir" because
that is not my function, if I can put it that way, but
in concentrating as I have on what I have, sir, it may
be obvious where I consider the Jury's primary
consideration should be but that is not to usurp your
function.
    Can I say that on the evidence there could be no
question of withdrawing the issue from the Jury by
virtue of arguments as to intervening events after this
decision to open the gates and to allow the crowd in
because on the evidence it must be open to the Jury to
say that everything which flowed thereafter was
entirely foreseeable? It is not for me to argue the
case, sir, but it must be open to the Jury to say that
if you allow in a large group of people through gates
into a concourse with the assumption that they have
established in advance it was obvious they would make
their way into the centre pens, that overcrowding would
occur, there would be pushing, there would be shoving,
all sorts of consequences which flow there from. That
is just the natural flow of introducing a large number
of people but at the end of the day that is a matter
for the Jury.   It is certainly not a matter for you,
sir, to make a ruling upon.

    Certainly the argument of my learned friend, Mr.
Isaacs, falls at the first analysis of it because there
is no suggestion here that there was an intervening act
on the part of other members of the Control Box, be it
Mr. Murray, be it Mr. Goddard, or what have you. It is
simply the case that each and every one of them failed
to take steps to divert, to block off the tunnel, what
you will. There is no question on the evidence that
Mr. Duckenfield's duty would cease merely because an
argument can be constructed which I need not go into
that someone else had a duty to observe and to divert.
He had a continuing duty and on the evidence it could
not positively be said to the contrary.

    It is not a question of intervening acts. It is a
question of coincident acts and, of course, one option
                                                          5

                                                   MR. KING


open to a Jury on the facts is to say that more than
one person whom they can identify, their conduct or
omission amounts to unlawful killing but, sir, I do not
have to concern myself with that as long as there is
one person to whom they can direct their attention.

    Sir, the consequence of what I have said to you is
that the submissions which my learned friend, Mr.
Payne, has made to you and, for example, his Schedule
17 submissions if I can call it that, they are all
directed to evidence not of the obviousness of the risk
of overcrowding in the centre pens consequent upon the
opening of the concertina gates and the allowing in of
a large influx of people, that is the issue which I
have directed myself to in addressing you.All that
evidence is directed allegedly to the issue of the risk
of overcrowding in the terraces by virtue of the
general system which was being employed on the day.

    I can argue the point, if necessary, but will not
because I do not go into the evidence as to whether or
not that evidence is to the effect as alleged by my
learned friend. I would certainly submit it is not all
one way and if one looks at each individual witness in
that schedule, in particular the evidence of Mr. Lock,
Mr. Seamen and Mr. Eastwood, there is very clear
evidence there that their expert opinion was that the
system they expected to be operating on the day which
would have the safety element to protect people from
overcrowding would have certain characteristics which
patently were not present on the day as operated by the
Mr. Mole plan. It is not for me to direct you to that
evidence, sir, unless you want me to because I cannot
comment on the facts.
     THE CORONER: Yes, I understand.   It is difficult
for everybody, including me.

     MR. KING: Indeed. It is not right to say that
the evidence which is contained in those witnesses in
Schedule 17 all indicate that it would not be obvious
to the reasonable and prudent person in the position
say of Mr. Mole drawing up his plan that there was not
a risk of overcrowding on his plan because the
witnesses which my learned friend prays in aid includes
Mr. Seamen, includes Mr. Lock, includes Dr. Eastwood,
both of whom gave very clear evidence that for safety
purposes they would expect a certain amount of control
on the radial fences. They disagreed. One said that
he would expect manning on the radial gates. Certainly
all of them suggested you would have to have a system
whereby even at a Semi Final you would block off the
pens when they were merely comfortably full and you
would have an active system in operation. Certainly
their evidence was that you would have to have people
stewarding, somebody in the capacity of a steward, on
the concourse directing people to the side pens.

    I do not want to go into the argument of it, sir.
I just want to point out it is not right to say that
evidence is all one way on the issue of whether the
system as Mr. Mole employed on the day amounted to an
obvious and serious risk of overcrowding to a
reasonable and prudent person. I do emphasise, sir,
that if the Jury are directed to unlawful killing by
system, I accept that you have to have regard to the
principle of subsequent intervening act, and that must
be right. I have accepted that. To that extent the
evidence certainly divides itself into two separate
categories in that respect; the facts and matters
relating to the opening of the gates and the allowing
of the influx of people into the ground and the other
matters prior to that time.
    Certainly, sir, if you came to the conclusion that
there was evidence that the system was a cause then I
do not accept that there is not evidence to go to the
Jury that it would not be obvious to a reasonably
prudent person who the Jury have in mind who was
responsible for the system, that it carried with it the
risk of overcrowding. I say there is evidence of that
but that is a separate issue, sir.

    It must also be the law, and I accept it, that one
just cannot have a system in the air. One has to
identify a given individual who one has in mind for the
system and that must be right in law too. Again it is
difficult for me because if I suggest one candidate
there may be other candidates but certainly one
candidate, if one was viewing the system as the cause
on the day, it would be Mr. Mole because it was his
plan. That would be sufficient if the system was one
which could be a cause.

    When one looks, sir, at all the other potential
acts which my learned friend, Mr. Payne, points to, if
one assumes they do not fail at the hurdle of the
intervening act, then one still has to identify the
person. I have not addressed you, for example,
specifically on Mr. Greenwood and I know that my
learned friend, Mr. Russell will. Again he was not
responsible for the opening of the gates and the
allowing in of the influx of people which I say the
concentration should primarily be on in the context of
what I am observing.
    The same principles will apply to him though, that
is to say, was he guilty of conduct or an omission?
Was he under a duty to act which created, to a
reasonably prudent person in his position, an obvious
and serious risk of overcrowding on the terraces which
he failed to avert?
    The arguments which he may raise as to his conduct
by reason of the intervening act are arguments that I
will not go into but they are there and I can see them
there. I would not want to mislead you into believing
that I am inviting you to approach all the potential
persons whose conduct or omissions can be called into
question in the same light because I am not.
    The danger of in fact viewing them all in the same
light is because one can see the weakness in respect of
one of them and one says, "There must be weakness in
respect of all of them" and that patently is not so
when one is dealing with the issue of those responsible
in the Control Box for the opening of the gates and
allowing the influx of people in.




                                 /Sir, I do not
                                     MR. KING




      Sir, I don't believe there is much at the moment,
I say "at the moment” because you indicated you might
like to come back, but can I emphasise again sir that if
necessary I can identify to you and it has been analysed
on my behalf, evidence directed to the state of the pens
at a given time; the position the witnesses were;
evidence as to the view from the Police Control Box, not
merely by reference to those who were in it on the day
but those who had had experience of it on previous
occasions which must not be forgotten the evidence, all
that; evidence as to the numbers; the Serials; the steps
which were available on the evidence to those who wished
to divert; steps as to the efficacy of those measures
and so forth, all matters for the jury at the end of the
day in my submission and I won't go into them unless you
were to say to me:  "Mr. King, point to me the evidence
upon which the jury could consider those issues?" but in
my submission the evidence is patently there.

      Sir, was there any other matter of law which you
were concerned about which you raised yesterday?

      As regards the case of Higgins I must say I don't
see any difficulty in the case of Higgins.  If you sir
are of the view that there is evidence properly to go
before the jury but that you yourself, I can say this
because the jury aren't here, would not reach a parti­
cular verdict, that is no reason for not leaving it
to the jury and merely because the Coroner in Higgins
himself did not like the verdict or did not want the
verdict, is no reason to withdraw it from the jury.

      If however at the end of the day, for example
because of the evidence of a supervening act which you
concluded was not open to the jury to interfere with as
a finding, then it would not be proper to leave it to
the jury and I must say I don't think anybody is in
disagreement.

      My submission is as regards those responsible for
the opening of the gates and the influx of the people
into the ground, for the reasons I have stated there
is clear evidence for the jury to consider and make
their minds up and you - I am not suggesting you would -
but you should not usurp sir the function of the jury
by withdrawing that from them.

       Most of the arguments we have heard along the
line are really arguments for the jury to consider.
For example my learned friend Mr. Isaacs said at one
point:   "Well the jury should have to consider
Mr. Duckenfield in certain circumstances", the circum­
stances of an emergency and so forth.
                                                            9


                                      MR. KING



      I don't deny they are entitled to look to all the
circumstances but that is a jury point not a legal point,
sir, so that is how I would leave the position at the
moment.

      THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed.

      May I just say, it applies actually both to you and
to Mr. Payne. From my personal point of view I would have
found it exceedingly helpful to have (a) had your schedules
and (b) your work as well because I am quite certain that
a lot of effort and work has gone into it, but I think it
would be wrong of me in view of the rule to accept it, but
that is not to say that I don't recognise that (a) a lot
of work has been done and (b) that in fact I probably
would find it well certainly very interesting and I have
no doubt also very useful because it would help me to if
you like cross-check against work which I have done on
the matter, but I don't think it is wise to embark on it.
It annoys me because I know you have got it and I would
like it but I am not going to take it.

      MR. KING:   So be it sir.

      MR. CATCHPOLE: Sir, can I start by, I don't think
I am qualifying what my learned friend Mr. King has just
said to you, but certainly in my submission, I don't think
this is controversial, you are the arbiter of whether
there is sufficient evidence for a reasonable, i.e.
hypothetical reasonable jury properly directed to conclude
beyond reasonable doubt there was unlawful killing, so
to that extent you are required to exercise at least some
judgment in respect of the arguments advanced by :r.y
learned friends up and down the line.

      I can also agree with my learned friend Mr. King
in relation to ex parte Higgins.  I don't see any
difficulty with that case.  If you conclude in respect of
any individual or in respect of all principal players,
if I can put it that way, that there is no evidence
sufficient for a reasonable jury properly directed to
conclude beyond reasonable doubt there was unlawful
killing you must withdraw it either in respect of an
individual or in respect of everyone. That is uncontroversial.

      My submissions are confined largely to the question
of whether unlawful killing can be properly left in
respect of Sheffield Wednesday and it is my submission
that there is no evidence on which a reasonable jury
properly directed could come to the conclusion that
Sheffield Wednesday were guilty of unlawful killing.

      To a certain extent very largely I adopt the
submissions that have been made as to the law by my
                                                            10


                                       MR. KING




learned friends Mr. Maxwell, Mr. Payne and Mr. Isaacs,
and so hopefully I can take it fairly shortly.

      Certainly that is so that the standard of proof is
uncontroversial, it must be beyond reasonable doubt &nd
I also agree, I think everyone is agreed the type of
unlawful killing that is to be considered is only that
of involuntary manslaughter or reckless manslaughter and
I go as far as to say, unlike my learned friend Mr. King,
that the concept of gross negligence should not be left
as a basis for any verdict.

      If I need to refer you to it, sir I think you have
already seen the passage in Stanley in the ruling of
Mr. Justice Turner.  I can give you the page reference,
it is page 14 F-H.

      THE CORONER:   I have seen it.

      MR. CATCHPOLE: That is certainly so - whatever
the qualifications my learned friend suggested and the
comments that he made in relation to Stanley as to the
system - that is certainly so when one is considering
the Club because of course if a criticism is to be made
it is of a system or lack of one the Club employed, so
Stanley is directly on the point.

      There is one matter that has not been raised except
obliquely by my learned friend Mr. Maxwell and that is
the concept of corporate manslaughter.  I accept, but I
must preface it by saying only for the purposes of this
submission in the event that it might go higher and might
have a different view, that a corporation can be found
guilty of manslaughter but the only basis for that finding
is, as was properly set out by iny learned friend
Mr. Maxwell, that the actus reus and mens rea have to
be identified in the person who is the embodiment of the
company.

      I tan take you to the authorities. Again I don't
think that is controversial. One can't aggregate the
acts of other people into that individual, and again for
the purposes of this submission only, I would accept
that Mr. Mackrell is the embodiment of Sheffield Wednesday
and take it from there.

      Again I agree with the elements that are required
to establish reckless manslaughter which have been set
out by my learned friends and I will run through them
very briefly again.

      It must be proved beyond reasonable doubt that a
particular individual had a duty regarding the health
                                                            11


                                     MR. CATCHPOLE




and welfare of the deceased.  I don't think that is in
dispute in respect of any of the principal players here.

       (b) by some act or omission that individual failed
to do what he ought to have done for the health and
welfare of the deceased?

      (c) that but for the failure of that individual
the death of the deceased would not have occurred;

      (d) that the failure was a substantial cause of
the death of the deceased.

      Finally I come to the one that has exercised some
debate up until now:

      (e) that there was no intervening act which caused
the death of the deceased subsequent to the failure.

       If there is such an intervening act it is ray strong
submission that chain of causation will be broken.    If
you need authority for that I say it is a standard principle.
I can direct you sir to Smith and Hogan. There is a debate
I am sure you have seen on page 316, but also in relation
to a discussion of murder that applies here.   I have got
the C ORONERSHIP on Knapman and there is a little debate
on it at paragraph 22.39 and I can read the first paragraph.
It goes on. It says:

      "A murder is not committed when a person
      does a deliberate act which by the inter­
      position of an unforeseen event unwittingly
      leads to the death of another."

So again I don't think there can be much room for debate.

      I am heartened to hear that ray learned friend
Mr. King did not seek to challenge that.   I think it is
a fairly well established principle of law and I also
with respect adopt what my learned friend Mr. Isaacs
has said in that it is not only events that occurred
before the 15th of April, and one can see why Mr. Maxwell
put that in the context of Sheffield City Council
because of course they weren't there on the 15th of April,
but ary intervening act is sufficient to break the chain
of causation, assuming the relevant criteria are
established.




                     Turning to the mental element
                                            MR. CATCHPOLE


     Turning to the mental element, I am quite content
simply to say that Lawrence applies in this case.   I
would, however, take you back to the ruling of
Mr. Justice Turner.   I know Mr. Payne went through it in
some detail but there are some elements I would like to
re-emphasise and perhaps put a slightly different slant
on.   Again I preface it by saying that whatever comments
my learned friend Mr. King made in relation to Turner, do
not apply when one is considering the club, or, indeed,
Mr. Mole s system that was employed on the day, because
this is a case about system.

     Sir, if we start off at page 17.   It is really
letters G .to H.  This is setting out the submissions of
nr. Kentnage:

     "The word 'obvious', said Mr. Kentridge, was not the
     same as 'reasonably foreseeable' and connotes more
     than a risk wnich was reasonably foreseeable.   The
     meanings suggested were 'perfectly evident', 'stares
     one in the face', 'immediately apparent'."

Then if one goes to page 19, sir, F to H, half way
through the paragraph:

     "In my judgment Lord Diplock who was, I respectfully
     think, a master of the English language, did not use
     the words 'obvious and serious' as synonyms to
     describe a risk which was reasonably foreseeable."

In that passage, in my submission, he picks up on the
submissions made by Mr. Kentridge quite plainly.    We
have seen the passage where he emphasises that mere
negligence was not enough.   That obviously follows on.
Then just to re-emphasise a passage on page 22, from
F to H:

    "Thus, it is that in my judgment, before a risk can
    properly be said to be obvious and serious, there
    must be some evidence upon which the jury, being
    properly directed, can find that the particular
    defendant failed to observe that which was 'obvious
    and serious', which words themselves convey a
    meaning that the defendant's perception of risk was
    seriously deficient when compared to that of a
    reasonably prudent person engaged in the same kind
    of activity as that of the defendant whose conduct
    is being called into question."

Having said, obviously, hindsight must be excluded, that,
with respect, sir, does lead to the position that before
the terms "obvious and serious" can be satisfied there
has to be a risk, which was not only merely reasonably
foreseeable.   It goes far beyond that, that one was -
                                            MR. CATCHPOLE


and I had used the words "so plain" to a reasonably
prudent person in the circumstances of the particular
individual in question, that if that particular
individual had failed to perceive it he would be
described as having a perception that was seriously
deficient, but one can use the epithets that
Mr. Kentridge used, that would stare that reasonably
prudent person in the face, or that it was immediately
apparent.   They are very strong words.

     I don't believe my learned friend was challenging
it, indeed my note certainly suggests he wasn't, when he
referred to the case of Elliott.   Certainly in my
submission Elliott can be summed up briefly by saying
that when one is considering the position of a reasonably
prudent person, one puts them into the position and in
the circumstances that the individual in question found
himself - you exclude hindsight - it puts him with all
the factors available to him to see.   However, you do
not take account of any particular - Mr. Russell, I know,
has used the word idiosyncrasy - in the individual
himself.   In Elliott we had a girl with a very low 10
and one could not then put in a reasonably prudent person
with a very low IQ.    If you exclude that would then put
the reasonably prudent person into the position that the
individual in question found himself.

     In that case one is then left that in order to find
the club responsible, in terms that there was an obvious
and serious risk, one has to put in a reasonably prudent
club secretary into the circumstances that Mr. Mackrell
found himself and also to find that there is evidence
there was a risk that was so plain that it would have
been immediately apparent or stared him in the face.

     I do not think Mr. King sought to challenge that.

     Can I turn specifically to the club in relation to
causation?   We have mention from my learned friend
Mr. Payne and I think from my learned friend Mr. Isaacs
that one of the difficulties of the jurisdiction
certainly on this side of the bench is actually that no
criticism comes up front either by way of an indictment
or pleadings so one is inventing one's own criticism of
oneself, if that's right.

     It is fair to say that limited criticisms were made
in cross-examination of the arrangements outside Leppings
Lane turnstiles in relation to the signs, the turnstiles
and the tickets.

     I am not going to argue or enter into tne debate
because that would not be proper, but assuming any of the
limited criticisms that were made have any merit, which I
                                             MR. CATCHPOLE


do not accept, there is no evidence that any jury,
whether reasonable or not, could come to the conclusion
that that caused the crushing outside the turnstiles.
It may be that it might lead to some build-up, but
crushing is a completely different thing and there is
simply no evidence to suggest that anyone foresaw
crushing or the emergency event outside those turnstiles
on that day.   It is wholly unprecedented and all the
evidence is that way.

     Equally there is no evidence on which a reasonable
jury could conclude that the events outside che
turnstiles at two-thirty up to three o'clock, caused the
death of the deceased inside the ground.    It certainly
would not have been foreseeable and that leads on to the
intervening act point.    There is no evidence at all that
any reasonable person, prudent person, in the position of
Mr. Mackrell or any other officer of the club could have
expected or foreseen - and I am using that word in
contradistinction to the mental element - that an exit
gate would be opened at a time, and I add in, "as close
to kick-off," to permit a large number of fans to be
introduced en masse into an area of the ground that was
already full, in particular when the club itself was not
told of that decision and no steps are taken to divert
them away.   All the evidence is that was wholly
unforeseeable as far as any person was concerned, and I
would certainly say any reasonably prudent person in the
position of Mr. Mackrell.    There was no history of it at
all.

     Once one accepts that, any - if there is any -
causation started off outside the ground by the
arrangements or the system or the tickets or whatever,
that must be wholly broken once that decision is taken.

     Equally, if one moves inside the ground, that
argument applies really mutatis mutandis, because the
arrangements that were in place were for an ordinary,
normal turnstile entry.   Once the decision is taken to
open Gate C in the manner I have described, then that
supervenes and becomes an intervening act in relation to
those arrangements that have been made.   If evidence
needs to be said to support the proposition that it
overrode any system that was in place, that evidence came
both from Mr. Mole and Mr. Duckenfield.   I can give you
the references.   It was unchallenged, and indeed I would
say with respect, it was perfectly patent that that
decision overrode any system.

     Again, as far as causation is concerned, I say if
there is anything for which the club can be criticised,
then there was an intervening act on the day of which
they were unaware and could not reasonably have been
                                            MR. CATCHPOLE


expected to have foreseen, which broke any chain of
causation which can be attributed to the cluo.

     It may also be said, and this might be slightly
over-egging the pudding, that given the opening of Gate C
in those circumstances was wholly unforeseeable, if
criticism is being made of the club, and I am not sure
that it was actually raised, if criticism is being made
that there was a failure to have in place arrangements to
deal with that exceptional entry of people, I would say
that that does not even amount to a failure in the terms
described, a failure of breach of duty, because it
requires the club to undertake a crystal ball exercise
and anticipate something that is wholly unforeseen,
whether reasonably or not, by any person, and then to
expect it to make arrangements to deal with that
possibility.

     I even go so far as to say there was no breach of
duty, so causation fails on that limb as well.




          In those circumstances I submit
                                           MR. CATCHPOLE


In those circumstances I submit that there is no act or
omission by the Club which a reasonable Jury properly
directed could possibly conclude was a cause, or even a
substantial cause, of the deaths of the deceased.

     One then really turns, even if that is not right, to
could any reasonable Jury possibly conclude that there was
evidence to establish mens re a. Again, when I use the
word "Club", I have to use the word in relation to Mr.
Mackrell, and again I make the submission that no
reasonable Jury could come to the conclusion that on the
evidence a reasonably prudent person in Mr. Mackrell's
position would have perceived that there was an obvious
and serious risk of overcrowding or of physical injury or
death by overcrowding on those terraces as a result of any
act or omission of his.

     Again I go back to what could or could not be
foreseen, and I again use the distinction as to the events
outside the turnstiles, no evidence suggests that the
crushing could be foreseen by anyone, and that is against
the background when for two years all the evidence is that
the arrangements at that end of the Ground were
successful.  There is again, taking the argument I
advanced slightly earlier, further, there is no evidence
even if that build up and crushing could have been
foreseen that that gave rise to an obvious and serious
risk inside the Ground, because then one is back to the
intervening act, and I think my learned friend Mr. King
has quite rightly focussed on the intervening act, because
one of the things one has to establish in deciding what
was or what was not a substantial cause is not whether
there was a general risk of physical injury for whatever
reason on the terraces, but could it have been foreseen
that an act would lead to a particular train of events,
which would lead to the possibility of overcrowding and
physical injury?  In this case again I say there is
absolutely no evidence which could possibly suggest that
anyone in the position of Mr. Mackrell, up to and
including the 15th April, could perceive that there was an
obvious and serious risk that Gate C would be opened to
permit the entry of a large number of fans in an
uncontrolled fashion without either the Club being told,
or without steps being taken by those who make that
decision to ensure that the fans are diverted.

     So as far as any of the events that occurred on the
day, I say there is simply no evidence that one could pin
on a reasonably prudent man in Mr. Mackrell's position to
show that he would have perceived such a plain risk, or a
risk that was immediately apparent.   It runs wholly
contrary to everything we have heard.
                                           MR. CATCHPOLE


     There has been a brief reference to the system that
was employed on the day, and again I am not sure how much
criticism, if any, was made of the Club in relation to
that system.  Certainly I do not think it came very thick
and fast and was not put to Mr. Mackrell ....

     MR. KING:   Can I say, sir, far from it.   I make my
position clear, that the evidence of Mackrell, Lock,
Seamen, I would submit indicated a different system they
were expecting from the system which was employed on the
day, and that is why I submitted to you, sir, that if
system was a cause there was evidence - it is not for me
to say which way a Jury would go - but there was evidence
that a reasonably prudent person of the expertise dealing
with plans would know that the system on the day had the
risk of overcrowding inherent in it, because of the fact
that Mackrell, Lock, Seamen, Eastwood, were expecting a
different system in certain respects.   If that helps my
learned friend ....

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   It is very helpful.  I have got a
series of factors which I would have put to you as there
being a lack of evidence for a person in the position of
Mr. Mackrell, but I think it is now plain it simply has
not been put to Mr. Mackrell that he should have perceived
there was an obvious and serious risk, and as such I don't
think there is any evidence, with respect, that could
establish any mens rea against Mr. Mackrell/the Club, in
relation to the system if that system is to be found at
fault, and I make no argument about that.

     So in the round, whether it is the opening of Gate C
or the system itself, there is simply no evidence on which
any reasonable Jury could come to the conclusion that a
reasonably prudent person in the position of Mr. Mackrell
would have perceived the obvious and serious risk to which
I have referred and in the manner in which I have defined
it. As such, with respect, there should not be left to
this Jury the verdict in respect of Sheffield Wednesday of
unlawful killing, and they should be directed as my
learned friend Mr. Maxwell has suggested in relation to
the Sheffield City Council.

     Unless I can assist you, sir - as I say, I have got a
number of factors for the circumstances but I don't think
in the light of that intervention that I need to go
through them, and I have been much shorter than I
anticipated.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   My submission is relating to the
Inquest into the death of my son John McBrien at
Hillsborough Football Stadium on 15th April, 1989.
                                               MRS McB.RIEN


     Thank you for giving me the opportunity to make a
legal submission on behalf of my family, as I am only a
lay person.  Also, I am grateful that I have had the
opportunity to study the submissions made by Hr. Richard
Maxwell, QC, on behalf of Sheffield City Council.  I wish
to utilise a large amount of those submissions as they
relate to the law in general to develop my theme and put
my case.

     My submission relates only to the possibility of the
Jury being directed to consider a verdict of unlawful
killing.  For the purpose of this Inquest a verdict of
unlawful killing would be justified if the Jury was
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that some person or
persons whom the Jury must under no account name or
identify, had brought about the death of John McBrien, as
a result of committing the offence of manslaughter.

     If the Jury are to be directed to consider a verdict
of unlawful killing, on the basis that John McBrien died
as a consequence of manslaughter, then the Jury must be
warned in terms that they are being directed to consider
whether a criminal offence of manslaughter had been
committed.  They must be given the appropriate direction
as to the standard of proof for manslaughter, and the
appropriate direction is the simple one, that they should
be satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt, or as is
sometimes said satisfied so that they are sure that all
the necessary elements of the offence are proved, and that
the verdict of unlawful killing must not be returned
unless they are satisfied beyond all reasonable doubt that
such elements are proved.

     The question is whether the Jury should be directed
to consider a verdict of unlawful killing based on
reckless manslaughter.  That is to say to consider whether
the Jury are satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that some
person or persons whom they must under no account name has
brought about the death of John McBrien as a result of
recklessness.  If the Jury are to consider whether some
specific individual committed the offence of reckless
manslaughter then the Jury have to consider firstly
whether that person by his conduct, that is some act or
omission to act where there was a duty to act, was a
substantial cause of the death of John McBrien.

     In order to prove causation the following matters
must be established:  (1) that but for the conduct of the
person under consideration the death of John McBrien would
not have occurred; (2) that although the conduct of the
person under consideration need not be the sole or the
main cause of death, it must be a substantial cause.
                                                 MRS McERIEN


     The Jury's function is to establish how John McBrien
came by his death and they are concerned to find out what
circumstances are directly responsible for his death, that
the events occurring at the Ground on 15th April, 1989,
from 2.30 p.m. onwards were foreseeable.  The events
referred to are the sudden introduction of a large number
of fans en masse into an area of the terraces which was
already crowded and full.  Prior to the opening of the
exit gate, Gate C, at 2.52 p.m. approximately 52,000 fans
had been safely accommodated within the Stadium that day
and had been admitted by turnstile entry.  The admittance
of the remaining 2,000 or so fans should have continued by
the same safe method of turnstile entry, and not in the
form of a sudden in rush by the opening of an exit gate.
The breaking of the rules that day to enable fans to enter
the Stadium ....

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, you were doing very
well, exceedingly well, but you are now beginning, in fact
not beginning you are well into an address on the facts.
I did warn you twice because I know how difficult it is,
but I am not going to let you address me on the facts.   It
is not proper or fair to 94 other youngsters, or indeed
older people, because 94 other people have also died and
they are just as precious to their families as John is to
you.  It is quite improper that I should allow you to
break all the rules, if I don't let Mr. King break them.

     I don't know what is coming next but at the moment
you are telling me facts.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I was going to lead up to the point
of the alternative of opening the gates, that there was an
alternative.

     THE CORONER:   No, that is an address on the facts.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Might I   suggest perhaps we could
rise for our coffee break and   meanwhile Mr. King and
myself will have a quick look   over Mrs. McBrien s
submission and see whether we   can be of any assistance.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.  Please understand, Mrs.
McBrien, I am in a terrible difficulty over this.  I don't
want to muzzle you, if that is the right word, but on the
other hand I have also got to stick within the rules.
That is very kind of you, Mr. Catchpole, and a good idea.
Shall we have 20 minutes?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Sir, I think almost all of it does
relate to the law though.

     THE CORONER:   If Mr. Catchpole and Mr. King are
happy to look at it ....
                                               MRS McBRIEN


     MRS. McBRIEN:   I would not like the theme that I
have changed in any way.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   I can promise Mrs. McBrien I would
not dream of attempting to alter the theme.

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, let's make this quite
clear.  What Mr. Catchpole and Mr. King, or indeed anybody
is going to say to you, is not binding.  You can say, "Get
lost".  You can even say, "I don't want you to look at
it", but if you have an offer of help then you must
consider it and either accept it or reject it as you wish,
but you must also bear in mind that when I come back after
my coffee break if I am not satisfied that you are dealing
with law I am going to stop you.

                   (Short Adjournment)
     MR. CATCHPOLE: I have had the opportunity, sir,
of briefly looking through Mrs. McBrien's submission.
She was in fact right to say that the vast majority of
it does relate to the law. There are passages relating
to the fact which, as written, sounds like a speech but
I think, as I have tried to explain, they are actually
intended to illustrate Mrs. McBrien's theme that there
is evidence the Jury could properly consider in
reaching a verdict rather than addressing you on the
facts. They are not very long passages.
     THE CORONER: I take it though, from those of you
who have looked at it, you are not going to jump and
complain if I listen?

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   It is only me that has looked at
it, sir.
     MR. KING: I suggested an approach by which we
could solve the problem and I left it to my learned
friend, Mr. Catchpole, to continue only because on
reflection, given my particular position I did not feel
I ought to go any further because I did not want any
conflict arising out of my position.
     THE CORONER: I look to you then, Mr. Catchpole.
I have heard what you say. Mrs. McBrien, carry on.

     MRS. McBRIEN: Sir, there is just a little to put
in a different way that I was referring to before.

     THE CORONER: I have heard what Mr. Catchpole has
said and I am reassured.

     MRS. McBRIEN: It is the law. I have read the
submission of Mr. Hale and I have listened carefully to
the submissions of Mr. Isaacs and my submission is that
there is evidence on which a reasonable Jury, properly
directed, could conclude that John McBrien was
unlawfully killed.

    There is evidence to suggest that the opening of
Gate C was the cause, or substantial cause, of the
death of John McBrien. For example, some 50,000 fans
were already in the stadium and there was the
uncontrolled entry through Gate C at 2.52. In
addition, there was the evidence of Dr. Nicholson about
the increase in the rate of flow into the ground.

    The second matter to be considered is the mental
element involved in reckless manslaughter. The Jury
should be directed to consider whether the doer of the
act acted recklessly in so far as before doing the act
he either failed to give any thought to the possibility
of there being any such risk to the fans within the
stadium, or, having recognised that there was such a
risk, he nevertheless went on to do it anyway.

    This can be compared with driving a motor vehicle
on the highway. The example I give is that we have
evidence that about 52,000 had entered or been driven
into the stadium by 2.52 by the safe speed limit, that
is, turnstile entry. That had been observed at the
time but at 2.52 the speed limit was exceeded
considerably, that is, the rate of flow of fans was
dramatically increased. That was a reckless act. That
was driving at excessive speeds causing injuries and
deaths.

    The Jury must be satisfied that the defendant was
in fact driving the vehicle, that is the mass of
people, in such a manner as to create an obvious and
serious risk of causing physical injury to some other
person, namely John McBrien, who was using the road,
namely the Hillsborough Football Stadium, at the time.
In driving in that manner the defendant did so without
having given any thought to the possibility of there
being any such risk or, having recognised that there
was some risk involved, had none the less gone on to
take it.

    It is for the Jury to decide whether the risk
created by the manner in which the vehicle was being
driven was both obvious and serious and in deciding
that they might apply the standard of the ordinary,
prudent motorist as represented by themselves. If
satisfied that an obvious and serious risk was created
by the manner of the defendant's driving, the Jury are
entitled to infer that he was in one or other states of
mind required to constitute the offence and will
probably do so, but regard must be given to any
explanation he gives as to his state of mind which may
displace the inference.

    The second question you have to decide, was the
driving that caused those injuries reckless? If so,
then it is manslaughter. To amount to reckless driving
mere negligence is not enough. His conduct must go
beyond the question of compensation between citizens
and amount to criminal conduct requiring punishment.
You have to be satisfied upon the question of
recklessness that he drove in such a manner as to
create an obvious and serious risk of causing physical
harm to some other person who might be using thfe road
at the time.
    Once you are satisfied that the manner of his
driving was such as to create an obvious and serious
risk of causing physical harm to a person using the
road at the time you also have to be satisfied that
driving in that manner he did so without having given
any thought to the possibility of there being such a
risk or, alternatively, having recognised that there
was some risk none the less went on to take it. In
other words, he was reckless. He reckoned not of the
consequences.
    In determining the quality of his driving, you
apply the standards of the ordinary, reasonable
motorist. You, of course, take into account all the
evidence including his explanation. If you are
satisfied so as to be sure that the first question is
proved, that is to say, the act of X was a substantial
cause of the death of John McBrien then the second
question you have to decide is, was the act that caused
his death reckless? If so, then it is manslaughter.
    His conduct must go beyond the question of
compensation between citizens and amount to criminal
conduct requiring punishment. You have to be satisfied
upon the question of recklessness that he acted in such
a manner as to create an obvious and serious risk of
causing physical harm to John McBrien who happened to
be using the Leppings Lane terrace at the time. You
also have to be satisfied that acting in that manner he
did so without having given any thought to the
possibility of there being any such risk or,
alternatively, having recognised that there was some
risk involved none the less went on to take it. In
other words, he was reckless. He reckoned not of the
consequences.
    In determining the quality of his act you apply the
standards of the ordinary reasonable person who
happened to be in the same circumstances as X. You, of
course, take into account all the evidence including
his explanation.

    In order to constitute the offence of manslaughter,
the risk of death being caused must be very high and
such a remark should be made to the Jury here. There
is evidence on which a reasonable Jury could conclude
that there was a real possibility of a sudden inrush of
fans using the central tunnel as that was the direct
means of access to the Leppings Lane terrace. It was
also known that the terrace had a high perimeter fence
at the front and radial fences dividing the terrace
into pens, and having radial gates that could become
obscured.
    Where manslaughter is charged and the circumstances
are that John McBrien was killed as a result of the
reckless driving of the defendant on a public highway,
that is Hillsborough Football Stadium the Judge should
give the Jury the appropriate direction but in order to
constitute the offence of manslaughter the risk of
death being caused by the manner of the defendant's
driving must be very high.

    In deciding whether or not the risk was obvious the
Jury should have regard to whether the risk would have
been obvious to an ordinary, prudent individual in the
relevant circumstances. The Jury should be told that
they may take into account what any witness has told
them was obvious or not to that witness as a risk. The
witness's perception of the risk can provide an
indication of whether or not the risk was obvious to an
ordinary prudent person and especially so if the Jury
conclude that the witness in question was such an
ordinary, prudent person.

    For this purpose, witness includes a person whose
conduct has been called into question at the Inquest
and the Jury can take into account an explanation by
such a person. The Jury should only be directed to
consider a verdict of unlawful killing based upon
reckless manslaughter if the Coroner concludes, as a
matter of law, that there is a case fit to be left to
the Jury and whether the Coroner concludes, as a matter
of law, that a reasonable Jury, properly directed,
might bring in such a verdict.

    The death of each deceased must be considered
individually. Before the Jury may be invited to
consider a verdict of unlawful killing in respect of
John McBrien the Coroner must direct himself as to
whether or not there is a prima facie case so far as
John McBrien is concerned. A verdict in the case of
each deceased is required and if unlawful killing is to
be left to the Jury it must be considered by the Jury
in relation to each of the deceased.

    The Jury should be directed that if, having
considered the circumstances of death affecting each of
the individual deceased, they are satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that some or all of them may be
considered as a group of persons whose death was caused
as a result of reckless manslaughter committed by some
specific individual or individuals, who must under no
account be named or identified, then similar verdicts
may be returned in the case of each member of such
group. There will, therefore, be 95 verdicts but some
or all may be in similar terms.
                                                       26


                                     MRS. McBRIEN




      However, the jury must be directed that it is
improper to consider unlawful killing in relation to the
95 deceased as a whole or to any group of the deceased
without first considering the individual circumstances
of the death of each particular deceased.

      The jury must be warned that no short cut is
available to them permitting them to proceed on the
presumption that they are entitled to consider the
circumstances of death of the 95 deceased as a whole
or of any group of the deceased as a group unless some
cause is shown why they should not do so.

      That would reverse the order in which relevant
consideration should be dealt with.

      They are concerned with the Inquest relating to
the death of John McBrien at the Hillsborough Football
Stadium disaster as an individual case.

      There is no presumption that a verdict in common
form is applicable to the 95 deceased persons.  Only
after careful consideration of each individual case can
the jury establish what verdict is appropriate.

      The jury must be directed that they can return a
verdict of unlawful killing only if they can attribute
the ingredients of the relevant offence, reckless
manslaughter to some individual person or persons
whom they should on no account name or otherwise
identify.
      In this context the jury should consider the position
of each single person who may be a candidate taking each
such person in turn and coming to a conclusion.

      In this context the jury must be warned that
whatever person is being considered, and be that person
a corporation or a natural human being, the ingredients
of manslaughter must, be established by proving the
necessary mental element and criminal conduct of man­
slaughter against it or him by evidence properly to
be relied on against it or him and a case against any
person cannot be fortified by evidence against another
person. No aggregation of criminal culpability is
permitted.

      If unlawful killing is to be left to the jury
as a possible verdict then the Coroner should indicate
to the jury that they must deal with that issue first
and that they should approach therefore initially the
question whether or not they are satisfied so that they
are sure beyond a reasonable doubt thht the verdict
of unlawful killing raay be returned in respect of
John McBrien.
                                                            27


                                     MRS. McBRIEN



      The jury have heard a variety of different persons
and such criticisms have been voiced wholly or mainly
in cross-examination.

      Representation of certain persons whose conduct
was likely to be called into question has been permitted.

      The case of any such person whose conduct has been
called into question then unless a reasonable jury properly
directed could conclude that such person committed the
offence of manslaughter against any or all or some of the
deceased, the jury must be directed in terms either:

       (1) To exclude that person from their consideration
of the issue whether or not they are satisfied beyond
reasonable doubt that the verdict of unlawful killing is
appropriate; or

       (2) To consider such a verdict only in the case
of some other person or persons who should be named in
the direction but not of course in the verdict and not
to consider such a verdict in the case of any other
person.

      The reasons for discriminating in this way are:

      (a) For reasons of justice and humanity there
should be no question of any risk arising that a verdict
of unlawful killing where the jury are forbidden to name
any culprit might be understood in the context of the
evidence to refer to one or more of those persons whose
conduct was called into question at the Inquest, but in
respect of whom no reasonable jury properly directed
could conclude that such person had committed the offence
of manslaughter.

      Such a risk does arise where there have been
criticisms of and suggestions express or implied of
negligence against a variety of persons and all the more
as where the verdict of unlawful killing involves a finding
of recklessness which the jury and the public may be at
risk of confusing with negligence. There must be no risk
of those who are innocent of criminal culpability of being
caught up with any whom the jury may regard as criminally
responsible.

      (b) The converse of (a) is also true, namely that
in the case of a person whose conduct the jury are rightly
scrutinising to see whether they are satisfied so as to
be sure that such conduct is criminal, any allegations
against or criticism of any other person might give rise
to prejudice.  Such a case does arise where the jury may
be tempted to aggregate fault.
                                                           28


                                      MRS. MCBRIEN



       (c)       Without discrimination and exclusion of persons
who ought not to be regarded as candidates in terms of
criminal culpability there is a risk that the jury may
be confused by an unnecessarily and erroneously wide choice
of candidates.

      That concludes my submission.

      THE CORONER:   Thank you, Mrs. McBrien.

      MISS ADDLEMAN:  Sir, can I say that in due course
what I will seek to do is to adopt many of the submissions,
indeed if not all the submissions made by my learned friend
Mr. Russell. Perhaps I will then have some amplification
to make.

      I am in your hands, sir, but we feel down this end
that Mr. Russell should go first.

      THE CORONER:   I will be very happy to hear Mr. Russell
before I hear you.

      MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, I have sought to prepare a
skeleton argument of my submissions and you will see casting
your eye over it that it covers many of the points which
I will be able to pass over very quickly indeed because I
don't see any point in rehearsing submissions which have
been made concisely and forcefully by those further up
the line.

      Sir, perhaps the quickest way is to move through
this skeleton pausing to elaborate matters where either
you require further guidance of what I am trying to say
or where I feel the point is not covered sufficiently
in the skeleton.

      The intention of these submissions is made clear first
of all. The sole concern of these submissions is to
establish that Mr. Greenwood is not a person in respect
of whom the jury should be permitted to consider returning
a verdict of unlawful killing and is made with this
proviso, that it is not concerned with the positions of
other persons whether human or corporate.

      Sir, the first point that I come to is the importance
of excluding ineligible persons and two authorities are
referred to in the skeleton, ex. parte Gray and the case
that is referred to in that case within the body of the
judgment, that of ex parte Thompson.

      Sir, I don't think it is necessary to read out the
whole of the judgment in ex parte Gray. You are familiar
with it and have shown yourself to be familiar with it,
but you will recall in ex parte Gray what Mr. Alan Jones
                                                      29


                                      MR. RUSSELL




maintained had happened and the basis upon which he made
his criticism, was that the effect of the direction given
to the jury in ex parte Gray was to create a blunderbuss
effect where the opportunity for returning an unlawful
killing verdict was a shot which went off in all directions
striking Police involved indiscriminately.

      Sir, the reference to that, certainly in the Weekly
Law Reports is at 1028 at E.

      THE CORONER:   Yes, I remember that.

      MR. RUSSELL:  I am sure you are familiar with that
passage, but it follows from that, indeed it is said in
terms by Lord Justice Watkins that the jury's task is to
consider each Police Officer in turn rather than employ
the weapon that was described by Mr. Jones as a "blunderbuss".

      In that case of course there were eight Police
Officers who could conceivably have had anything to do
with the death of the deceased and in those circumstances
it was a possible and feasible task for the jury to consider
each of those Officers in turn and apply the proper test
for unlawful killing which is articulated by Lord Justice
Watkins in that case, but the essential difference between
ex parte Gray and these Inquests is that compared to a
cast of eight in the weeks that have brought us to these
submissions we have heard from a cast of hundreds, of
people from all walks of life be they Policemen, Club
Officers, Engineers, supporters, members of Local Government,
members of the Fire Service, each of which from one source
or another there has been criticism, but it does not help
the jury's task to be simply referred to the evidence and
given the appropriate direction as to the circumstances
in which they can return an unlawful killing, if they are
left with a morass of people from whom to choose.

      Sir, perhaps the position is made starkly clear
in the reference to ex parte Thompson that occurs in
ex parte Gray. As you will see it appears on page 1025
of the Weekly Law Reports, I apologise for not using
the Queen's Bench Reports, it is the fourth page of the
judgment of Lord Justice Watkins.   Lord Justice Watkins
said this:

      "I think it right to preface consideration of
      the excellent submissions which we have
      listened to by reciting the words used by
      the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Lane, in
      R. v South London Coroner, ex parte Thompson,
      in giving the judgment of the Court in which
      I was a member, he said:  'The Coroner's
      task in a case such as this is a formidable
      one and no one would dispute that.  It is
                                                          30


                                    MR. RUSSELL




     quite apart from the difficulties which inevitably
     arise when feelings are running high and the
     spectators are emotionally involved and vocal.
     Once again it should not be forgotten that an
     inquest is a fact finding exercise and not
     a method of apportioning guilt. The procedure
     and rules of evidence which are suitable for
     one are unsuitable for the other.  In an inquest
     it should never be forgotten that there are no
     parties, there is no indictment, there is no
     prosecution, there is no defence, there is no
     trial, simply an attempt to establish facts.
     It is an inquisitorial process, a process of
     investigation quite unlike a criminal trial
     where the prosecutor accuses and the accused
     defends, the judge holding the balance or the
     ring, whichever metaphor one chooses to use.'"

Sir, insofar as one can draw an analogy or a contrast with
criminal cases so one can with civil cases.

      Of course in a civil case one has means whereby the
issues are limited and the attention of the tribunal is
directed to a narrow compass which is very properly a narrow
compass and one has pleadings where the issues are set out
and one has other legal documents whereby a party who is
putting forward a case is tied down by further and better
particulars or by the administration of interrogatories.
I am sure this is a familiar process to you.




                          At a criminal trial
                                               MR. RUSSELL


     At a criminal trial the jury is not left with an
account of all the events that have happened that gave
rise to the event with which they are concerned and then
a direction as to what the appropriate mental process
should be for them before they could return a verdict of,
let us say, manslaughter.   Indeed, in this case the jury
needs help out of the morass of all the circumstances and
that help must inevitably come from you and the deeper
the mire the more robust, in my submission, you must be
in helping the jury identify what are the proper verdicts
and, certainly as far as my client is concerned, who are
the proper persons.   Putting it another way, who are
ineligible persons for them to consider?

     If it is a robust task - I choose that word reading
what is said by Lord Justice Parker in the case to which
you referred us last night, ex parte Higgins.    Tnat is a
case which was wholly different from that which we are
considering.   Sir, it is page 243 of that book.    It is
a simple case arising out of the Mapping dispute, when
the deceased had been killed by the driving of a lorry.
In that case Counsel for the deceased and Counsel for the
applicant - they were separately represented - sougnt to
identify in the evidence at the stage of the judicial
review, scintilli of unlawful killing, which would have
entitled the jury, so it was submitted, to come to the
conclusion that the proper verdict was unlawful killing,
notwithstanding the inadequacies of the direction tnat
were furnished to the jury by the Coroner.

     Indeed at page 245, appear these two short
paragraphs:

     "Mr. Coghlan for the coroner submitted th.-it
     nevertheless there was evidence upon whicn .t jurv
     properly directed could have come to the conclusion
     that a verdict of unlawful killing was the uroi>er
     verdict.   In this he was supported by Mr. O'Connor.
     Both of them referred us to all such passages of the
     evidence as they were able to suggest mi:;ht amount
     to sufficient evidence to justify such a verdict.

     I am wholly unable to accept that the evidence could
     conceivably amount to justification in law for any
     such verdict.   For myself I gain the distinct
     impression that the coroner was of the same view but
     for some reason or other did not withdraw that
     verdict from the purview of the jury."

     Perhaps there it envisages what is the duty on the
coroner in such circumstances;  a duty, in my submission,
to be robust, to withdraw verdicts which should not be
left to a jury on the basis which has already been
articulated higher up.   Equally importantly, to withdraw
                                                        32

                                                MR. RUSSELL


from the jury's purview those people who are ineligible
because the evidence against them-is insufficient or none
existent for a reasonable jury, accepting such evidence
there is, concluding, having been properly directed, that
the appropriate verdict is unlawful killing.

     In this, sir, I am fortified by the observation in
the commentary by the editor of the Casebook on Coroners,
page 247, beginning on the third line of the commentary:

     "Moreover, Lord Justice Parker considered that the
     evidence could not have amounted in law to a verdict
     of 'unlawful killing' and the verdict ought to have
     been withdrawn from the purview of the jury.   The
     Coroner must withdraw from the jury, as a matter of
     law, those formal verdicts which cannot possibly be
     supported by the evidence."

The next paragraph, again it is a short one and is
perhaps relevant:

     "Occasionally Coroners have left some most unlikely
     verdicts to a jury, if only to give the jury a
     choice.   One can imagine the discomfiture of a
     Coroner who, after perhaps a long and exhaustive
     inquiry, is obliged to inform the jury that as a
     matter of law there is only one conclusion to be
     considered and effectively having to direct them to
     return it."

I do not think the last sentence is relevant.

     Sir, last night you invited us to consider whether
in the light of what was said in ex parte Higgins, there
was a duty upon yourself to take certain action in
respect of verdicts, and I presume you are also enquiring
particular persons, or a discretion.   Sir, I wonder
whether it is helpful in these circumstances to talk
about a discretion.   What there clearly is, and here
again there is an analogy with the criminal law in the
case of Galbraith, is a duty upon you, sir, to form a
judgment and that is a judgment which you must form
having regard to the length of the inquiry that has taken
place and in that I have used the word "robust" before, I
use it again, it follows that the longer the inquiry the
larger the conceivable cast of people whose conduct has
been criticised by one or more people over the weeks that
have preceded this, the more robust you should be.

     Returning, sir, if I may to the skeleton, I perhaps
put it in more simple terms here.  The Coroner has a duty
to withdraw from the jury's consideration those persons
where there is no evidence, or only tenuous evidence on
which, even if such evidence were accepted, a reasonable
                                              HR. RUSSELL


jury, properly directed, could conclude that they
unlawfully killed any of the deceased.

     Sir, that is an analogy with the case of Galbraith
and I use the word "analogy* advisedly, bearing in mind
what is also said and the sentiments that are expressed
by the Divisional Court in the case of ex parte Higgins.

     Sir, it follows that one can derive from the case of
Spooner, as I go on to say, that the Coroner's duty is to
exclude ineligible persons, and it is a duty that should
be discharged robustly, especially when dealing with
causation, to which I come below, and the elements of
manslaughter.

     Sir, you have been referred to the case of ex parte
Spooner and I am sure you are familiar with the brief
passage on page 17 of Lord Justice Bingham's Judgment.
The penultimate paragraph of his Judgment:

     "It is his duty to guide the jury to a correct
     verdict, but nis responsibility is to conduct a fact
     finding exercise, not to apportion blame and not to
     decide civil liability.   In a case such as this the
     chain of causation may be of infinite length.   The
     Coroner had to break it somewhere to keep his
     inquiry within tolerable bounds.   He broke it at
     what I judge to be a reasonable and sustainable
     point, particularly bearing in mind the exhaustive
     Public Inquiry which had already been conducted by
     Mr. Justice Sheen."

     Sir, perhaps that is further comfort for a Coroner
who recognises that he has a duty to form a judgment and
perhaps should be encouraged to do so robustly.

     Returning to the skeleton, a person should not be
left for the jury to consider in respect of a verdict of
unlawful killing unless, I submit, there is sufficient
and proper evidence on which a reasonable jury, properly
directed, could conclude that that person killed
unlawfully one or more of the deceased.

     Sir, I respectfully adopt what my learned friend
Mr. Maxwell says on pages 15 and 16 of his submissions as
to the reasons why it is important only to leave within
the purview of the jury those people who are proper
persons.   Sir, this can be expressed on one of two
bases, as he does in the alternative on page 15 of his
submissions, either that you should seek to include for
the purposes of the jury only those people for whom you
feel that there is sufficient evidence upon which they
could reach a verdict of unlawful killing or,
alternatively, negatively, that you should exclude all
                                               MR. RUSSELL


those people or all those classes of people by reference
to occupation, job, position, location, time, or
whatever, those people who should not be eligible persons
for the jury to consider in respect of a verdict of
unlawful killing.

     THE CORONER:    Can I just stop you for one minute?
It is paragraph 12, because we want to follow when we
read the transcript.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, it is page 15.   It is the
second sub-paragraph under the numbered paragraph 12,
beginning, "In the case of any such person..." and the
passage which I adopt is that that ends at the end of
paragraph 12 towards the foot of page 16, ending with the
words, "...erroneously wide choice of candidates."

     Sir, the next two sections I think I can move over
very quickly.   I do not seek to depart from the
suggestion by Mr. Maxwell that the only version of
unlawful killing with which we are concerned is reckless
manslaughter and those above me have dealt well with what
is the relevant standard of proof and I think that is
clear and I would not seek to repeat what has already
been said.

     Moving on to the second page, the approach I would
invite you to take in respect of unlawful killing in
respect of Mr. Greenwood, because remember the original
intention I articulated at the beginning of these
submissions, and the question I pose is this:  were the
deaths of any of the deceased caused by a reckless act by
Mr. Greenwood, or an omission to act on his part when
under a duty to act?   Afterwards I refer to an omission,
I am meaning an omission to do an act on his part when he
was under a duty to act, but for conciseness I have only
called it an omission.

     For reasons I shall develop later on, nothing short
of recklessness will suffice and it is no longer
appropriate to talk in terms of negligence with some sort
of adjective stuck in front of it.

     Sir, I then proceed to unlawful killing itself.
The first and vital hurdle is one of causation.   Sir,
this has been touched upon by my learned friends further
up the chain.   I need not dwell on it.  I can perhaps
move through some sentiments quite quickly.   It is
possible, in my submission, to unravel time and
circumstances leading up to the deaths, to produce a
catalogue of all the features which have been mentioned
in connection with the disaster, but, I submit, it is
important to distinguish a cause or causes of the deaths
                                               MR. RUSSELL


from the tessellation of events which constitute the
background to the disaster.

     Sir, in making that I do not seek to denigrate from
what my learned Mr. Payne has done in providing a list of
factors which he says are capable of being causes.    It
is, of course, a question in the last resort, subject to
your direction, to the jury to identify the cause, the
causes,  the "how".   Certainly while it might be possible
to identify approximate cause or causes of how the deaths
occurred, it is important to remember that certain
factors might play in a part in the sequelae to the
events created by those cause or causes, which themselves
remain relevant.

     That sounds gobbledegook - I apologise if it came
across as gobbledegook - but take the example of the
creation of the radial fences, or the installation and
size of the radial gates at the back of the radial
fences,  onecan, for the sake of argument, postulate that
the cause of the deaths is the opening of Gate C, or the
manner of the entry into Gate C into the central pens by
those people, but the fact of the erection in the past
before the accident occurred, before two previous semi­
finals had taken place, their presence and their position
and their form of construction are, of course, relevant
factors which colour what happens after the cause which
is identified by the jury, subject to your direction, was
the proximate cause of the disaster.

     Sir, it is important, returning to the skeleton, to
identify the features and events and the acts and the
omissions, but only identify those which are substantial,
effective and direct.

     Sir, you have already been addressed upon what might
be the "but for" test.   An equal, legal way of
discussing that is to identify what is a causa causans, a
cause causing what has happened.

     However, sir, it is important as I proceed to
recognise breaks in the chain of causation and the
effects of such breaks.   Now I am speaking here solely
from the position of Mr. Greenwood and one can postulate,
for example, a break in the chain of causation, and I
have added a little to what appears on the skeleton.
For example, the consequences of opening Gate C and the
fact of the entry of a large number of supporters intent
on seeing the match, into the most popular area of
terracing very short before or at kick-off, in
circumstances wholly unprecedented, unexpected and
unforeseeable, which takes place to the ignorance of
Mr. Greenwood.
                                              MR. RUSSELL


     It is important that I add those words because when
one is concerned with what acts or omissions by
Mr. Greenwood might have caused the deaths it is
important that his ignorance of what was happening, of
which the evidence is unanimous, is, of course, very
material.




        My conclusion under
                                                 MR. RUSSELL


My conclusion under causation for unlawful killing is that
no reasonable Jury, I submit, properly directed could
conclude that any act or omission by Mr. Greenwood was a
direct, substantial and effective cause of the death of
any of the deceased.

     Sir, moving on to the next page, to the elements of
manslaughter, again this can be taken shortly because of
what has already gone before.  The only way perhaps in
which I would differ from my learned friend Mr. Maxwell's
exposition of the law is to invite you or to remind you of
the two elements that exist to manslaughter.  Sometimes
the mental element of manslaughter is all wrapped up as
being both the subjective and the objective element, but
in my submission when the offence is analysed it still
does fall into the traditional categories of an actus
reus, the deed which was done, and the mens rea, the mind
with which that act or omission was done.

     The definition that I offer of actus reus is an act
(or omission, where there is a duty on that person to act)
which creates a risk, serious and obvious to a reasonable
and prudent person (in the same position as that person)
that physical injury will be caused to another person by
that act (or omission).

     Sir, there has been some dispute, or some argument
between my learned friend Mr. Isaacs and my learned friend
Mr. King as to whether death is more appropriate a word to
use instead of personal injury.  I would respectfully
support my learned friend Mr. King and disagree with my
learned friend Mr. Isaacs for this reason, not only is it
my understanding that is what it is, but it would be
surprising if one considers what is the requisite need for
murder which, of course, does not have to include an
intent that death will follow, but a conviction for murder
can, of course, stand when there is no more than an
intention to commit grievous bodily harm, or inflict
grievous bodily harm.  Indeed, it would be turning the
criminal law on its head to say that there must be an
intention or an anticipation of death for manslaughter,
and only grievous bodily harm for murder.  Perhaps it is a
matter of semantics for these purposes but I would submit,
as my learned friend Mr. King says, physical injury,
physical harm, would be the appropriate word and not
death.

     Sir, to mens r e a , when that person does that act (or
omits to do it) he has not given any thought to the
possibility of there being such a risk or has gone on to
take it, having recognised it, and the three cases of
Caldwell, Lawrence and Seymour I need not refer you to.
The only feature that I would remark upon which is no
doubt something you have already observed is that the
                                                MR. RUSSELL


Judge who gave the decision in ex parte Gray, Lord Justice
Watkins, in articulating what is the appropriate
ingredients for an unlawful killing direction, was the
Court of Appeal Judge who gave a leading judgment in the
Court of Appeal in the case of Seymour which was
subsequently cited with approval, not only by Lord Roskill
in the House of Lords in Seymour, but subsequently by Mr.
Justice Turner in the case against Stanley. If you are
concerned about whether there are two routes, one
affecting inquests and one affecting the criminal courts
in terms of manslaughter, you can identify a cornerstone
in the mind of Lord Justice Watkins, who was the Judge in
both ex parte Gray and in the Court of Appeal in Seymour.

     Sir, then I set out a reference from ex parte Gray,
namely his observation that a failure to appreciate such a
risk is not by itself sufficient to amount to
recklessness.  Sir, this was something which my learned
friend Mr. King yesterday confessed that he was a little
confused by.  I would perhaps invite him and you to read
that sentence, underlining mentally the words "by itself",
and surely what Lord Justice Watkins is saying there is
that for recklessness it is not sufficient just to have
the mental element, namely whether or not the risk was
appreciated by the person whose conduct is called into
question.  One must also have the actus reus , which is the
objective element of the offence of manslaughter requiring
consideration of what a reasonably prudent person in the
position of the person whose conduct is called into
question would have been.

     Sir, finally on this section I would submit that no
epithet applied to negligence can be a synonym for
recklessness, and the authority referred to is Kong Cheuk
Kwan v. The Queen, which is a report that you have already
had before you.  In my submission the effect of what is
said by Lord Justice Roskill is to lay to rest in effect
if not in name that there continues to be a creature which
is manslaughter by gross negligence, and that appears on
page 26 of the opinion expressed by Lord Roskill,
beginning about six lines down, with a reference to Lord
Atkin in Andrews:

    "Though Lord Atkin in his speech in Andrews v .
    Director of Public Prosecutions ... did not
    disapprove of what was there said, he clearly thought
    ... that it was better to use the word "reckless"
    rather than to add to the word "negligence" various
    possible vituperative epithets.  Their Lordships
    respectfully agree.  Indeed they further respectfully
    agree with the comment made by Watkins LJ. in
    delivering the judgment of the Court of Appeal ... in
    Seymour ...."
                                                        39

                                               MR. RUSSELL


and then the extract from Lord Justice Watkins is set out:

     "'We have to say that the law as it stands compels us
     to reject Mr. Connell's persuasive submissions and to
     hold that the judge's directions were correct,
     although we are of the view that it is no longer
     necessary of helpful to make reference to
     compensation and negligence.  The Lawrence direction
     on recklessness is comprehensive and of general
     application to all offences, including manslaughter
     involving the driving of motor vehicles recklessly
     and should be given to juries without in any way
     being diluted.  Whether a driver at the material time
     was conscious of the risk he was running or gave no
     thought to its existence, is a matter which affects
     punishment for which purposes the judge will have to
     decide, if he can, giving the benefit of doubt to the
     convicted person, in which state ofmind that person
     had driven at the material time.'"

The other words that I rely upon in saying that it is no
longer apposite to talk in terms of negligence with any
epithet applied to it is from the judgment of Mr. Justice
Turner and, sir, you have had that read to you, I think,
more than once and I just refer you to it rather than read
it again.

     So the crucial words in the actus reus of
manslaughter, in particular as far as Mr. Greenwood is
concerned, is the phrase "serious and obvious", and I
trespass upon your patience to dwell upon it a little
further, because I would like to point out certain aspects
of that phrase which although they may repeat in
particular what has already been said by my learned friend
Mr. Catchpole, they are important to bear in mind of quite
to what extent "serious and obvious" brings the criminal
law into a different category from what are otherwise
familiar concepts from civil law.

     The first point I would like to make isthis, that
"serious" and "obvious" are not synonymous.  It is perhaps
a matter of commonsense but the two words are used and not
one or the other, and the direction that is approved
includes both.  "Serious", in my submission, goes to the
likelihood of the occurrence of an event for which a
synonym might be "very likely".  "Obvious" goes to the
apparent-ness of that event happening, i.e. "very
apparent", and synonyms for "obvious which I admit I have
simply cribbed from submissions made by Mr. Kentridge in
the case of Stanley, and as my learned friend has already
recited, might include "perfectly evident" or "stares you
in the face .
                                                MR. RUSSELL


     Second, "serious and obvious" means much more than
what is reasonably foreseeable and it is important to
distinguish between what someone might appreciate could
happen, what a reasonable person might think was going to
happen, and what was a risk serious and obvious to happen
and the authority that I refer to there is the case of
Shepherd from the 1981 Appeal Cases, 394.  Sir, that is a
case which I don't think you have had, have you?

     THE CORONER:   No, I have not.   That is the one case
I have not had.

     MR. RUSSELL:   Can I hand up a copy? The importance
of Shepherd is perhaps difficult to grasp immediately but
I do refer to it for this reason.  First and foremost it
was a judgment of Lord Diplock in the year before the
cases of Caldwell and Lawrence. It concerned the death of
a child, it was alleged by the wilful neglect of his
parents contrary to Section 1 of the Children and Young
Persons Act 1933, and it included in the course of Lord
Diplock's speech an examination of what is necessary to
establish wilfulness.  Sir, while that might not appear to
be at first glance relevant to what is said here, what
Lord Diplock does is distinguish the idea of reasonable
foreseeability to concepts of criminal recklessness.   At
page 401G the form of direction which the judge used for
the jury at the trial is set out and was this:

     "Would a reasonable parent, with knowledge of the
     facts that were known to the accused, appreciate that
     failure to have the child examined was likely to
     cause him unnecessary suffering or injury to health?"

and Lord Diplock's preferred direction is set out at page
408F.  You will see a passage there inset and I can begin
part of the way down:

     "... the jury must be satisfied (1) that the child
     did in fact need medical aid at the time at which the
     parent is charged with failing to provide it (the
     actus reus) and (2) either that the parent was aware
     at that time that the child's health might be at risk
     if it were not provided with medical aid, or that the
     parent's unawareness of this fact was due to his not
     caring whether his child's health were at risk or not
     (the mens rea)".

But what is important for the purposes of this submission
from that case is the observation that Lord Diplock made
about the difference between civil standards and criminal
standards, especially when one is dealing with a matter
which he equated really to recklessness, and I invite you
to turn to page 404:
   "The concept of the reasonable man as providing
   the standard by which the liability of real
   persons for their actual conduct is to be
   determined is a concept of civil law,
   particularly in relation to the tort of
   negligence; the obtrusion into criminal law of
   conformity with the notional conduct of the
   reasonable man as relevant to criminal
   liability, though not unknown (eg in relation
   to provocation sufficient to reduce murder to
   manslaughter) is exceptional, and should not
   lightly be extended..."

There is then reference to the cornerstone case as far
as this is concerned of Andrews. If I can ask you to
move down to letter G on the same page:

   "So much for 'wilfully' in the context of a
   positive act. To 'neglect' a child is to omit
   to act, to fail to provide adequately for its
   needs; and, in the context of section 1 of the
   Children and Young Persons Act 1933, its
   physical needs rather than its spiritual,
   educational, moral or emotional needs. These
   are dealt with by other legislation. For
   reasons already given the use of the verb
   'neglect' cannot, in my view, of itself import
   into the criminal law the civil law concept of
   negligence. The actus reus in a case of wilful
   neglect is simply a failure, for whatever
   reason, to provide the child whenever it in
   fact needs medical aid with the medical aid it
   needs. Such a failure as it seems to me could
   not properly be described as 'wilful' unless
   the parent either (1) had directed his mind to
   the question whether there was some risk
   (thought it might fall far short of a
   probability) that the child's health might
   suffer unless he were examined by a doctor and
   provided with such curative treatment as the
   examination might reveal as necessary, and had
   made a conscious decision, for whatever reason,
   to refrain from arranging for such medical
   examination; or (2) had so refrained because he
   did not care whether the child might be in need
   of medical treatment or not.

   As regards the second state of mind, this
   imports the concept of recklessness which is a
   common concept in mens rea in criminal law. It
   is not to be confused with negligence in the
   civil law of tort..."
- there is there a reference to Andrews:

   "   In speaking of the first state of mind I
   have referred to the present knowledge of the
   existence of some risk of injury to health
   rather than a probability. The section speaks
   of an act or omission that is 'likely' to cause
   unnecessary suffering or injury to health.
   This word is imprecise. It is capable of
   covering a whole range of possibilities from
   'it's on the cards' to 'it's more probable than
   not', but having regard to the ordinary
   parent's lack of skill in diagnosis and to the
   very real consequences which may result from
   failure to provide a child with timely medical
   attention, it should in my view be understood
   as excluding only what would fairly be
   described as highly unlikely."

    The third observation I wish to make about 'serious
and obvious' is that what is serious and obvious - and
perhaps this is again no more than understanding the
English language - it means much more than conduct
which is inefficient or defective or open to criticism.
A much stronger case, in my submission, is required
before one gets off the ground with a case of
recklessness.

    The fourth matter is the question of serious and
obvious to whom? We have heard from passages read out
from Lord Diplock's speech in Lawrence - and they could
have been speeches taken from Caldwell or Sevmour as
well - that in motor cases the Jury will include
motorists and is entitled to draw upon its collective
experience but there is a clear distinction drawn by
Mr. Justice Turner in Stanley, and equally to be drawn
in this case certainly so far as Mr. Greenwood and
please remember all these submissions are made in
respect of his position.

    If the conduct of a person doing a particular
activity in a civil case is to be judged by comparisons
to the conduct of a reasonably prudent person engaged
in the same activity - and I give examples of a
solicitor, doctor, accountant and so on - a fortiori in
a criminal case what is alleged would have appeared as
a serious and obvious risk must be compared to the
perception of the risk by a reasonably prudent person
engaged in the same activity and in the same
circumstances. That is no more than a paraphrase of
what Mr. Justice Turner says in Stanley and I do not
think there is a need to refer to those words again.
They are in your mind and they have been recited to you
by others. It is important that his concern in that
case was for the view of - and these are the
occupations he names although there are probably others
- Marine Superintendents, Chief Superintendents, Naval
Architects and indeed, if he had thought about it, it
would have included ships' captains.
    In Mr. Greenwood's case one is concerned with the
reasonably prudent Superintendent doing the job of
Ground Commander as it was perceived by the South
Yorkshire Police, equipped with the information that
Mr. Greenwood had and in the precise circumstances in
which Mr. Greenwood found himself. In the course of
his submissions, sir, my learned friend, Mr. King,
sought to draw a distinction between the necessity
expressed by Mr. Justice Turner in Stanley to find
people doing the job, or doing the same job of the
person whose conduct is called into question, which he
did not seek to depart from and the acts or omissions
of certain persons on the day of the Hillsborough
disaster.
    I make no comment about that because I am limiting
my remarks to Mr. Greenwood but what I would say about
Mr. Greenwood is that no distinction can be drawn in
his case because he is, is he not, in the same position
as Captain Lewry was as the person in charge of the
ship who doubtless put to sea ignorant of the fact he
was doing so with the doors open.
    If it can be accepted that one does not need
evidence of what a reasonably prudent person doing the
same job of other people might be where those people
are actual actors in a cause or causes immediately
approximate to the disaster. Where one is seeking to
establish what a reasonably prudent Mr. Greenwood
should have done in his position then one does need
evidence from someone who fills the notional position
of a reasonably prudent Ground Commander as a
Superintendent adopting the plan developed by the South
Yorkshire Police at that time in those circumstances
which pertained on the 15th April.
    In this respect the standard of proof is critical
because how can a Jury, even properly directed, be
satisfied so that they are sure or alternatively beyond
reasonable doubt as to what would be a risk, obvious
and serious, to a reasonably prudent Ground Commander
in Mr. Greenwood's position if they had not had that
evidence to consider to compare with the actions, if
they had been able to perceive them, as either recited
by other witnesses, as recited by Mr. Greenwood himself
or as appear from the wealth of appearances that he
makes both on the video and in the still photographs.

    Fifthly, concerning 'serious and obvious', serious
and obvious to a proper person, that follows on from
the fourth matter above, in the same circumstances and
here, so far as Mr. Greenwood is concerned, one can
consider the position in two time frames. I have
suggested for the sake of ease and convenience before 3
pm and after 3 pm. I am not seeking by this
distinction to suggest that there is some novus actus.
that if anyone could have heard it on that day someone
had rung a gong and said, "We are now into time frame
B" but it is important when considering the
circumstances which prevail and the circumstances
against which Mr. Greenwood's conduct should be judged.

    Before 3 pm one has the instances that I refer to
of the atmosphere, the alternative calls that there
might have been on his attention, the communication
structure and the experience of the previous years.
Those are circumstances, of course, which have to be
taken into account by the postulated reasonably prudent
Ground Commander. He has got to put himself through
the same distractions and the same qualifications to
Mr. Greenwood's ability to devote his attentions to one
particular direction or another.

    After three o'clock, one is concerned there with a
reaction to an emergency and perhaps this ties in, I
hope quite happily, with the further observation you
made yesterday as to whether there is in the case of
Kona, the Privy Council case, a situation that is
relevant. In Kona, as you will recall, it was a case
of manslaughter originally brought against four
defendants arising out of a collision between two
hydrofoils which careered into each other in Victoria
Harbour, Hong Kong, and the express passages that you
drew our attention to last evening on page 25 and page
26 of that opinion envisage a situation where a
defendant is reacting to a situation which has been
created by another.

    I do not seek to persuade you that there is
anything other than an application of Lawrence in such
circumstances but it is obvious that the reasonably
prudent person, discharging the job of the person who
is called into question, must be considered in the
circumstances in which he finds himself.

    For further assistance for this there is a relevant
allusion in the case of ex parte Gray which doubtless
may have rung a bell when you read those particular
passages in Kona. It is on the last page of the
judgment of Lord Justice Watkins and is the end of the
penultimate paragraph of that judgment:

    "Without going into that evidence in detail,
    the medical aspects of it especially, I am in
    no doubt that I would have directed the jury
    that it would have been unsafe, wrong even, to
    find that the arresting officers misconducted
    themselves in a difficult situation in any
    sense whatsoever."

Quite clearly there, sir, the difficult situation in
which the officers found themselves was a highly
material consideration and to say that the
circumstances in which the reasonably prudent person
discharging the job of the person called into question
is to be shorn of the circumstances in which they are
set is, in my submission, incorrect and really fanciful
which brings me to Elliott, which is a further case you
invited us to consider.

    As was clear from the submissions of my learned
friend, Mr. Catchpole, he and I have discussed this and
I would respectfully agree with the interpretation of
Elliott that he gave in that one must consider the
circumstances that pertained in considering what would
have been a serious and obvious risk to a reasonably
prudent person in the same position but one should
ignore the particular personal idiosyncrasies of the
person concerned.

    If one can draw an analogy from the case of Elliott
to the presumed facts of this case, assume for the
moment that one of the track officers had not slept for
a week, either through illness, duty, pleasure,
whatever, and he was in a state of exhaustion, in
postulating what the reasonably prudent Police
Constable doing that job would do, one would be obliged
to take into account the circumstances which confronted
him, the atmosphere and after three o'clock the
emergency with which he was having to deal, but one
would not be entitled to take into account the
particular idiosyncrasies personal to that exhausted
Police Constable, and I hope a distinction can be
perceived in that. I may be pushing at an open door so
far as the argument of my learned friend, Mr. King, is
concerned because it may be that he did accept the
circumstances were relevant but the personal
idiosyncrasies of the defendant are not.
                                                         46


                                     MR. RUSSELL




      MR. KING:  Sir, I raised Elliott on the issue of
whether or not at the stage of considering what my learned
friend refers to as an "actus reus" one had to ask the
question whether it was obvious to the particular defendant
and I raised it in that context to show it was not the
particular defendant with his particular characteristics,
it was to the reasonably prudent person in the position of
that defendant.

      The position of that defendant obviously includes
the circumstances in which that particular defendant found
himself, but it excludes his characteristics which were
peculiar to him which might have led him to have not
reached the conclusion which the reasonable and prudent
person would have concluded.  To that extent I am
ad idem with my learned friend.

      MR. RUSSELL:  Then I apologise for taking up an
unnecessary part of the Court time.

      MR. ISAACS:  Sir, if it helps at all, he is also
ad idem with me because my learned friend was arguing the
point which I in fact had never put and I wish to make
that clear at this stage.

      MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, there are two further pages
left to my submission.

      I don't wish to trespass upon the Court's time any
longer than is necessary.  The last page though should
perhaps be dealt with before the penultimate page.  I put
it in last because I thought at one stage I ought to rip
it out altogether.

      Sir, it concerns, as you will see, the identification
of Mr. Greenwood by Mr. Hicks.  Sir, there has been no
reference to that so far, but of course that does not
mean that it is something I can safely leave alone.

      Sir, you will of course be familiar that in the
criminal law there is a particular caution attached to
evidence of identification and the Court of Appeal
have laid down particular guidelines to be followed which
are unanimously known as the Turnbull Guidelines.

      Now it is a side issue but most relevant to the
evidence that has been given in respect of Superintendent
Greenwood, it is particularly important that the jury should
be directed to ignore, in my submission, that evidence,
because as evidence of identification when compared to
standard criteria of what constitutes good and bad evidence
of identification it is, in my submission, very poor.
                                                             47


                                     MR. RUSSELL



      If you are proceeding to do other than direct the
jury to ignore Mr. Hicks' evidence in respect of
Mr. Greenwood, his recollection in respect of seeing a
senior Officer of course I cannot comment on, but insofar
as his evidence of identification of Mr. Greenwood is
concerned then there are certain matters that I need to
address you on.  I am in your hands or I can work through
it as you v/ish?

      THE CORONER:  I think (a) there is no need and (b)
I think it would be trespassing on the facts if you did that.

      MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, in my submission if there is no
need I can leave it there but as far as the facts are
concerned I would respectfully submit this is a special
case because of the sensitivity of evidence of identification
which the criminal law ....

      THE CORONER:  I think it is perfectly proper for you
to point out to me the rules of law relating to identification
evidence but I don't think you should deal with whether or
not the evidence, which we have heard, is adequate or in­
adequate or what the jury are to make of it, but you can
direct my mind, if that is the right word, to the principles,
the legal principles on which identification evidence may
be relied on.

      MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, I take particu r comfort from
your first reaction to my suggestion, namely that there is
no need but might I very briefly then refer you to the
centre part of the page and invite you to ignore the rest.

      It is submitted that the evidence of identification
of Mr. Greenwood as that person, namely the person who
Mr. Hicks saw come out of the Control Box and whom he
addressed, is so poor in all the circumstances that it should
not be left to the jury.

      Sir, the cases are R. v. Turnbull which can perhaps
be dealt with most speedily by a reference to Archbold
and even more speedily by passing straight from Turnbull
to the case of Breslin where the matter is summarised in
a few lines.

      The paragraph at Archbold is from Vol. 1, 14-2c
which appears on page 1140 of Vol. 1. I will read it:

      "In R. v. Breslin  -- that court stated that
      the following directions and warning in Weeder
      .... should be given in all 'identification'
      cases to which that passage is applicable:
      'When the quality of the identifying evidence
      is poor the judge should withdraw the case
      from the jury and direct an acquittal unless
                                       MR. RUSSELL




     there is other evidence which goes in support
     of the correctness of the identification.
     The identification evidence can be poor, even
     though it is given by a number of witnesses.
     They may all have had only the opportunity
     of a fleeting glance or a longer observation
     made in difficult conditions e.g. the
     occupants of a bus who observed the incident
     at night as they drove past.    Where the quality
     of the identification evidence is such that the
     jury can be safely left to assess its value,
     even though there is no other evidence to
     support it, then the trial judge is fully
     entitled, if so minded, to direct the jury
     that an identification by one witness can
     constitute support for the identification by
     another, provided that he warns them in clear
     terms that even a number of honest witnesses
     can be mistaken."

Sir, moving, you will be glad to hear to my concluding
submissions which appear on the penultimate page of the
skeleton, if the jury are not to have the verdict of
unlawful killing withdrawn from them altogether, it is
submitted that:

      1.  It is not possible on the evidence as a whole,
as a matter of law, to identify any act by Mr. Greenwood
which was a direct effective and substantial cause of
the death of any of the deceased.

      2.  It is not possible on   the evidence as a whole, or
as a matter of law, to identify   any omission to do an act
which Mr. Greenwood was under a    duty to do, which was a
direct and substantial cause of    death of any of the deceased.
In any event:

      3. There is (no evidence) that any act (or omission)
on the part of Mr. Greenwood created a risk, serious and
obvious to a reasonably prudent Superintendent with the
duty of Ground Commander, of physical injury to any of
the deceased.

      4. There is (no evidence) that any such act
(or omission) on the part of Mr. Greenwood was done (or
omitted to be done) by him without thought to a serious
and obvious risk (as defined) that it would cause physical
injury or regardless of such a risk which he had in fact
recognised.

      Submissions 3 and 4 can be made with greater force
if for the phrase 'no evidence' is substituted 'insufficient
evidence upon which a reasonable jury, properly directed,
could conclude', and I invite you sir to instal that
phrase, that clause, into the first sentence of 3 and 4.
                                         MR. RUSSELL




      The corollary of all this sir, in my submission, is
that Mr. Greenwood should be excluded from any pool of
persons in respect of whom the jury can even consider
returning a verdict of unlawful killing.

      Sir, unless I can assist you further, those are my
submissions on behalf of Mr. Greenwood.

      THE CORONER:     Thank you very much indeed.

      MISS ADDLEMAN:  Sir, in view of what has gone before,
the submissions of my learned friend Mr. Russell, and indeed
the submissions of my learned friend Mr. Payne, I hope I
can be mercifully short.

      I repeat and adopt those submissions save insofar
as they are referable to any Officer of the rank whom I
represent.

      Sir, I hope to avoid needless repetition of what has
gone before and I will seek to confine myself to ampli­
fication which I hope will be of some assistance to those
points which have already been mentioned so ably.

      Sir, may I begin by reference to the second heading
on the sheet before you submitted by my learned friend
Mr. Russell, namely the importance of excluding ineligible
persons from the jury's consideration.

      Sir, the relevant authorities have been brought to
your attention in that regard.  I won't go over them save
sir to perhaps make one further reference to the decision
in ex parte Gray.

      Sir, can I refer you to the headnote of that
authority.

      THE CORONER:     Yes, I am with you.

      MISS ADDLEMAN:     I am obliged.

      Before perhaps I look at    that can I say this:
that of course by implication,    as I have already said, I
adopt what has been said by my    learned friend Mr. Russell,
namely that you have a duty to    form a judgment.

      Put another way you have a duty to withdraw from the
jury's consideration verdicts which cannot be sustained
because of no evidence or wholly insufficient evidence.

      Sir, if you need any further support from that
proposition, namely that you have a duty as opposed to
a discretion which you would exercise, then looking at
the headnote, and you have already been referred to this
in a different context, the final paragraph there under (ii).
                                                             50


                                     MISS ADDLEMAN



      "The development of judicial review cannot
      possibly allow verdicts by jurors at inquests
      to stand which are based on no or wholly
      insufficient evidence."

Sir, the reference is given there to 1031 at letter ? and
I won't repeat it because in another context it has just
been quoted by my learned friend Mr. Russell.

      Sir, that makes quite clear the submissions which
have already been made what your duty is when considering
whether to leave the potential verdict of unlawful killing
to the jury.

      Sir, the reasons in my respectful submission are
axiomatic.  It must be right looking at the law as a whole
on this particular topic that the one thing that is sought
to be avoided by the Court of Appeal in all its decisions
and indeed the Crown Courts, the lower Courts, is for
a jury, indeed any jury, to come to a verdict which is
unsafe.

      Sir, it must follow, therefore, that you have a
duty and perhaps I need take the point no further.




                      Sir, next may I refer
                                             MISS ADDELMAN


     Sir, next may I refer to the topic of causation?
As I say, I will not repeat all that has gone before, but
I would ask you to bear in mind in the context of what I
am saying, as I am sure you will, the "but for" test.

     Sir, in this context it may well be needless and
superfluous for me to mention certain individuals whom I
represent.   I hope that that is the case but, sir, of
course I cannot ignore certain individuals, one of whom
has been mentioned by my learned friend Hr. Isaacs and,
indeed, by my learned friend Mr. King, namely, Sergeant
Goddard who was in the Control Room.

     Sir, if I can say generally on that topic, obviously
what you, sir, in the exercise of your duty must first of
all consider before you get to the question of
recklessness and mens r e a , is whether causation is made
out.   Sir, I will not refer to the evidence, but when
considering Sergeant Goddard's position, my respectful
submission to you is this, that no act or omission on the
part of Sergeant Goddard satisfies the "but for" test.

     Sir, if you are with me on that point then that is
the end of the matter and you have no need to consider
the question of recklessness.

     Sir, I submit secondly, however, that if you did
consider the mens rea and the question of any
recklessness on the part of Sergeant Goddard, then it
fails there too, reckless is not made out on the facts.

     In this regard you of course will have attention to
the position of Mr. Duckenfield and of course Mr. Murray.
When considering the three comparatively you will no
doubt have regard to the hierarchy of Officers in that
contest, particularly, as I say, when considering
Sergeant Goddard here and of course without reference to
the fact it would be artificial for me not to ask your
attention to be drawn to the decision making process in
that regard.

     In my submission it is abundantly clear that
Sergeant Goddard is not an individual who had power to
make any sort of final decision and that accords with the
evidence of Mr. Murray and, indeed, Sergeant Goddard
himself.

     Sir, those are my submissions in that regard.

     So far - and I hope I am not wasting time here, but
perhaps again I cannot ignore the question of track
Officers because, of course, you know, sir, I have been
particularly concerned with their position throughout.
                                                          52

                                             MISS ADDELMAN


     THE CORONER:   If I can stop you for one moment.
You are not wasting time.   It is very difficult for you
when you are right at the end of the line not to feel
that you are.   You are just as entitled as Mr. Payne at
the beginning, so don't feel you are wasting time at all,
not my time anyway.

     MISS ADDELMAN:    Sir, I am very much obliged for
that indication.    My anxiety perhaps extends a little
more than that.  I wonder whether there is in fact the
need at all to refer to these Officers that is why I say
I hope I am not wasting time, but I will mention them
because I obviously cannot afford to ignore their
position.

      Sir, their position is relevant under the heading of
causation as well, in my submission, because again as in
the case of Sergeant Goddard I would submit to you that
they fail on the first hurdle, namely, any act or
omission on their part does not satisfy the "but for"
test.    What has been said already by my learned friend
Mr. Russell in the context of his client, Mr. Greenwood,
can be said in respect of the track Officers as well.

     Sir, can I invite you to look at page 2 of nv
learned friend Mr. Russell's submissions?   The
penultimate paragraph, which has just been read to you.
He was giving an example there.   There it is referable
to Mr. Greenwood and his rank, but if you substitute the
names of track Officers and their rank, that exanple is
equally applicable.

     Similarly, sir, if one turns to the penulti~ntc- page
of my learned friend Mr. Russell's submissions, and
substitutes there the name of Mr. Greenwood with tnat of
track Officers and, of course, the rank, those points are
equally applicable to track Officers.

     An additional point, sir, ought to be made in my
submission in this regard and again it concerns the
question of causation.   One cannot, in my submission,
identify, and this follows from a point I made earlier,
one cannot identify any act or omission, as I have
already said, as being responsible for the death of any
deceased.

     Now you would have to identify a particular deceased
and connect it to an act or omission of a track Officer
before you could safely leave the jury with one of the
track Officers as being an individual they could have in
mind when considering any unlawful killing verdict.
That, in my submission, you simply cannot do.
                                                         53

                                            MISS ADDELMAN


     Sir, if I may comment on the question of
recklessness next and, sir, I do hope you will not
consider any of my comments to be impertinent here
because what I am suggesting is, and I am sure you have
taken this on board, is that there must be very, very
special care on your part to distinguish the vast
difference between what is required to make out
recklessness and negligence.    It is very easy to
confuse.    I have heard one or other of my learned
friends refer to certain tests - simply slips of the
tongue as we have gone down the line - tending to suggest
that negligence is the test.    I know, of course, that
tney do not mean it, but it just shows how very easy it
is to mix up the two concepts.    I know you have in mind,
sir, that on no account must this be done, but, of
course, to take on board what recklessness means is
highly pertinent to your deliberations when you are
considering whether to leave the verdict of unlawful
killing to the jury and, of course, if you do not accept
the submissions when in due course you are directing them
about that.

     Sir, can I suggest that you can glean very great
assistance on this point from Mr. Justice Turner s
appreciation, which is contained throughout his ruling
and, indeed, the comments he makes throughout the
arguments in the Stanley case.   As I say, sir, it is
relevant on the two points in the direction and, of
course, when you are considering the present
applications.

     Sir, again on the point of recklessness and the mens
rea here, can I draw particular attention to say my
learned friends have my support, my learned friend
Mr. Catchpole included, for the interpretation of the
decision in Elliott as to what is meant there when taking
into account any particular quality of a particular
individual.

     Sir, I support what has already been said and in my
submission it must be clear that what is meant there is
not a particular idiosyncrasy of a particular individual,
but the characteristics which have already been
mentioned.

     Can I, in the context of recklessness again, draw
your particular attention to the words "serious and
obvious", and again I hope I am not going to repeat what
has already been said by my learned friend Mr. Russell.
I agree with t’
              nat exposition.   Perhaps the quickest way
of doing it is by reference to page 4 of my learned
friend Mr. Russell's submissions.
                                            MISS ADDELMAN


      If I may, sir, look at page 4, the top of the page
   (iv).    Mr. Russell* s heading "Serious and Obvious to
Whom?"    I would submit that the point is worth
reinforcing here.    The example is given which is
referable back to the case of Lawrence and the Judgment
of Lord Diplock.    Now obviously, sir, what is being said
when one is looking at a driving case is that a jury has
a collective experience of motoring.     That must be so,
as in Lawrence.    Therefore, and this is most important
in my submission, therefore they can be trusced to draw
inferences from a particular set of facts of a road
traffic accident.    The same cannot apply with subject
matter such as these particular Inquests are dealing
with.    It must be axiomatic to say that a jury does not
have collective experience of any of the jobs of any of
the Police Officers with whom I am concerned, any of the
jobs that any of the Police Officers were doing on the
particular day with which we are concerned, in the
particular circumstances of the particular Officers with
whom you are concerned.

      Sir, perhaps I do not need to expound further on
that.    I have already mentioned the example further down
the page, the names and rank can be substituted there,
but the point is worth reinforcing.    They cannot draw
inferences in that fashion as they would be able to do in
a road traffic case.    There must be evidence to assist
with their consideration and it must be sufficient
evidence.

     Sir, in my submission there is none in this case.
If you are not with me on that point then I turn back to
what I have already mentioned, those submissions which
are contained on page 5 of my learned friend
Mr. Russell's submissions.

     Sir, unless I can assist further that is all I have
to say.




         THE CORONER:   Is the jury here
     THE CORONER:   Are the Jury here?  Can we just have
them in so that I can tell them they can go home again,
and then we will all go and have lunch as well.  I think
we will start at 10 tomorrow.  I did say 9.30 but I think
we will start at 10. Mr. Isaacs?

     MR. ISAACS:    I was just wondering what we were
doing this afternoon?

     THE CORONER:   Coming back to see whether anybody has
any further comments, and if we have not got any further
comments then we are all going home.

     MR. ISAACS:    Do you intend to give a ruling about
this matter, or do you intend merely to deal with it all
in your summing up?

     THE CORONER:    I think that   is ....

     MR. ISAACS:     The latter?

     THE CORONER:    Yes.

     MR. ISAACS:     Very sensible, if I may say so.

               (In the presence of the Jur y )

     THE CORONER:   Good afternoon.    Well, I have good
news for you in the sense we do not need you today.    We
have not got as far as I wanted to so I just wanted to
call you in and say that.  Tomorrow I think I had said
9.30 but I have changed my mind and we will start at 10,
but tomorrow we should be back in business so to speak.   I
am sorry to have dragged you all here abortively but it is
just one of those things.   We will all go and have lunch
now.

                    (Luncheon Adjournment)
     THE CORONER:   Before I turn back to you I am going
to read Mr. Hale's submission so that we have that as well
and then we have heard from everybody.  It is in the form
of a letter dated 18th March 1991:

    "Dear Sir,

    Hillsborough Inquest - legal submissions - on behalf
    of Superintendent Roger Marshall.

    Thank you for the opportunity of making legal
    submissions in writing.  I have had the benefit of
    seeing the submissions in writing by my learned
    friend Mr. Richard Maxwell Q.C. and respectfully
    adopt his submissions so far as they deal with the
    general law.

    So far as Superintendent Marshall is concerned, I
    would merely add:

    1. That any act of his on the day which may be
    considered to have been a substantial cause of the
    death of any person would not be an unlawful act
    unless it were a totally voluntary act with a
    reasonable alternative which was recklessly ignored.
    If the act was carried out under pressure which was
    not itself caused unlawfully by Superintendent
    Marshall and if the only alternative was seen by
    Superintendent Marshall as being likely to lead to
    other disastrous consequences it could not be said
    that the action actually taken was unlawful merely
    because taking the alternative, in hindsight, might
    have led to less serious consequences.  A decision
    taken honestly in a dilemma or in the 'agony of the
    moment' even if subsequently proved to be wrong, has
    been held frequently to be unimpeachable.  If such
    decision was therefore a lawful act, no further
    consideration need be given in Superintendent
    Marshall's case to the many other issues such as
    intervening or multiple causes including the
    voluntary assumption of risk by some, I stress some,
    of the deceased.

    2. As regards any omission in prior planning
    (insofar as Mr. Marshall had any responsibility
    therefor) alleged to be the basis of recklessness,
    the standard of care is that of the reasonable man.
    There must not only have been foreseeability of the
    consequences of the omission but also a reasonable
    prospect of success for what is alleged ought to have
    been done.  The mere possibility of an alternative
    procedure which might have been effective is not
    enough.  It needs a precise alternative procedure
    which could be shown to have been available and so
                                                     MR. 'HALE


     likely to be effective in the particular
     circumstances that failure to consider that course
     was reckless.  If there was no such alternative with
     a high degree of probable success, any alleged
     failure to foresee and provide for the circumstances
     which actually occurred is a mere counsel of
     perfection and cannot be a foundation for a finding
     of unlawful killing by the application of any of the
     tests.

     Yours faithfully"

and it is signed and addressed to me, and then:

     "Authority for 'dilemma or agony of the moment1
     decisions - as this is not the High Court, I hope I
     may be excused for giving a text book 'Glanville
     Williams - Joint Torts and Contributory Negligence' -
     Part II - Pp 360-364 or Winfield and Jolowicz on
     torts 13th Edition P 162 (or any good book on torts!)
     Similarly, on the standard of care - to avoid quoting
     innumerable cases, Winfield and Jolowicz summarise
     the cases on Pp 118-119."

I am afraid there is a bit of fact mixed up with this but
it is difficult when you are reading it, so I just did it
because I could not see what else I could do.

     Mr. Maxwell, before you stand up may I say that
judging by what I heard from your colleagues your
contribution has been - and indeed for my own sake -
received with both great interest and I think approbation
would be the right word.

     MR. MAXWELL:   Well I won't withdraw it then.

     Sir, could I raise a matter that can most helpfully
be highlighted by looking at my learned friend Mr. Payne's
submissions, and I do it in this way, not with a view to
criticising those submissions.  It concerns this, if it is
to be the case that you leave unlawful killing to the Jury
as a possible verdict then a question arises as to an
orderly order of priority for their consideration of the
possible verdicts, and it is quite clear in my submission
that they begin with unlawful killing, but then, and I
hope you would accept this, I hope it is equally clear
that they move on to misadventure, then they end up with
open verdict, and it is in that order.

     Sir, therefore could I ask you just quickly to look
at that so that I can highlight this point by reference
to what Mr. Payne has said on page 1 of his submissions?

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I have got that.
                                        FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


     MR. MAXWELL:   Item 2, "Verdict".  He says "Choice of
Three", and I am sure we all agree but I say that the
sequential and orderly choice there would be, is it (ii)
unlawful killing?  If not then is it (i) misadventure?   If
not then I think the answer must be it is (iii) open
verdict.  That has only this further consequential effect
that I think, and I think it is an example of a mere slip,
on page 2 where it says "with regard to for open verdict
either misadventure not proved or unlawful killing not
proved", I think it would have been more accurate to say,
 neither", "nor", because it is only if those two are
excluded that you have got into open verdict.  I hope,
sir, you would be able to adopt that, if unlawful killing
is to be put to the Jury, so that they can go through it
in that sequential and orderly manner.

     THE CORONER:   Well, I entirely agree with that.  I
had noticed the order of Mr. Payne but I had taken it as
not being part of the submission, if I can put it like
that, but merely as the types of verdict which he was
illustrating.

     MR. MAXWELL:   I make it clear, I am certainly not
seeking to correct that as a submission, only using it as
a way of making a point.

      MR. PAYNE:  I am greatly flattered that my
submission should escape the scrutiny of Mr. Maxwell with
the addition only of an "n" in front of "either" or "or".
Actually, as you know, when I came to the questions for
the Court I then put it in the order which he now says is
the correct order and that is right, so when it comes to
questions we are on common ground as to how it should be
done.

     Sir, may I just briefly deal with the questions that
you raised yesterday?  That is all I propose to do
although perhaps I might just be allowed to add an answer
to something that was said by Mrs. McBrien?

     THE CORONER:   Indeed.

     MR. PAYNE:    Sir, you raised five points which are
most helpful and certainly go to the centre of what needs
to be considered.   First of all you drew attention to Mr.
Maxwell's submissions, it is paragraph 6 (iii), where he
was talking about novus actus and you queried how that
could stand with my list of matters which are capable of
being causes.   Sir, may I address that?

     THE CORONER:   Indeed.

     MR. PAYNE:   If you go to my list of matters which
are capable of being causes, of which I have managed to
                                       FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


put 18 in number.  My submission is that there is, in
fact, in this case no novus actus. This is not a case
where one can look back historically and see a number of
causes or a number of events which have taken place, and
then their effect has been exhausted or their effect is no
longer to be treated as a cause, and then a new act comes
in which so completely overtakes and intervenes between
those causes and the injury that the effect of those
original causes is now evaporated or put to one side or
stopped from being a cause.  That is not this case at all,
or at least this is my primary submission.  If one looks
at this list of things which are capable of being causes,
our main submission is that each one of these at the time
and the place and the circumstances of the disaster was
effective as a cause.

     That is my submission about it and it is quite
artificial to pick on the last incident in that batch of
causes, all of which come together at the material time,
and to pick on the last one which is literally the last
minute, and to say, right, that is the novus actus, and it
is of such significance that it intervenes between the
disaster and all the other causes.  Without going through
them again, you have got them in mind, and my submission
is that each one of these causes was still alive and very
much effective at the time, place and circumstances, all
there together.  Sir, I just advert briefly to Dr.
Nicholson's comment about all these matters coming
together to cause the disaster.  So that is what I say
about it.  I say there is not a novus actus.

     Having made that primary submission, can I just step
back from it and just consider the notion that there was a
novus actus and that the action of (a) opening the gates,
or (b) consequentially failing to close off the tunnel,
could qualify as a novus actus. Just considering that as
an idea, if either of those actions is to qualify then it
only qualifies because it is an unforeseeable, unexpected
event which was not in the contemplation of any of the
people who were responsible for all the earlier causes.




                                  I say that includes
                                          FURTHER SUBMISSIONS



I say that includes the Police. It wipes out the whole
of the operational planning and contemplation of the
event and the history and the circumstances of the
location of the ground. It wipes all that out because
these events, if this novus actus point is correct, are
of such overwhelming importance that they stand between
all the other matters.

    If that is so then the true perspective of the case
is that the Jury, if the verdict of unlawful killing is
left as an option to them, are being asked to
concentrate upon an unforeseeable event, unexpected, in
unprecedented circumstances, which occupied the space
of ten minutes and was of such significance that all
the other factors which surround the situation are of
no importance. The Jury in concentrating on that brief
interval of time are being asked to say that beyond
reasonable doubt in those circumstances at that time
the people whose conduct is called into question - here
the Police - were guilty of unlawful killing. In my
submission that only has to be stated for it to be seen
as unsustainable. I do not know whether the argument
will improve with elaboration. That is my submission.

    If it is a novus actus then my submission is that
it would be quite inappropriate for the Jury to
conclude to the high standard of proof that is required
that it is unlawful killing because it plainly is not.
Those are the two branches of the submission in answer
to the first point and I hope that is helpful.

    The second point you mentioned is as to whether Mr.
Justice Turner's judgment is binding on you, as
mentioned by Mr. Isaacs. I regret to say that my
researches have not been able to find any authority for
whether a decision at first instance of a High Court
Judge is binding upon a Coroner and so I cannot draw
your attention to any authority. Therefore, what I say
is probably very lightweight and I would merely say
that our position is that the directions and decisions
of Mr. Justice Turner are of strong, persuasive effect
and I would leave it at that.

    The third point you raised was with reference to
Mr. King's analysis of Lawrence. Elliott and Gray and
his submission, if I understood it correctly, that the
Gray direction is not the one you should use. I hope I
have paraphrased it correctly. I have made my
submissions about that and I put Gray at the front.
Our position would be that certainly the up to date
view of the interpretation of the Andrews. Caldwell.
Lawrence. Elliott. Sevmour. and the Hong Kong case is
                                           FURTHER SUBMISSIONS



accurately summarised in Gray and Gray, therefore, is
the correct direction. So that is my answer to your
direct question. Unfortunately in a moment, in answer
to an extremely good question, if I may say so, which
you posed later on I am going to have to slightly
amplify that.

    The fourth question you raised was about the
Hiaains case and if I got the question correctly you
were concerned as to whether the judgment in Higgins
was to the effect that the Coroner had a duty to
withdraw the option of the verdict of unlawful
killing - I did not quite follow the way you expressed
it - or whether the Galbraith discretion still applied.

     THE CORONER: Shall I have another go? It is not
a terribly important point but what I was trying to say
was this; the Galbraith case is relatively clear to me
but it is a case dealing with a criminal prosecution.
In a sense it is the same question that I asked with
regard to Mr. Justice Turner, is it binding on a
Coroner? The second point is that there is a case
which actually deals with the issue of Coroners
withdrawing verdicts from a Jury and that is the
Higgins case.

    My question was, because I have read the book, the
note seems to say categorically it is theduty of a
Coroner to withdraw but my   reading of thecasewas that
whilst the Judge said that for reasons which he could
not quite understand the Coroner had not withdrawn the
case, the implication is that he felt it ought to have
been because he could not find anything in the evidence
to justify the verdict.

    I have two questions.    Was not technically in fact
his comment merely obiter because it was not part of
his decision in relation to the finding, in which case
it is persuasive again but not binding? In fact that
was the question.

     MR. PAYNE: I am very grateful, sir. I think our
submission would be that there is in fact no
distinction between the decision in Galbraith and the
way in which it was applied in Higgins. That is what
we would say about it. Galbraith makes it clear that
the Coroner does have a duty to withdraw the verdict if
there is no evidence upon which the Jury, properly
directed, could come to that conclusion. I do not know
whether it would be helpful for me to take you to
Galbraith again.
                                          FURTHER SUBMISSIONS



     THE CORONER: I do not consider it a vital point
and I do not think it is necessary to spend a lot of
time on it.
     MR. PAYNE: There are two stages to the Galbraith
test which I should just briefly mention and then pass
on. Stage 1 is that if there is no evidence then the
Coroner has a duty to withdraw the verdict. Stage 2 is
that if there is some evidence but it is of a tenuous
character, for example, because of inherent weakness or
vagueness or because it is inconsistent with other
evidence, in that stage the Coroner clearly has a
discretion because he is being called on to exercise a
judgment as to whether the evidence in a particular
case falls within that description and whereabouts it
falls on the table. So that is what we say about it.

    The way that was applied in Higgins was that the
Divisional Court before Lord Justice Parker in fact
found there was no evidence. In the relevant part of
his judgment he said:
    "I am wholly unable to accept that the evidence
    could conceivably amount to justification in
    law for any such verdict."

So he himself, having formed that view on the evidence,
he then commented:
    "For myself I gain the distinct impression that
    the Coroner was of the same view but for some
    reason or other did not withdraw that verdict
    from the purview of the Jury."
- carrying the clear implication that in the opinion of
the Lord Justice the Coroner ought to have done so,
once the Coroner himself had formed that view. So it
is an illustration of Galbraith.

    The fifth point is the one which is of particular
interest which you mentioned and that is the opinion of
the Privy Council in the Hong Kong case where the
judgment comments on the meaning of the Diplock
Lawrence direction. Sir, it is you who have drawn our
attention to this and may I, with deference, ask you to
look back at the passage that you have asked us to look
at. The two passages are at page 25 at the top. It is
important to see the context, which you have already
pointed out, in which this comment is made. It appears
certainly to me that on page 24 at the bottom there is
a misprint in the report because the penultimate
begins:
                                          FURTHER SUBMISSIONS




    "Lord Diplock on this occasion, speaking for
    all the noble and learned lords then present,
    said..."
- and the word 'after' appears. It says that after
quoting from his speech in Lawrence at page 11 in the
Criminal Appeal Reports and page 526 in the Appeal
Cases Reports, there is a quotation from the judgment
and that quotation is from the judgment in Lawrence.
It looks as if the word 'after' ought not to be there.




                          /What the opinion of the.
                                                         64


                                       MR. PAYNE



      What the opinion   of the Privy Council here is clearly
directing itself to is   the application of the Diplock/
Lawrence direction and   citing it precisely. Then their
comment appears at the   top of the next page:

      "Their Lordships emphasise that in this passage
      Lord Diplock was speaking of an obvious and
      serious risk of causing physical injury created
      by the defendant. He was not there concerned
      to deal with cases where the conduct complained
      of was a defendant's reaction or lack of reaction
      to such a risk created by another person."

And then you drew our attention to a repetition of that same
point which appears at the bottom of page 26 towards the
end of the judgment where the opinion comments at the end
of that paragraph:

      "The summing-up does not seem to have distinguished
      between an obvious risk created by those navigating
      each hydrofoil by theirown navigation and the response
      by those on board one hydrofoil to any obvious risk
      created by the navigation of the other."

Now I must say on considering what is being said by the
Privy Council in its application to this case, that is the
Hillsborough case, it appears that the opinion is this:
if the matter under consideration is in the context of
responding to a risk which is being caused by others, then
the undiluted or unamplified Lawrence/Diplock direction is
not intended to apply to that situation.

      Now if that is in fact what the Privy Council is
saying then it would mean in application to this case that
since the conduct of the Police which is called into
question was in fact in response to a risk which was caused
by others, then the Lawrence/Diplock direction would have
to be amplified to include that extra element.

      Now if that is correct, if that is what this remark
in the course of the judgment means, then I have got two
submissions about it.

      The first is that first of all the reason that such
a remark appears in the course of the judgment specifically
in the context of quoting from the well known Diplock/
Lawrence direction, means that the House of Loras/Privy
Council, has particularly directed its collective mind
to this question and said that Diplock/Lawrence does not
cover the case "where the serious and obvious risk has
been caused, created by the defendant's reaction or lack
of reaction to such a risk created by another person."
                                                           65


                                     MR. PAYNE




      That is the first submission.  In other words they
have taken the trouble to include in the course of the
judgment that caveat or qualification of the direction.

      The second comment I respectfully make is that
the reason that such a comment appears in the judgement
must be that it is in the mind of the Privy Council that
if the situation is that the person whose conduct is
called into question is responding to a risk which has
been caused by others, then it isvery unlikely in those
circumstances that anyone could be found guilty of
recklessness if their recklessness arises in the context
of their reaction by responding to a risk which has been
caused by others. That seems to be the meaning of it.

       Once one recognises this one feels rather like a
limpet that has been prised off the rock by the crowbar
because it means that one is not in the position of simply
being able to direct the jury per Lawrence and Gray, but
one has to build into the direction the particular circum­
stances and time, which I amplified in the course of my
original address, and point out that the conduct which
is being called into question and in particular the
alleged recklessness, is only taking place in response
to a serious and obvious risk caused by others, so that
foriaulation is the way in which I would submit one would
need to add to the direction.

      I have no doubt sir that by drawing this to our
attention this is something which you have already con­
sidered and I hope that that submission is helpful.

      My own respectful gloss upon it would be that if one
does get to the stage of having to amplify the Diplock
direction by adding this further qualification, it is a
further very strong argument that this is not a case of
unlawful killing at all but it is a case of accident.

      Sir, that is my answer to the question which you
put to us and I hope it is adequate or at least helpful.
Sir that deals with the points which you asked us to
consider.

      Finally may I just embark on something else very
shortly and I hope this will be helpful.

       Mrs. McBrien in the course of her very excellent
address to you this morning used an illuminating analogy
of imagining the Police to be driving the crowd, metaphori­
cally, as a vehicle at an excessive speed through the gates
instead of at a reasonable speed through the turnstiles
thereby creating the obvious and serious risk to people
in the ground to which the driver of the crowd/vehicle
was indifferent. That is the way she put it.
                                                           66


                                         MR. PAYNE




      Our answer to that is this:  for the analogy to
be complete we come back to our primary submission made
yesterday, which is one does have to look at all the
circumstances in which the driving was taking place and
one is very familiar that with the situation, using
Mrs. McBrien's analogy, the crowd vehicle in this case
to expand her metaphor, had unexpectedly jammed against
the turnstile obstruction and more crowd vehicles were
piling up behind, thereby causing a serious risk of death
or injury in the crowd vehicle and that serious risK was
in fact, on the evidence, obvious to the people whose conduct
is called into question, namely the Police driver of the
vehicle.  There was an obvious and serious risk of death
or injury to people in the jam outside the turnstiles.

      Using this analogy then, on the evidence the action
of the Police driver whose conduct is called into question,
was to attempt to rescue those in the crowd vehicle who
were at risk of death but in the jam and his response
was by driving the vehicle, or attempting to drive it
into an open space to relieve the jam.

      Nov/ I am not going to say any more because I
recognise that by taking the analogy further one is
venturing into argument and really in my submission
what I am saying I hope is self-evident.   That is all
I would say about it.

      Now unless there is any other particular matter
those are the responses that we would make to what has
gone before and the questions you asked sir.

      THE CORONER:  I think the only other point is
what you thought of Mr. Russell's interpretation of
Lord Justice Watkin's comment.

      MR. PAYNE:  Yes, that is towards the end of the
judgment in Gray?

      THE CORONER:    That   is right.

      MR. KING:    Sir, if I may help itis the line:
"It should be emphasised, however, failure to appreciate
there was such a risk would not by itself be sufficient
to amount to recklessness."

      MR. PAYNE:     Can I have the reference to that?

      MR. KING:  In the All England Reports it is page 136,
letter H.  It is at the bottom of the extract where  the
four ingredients   are set out.

      MR. PAYNE:   Well I mean I have got nothing to add
to that except I found what Mr. Russell said very
persuasive and I ask you to accept it.
                                                              67


                                        MR. PAYNE




      THE CORONER:    It in other words that it goes to the
actus reus?

      MR. PAYNE:     Sorry, no, it goes to the mens rea.

      THE CORONER:   I thought he said actus reus.    What
did you say, perhaps I misheard you?




                       MR. RUSSELL:   What I meant
                                                  HR. ISAACS


     MR. RUSSELL:      Uhat I meant was that that relates to
the mens rea and that recklessness cannot    live on mens
rea alone.   It requires the actus reus first.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I see.    I understand that now.
Tnat was the reason why I asked   that question.   I could
not quite understand.    I had obviously misunderstood
what you had said.

     HR. RUSSELL:   I apologise.     I am sure I didn't
express myself clearly.

     THE CORONER:     No, I thinkit is entirely my fault.

     MR. ISAACS:       Sir, yes, the foresight goes to the
mens r e a ; the actus reus still has to be proved.

     That brings me on to the first of the six points I
would wish to make in reply to the various matters that
have been canvassed before you.    The difference so far
as actus   reus is concerned between myself, Mr. Payne and
Mr. King, is as to whether the risk would have been
serious and obvious to the reasonably prudent individual
in the position of - let us use shorthand, sir - the
defendant, is that I say it is not a jury question any
longer because there is not sufficient evidence.     My
learned friend Mr. King says it is a jury' question
because there is evidence.

     He referred for a time to Elliott and as I said
earlier, I formed the impression that with the skill of
advocacy that he has he was in fact answering a point
that was never being made.    I do not suggest that the
jury would have to, if there was evidence, consider (a)
whether Mr. Duckenfield would have been able to see the
risk had he thought about it.    I accept the test is
quite clear:  would the risk have been serious and
obvious to the independent, prudent, reasonable
individual in the position of Mr. Duckenfield?

     However, I do not concede and I do not move away
from the submission I made earlier, namely, it has to-be
in the circumstances that faced Mr. Duckenfield and all
the circumstances that faced Mr. Duckenfield.    Those
circumstances not only involve the environmental
circumstances, namely, the risk and all that went with
what was happening in the Control Room at the time, but
also the personal circumstances insofar as they would
have affected the Police Controller in his position.    I
do not move away from that at all.   When one reads
Elliott, Elliott does not suggest anything to the
contrary.   All Elliott is saying is that the test is
objective, namely, would the serious and obvious risk
have been apparent to the individual, that is, the
                                                MR. ISAACS


reasonably prudent individual, but with those caveats.
That is, in that position, in those circumstances, and I
echo the submissions I referred to earlier made by
Mr. Kentridge in tfte Zeebrugge case.

     The point I was seeking to make when I made my
earlier submissions, which perhaps I made rather
inelegantly, was that when one comes to consider whether
there is evidence upon which a jury properly directed
could come to the conclusion so that they were sure that
the reasonably prudent individual in the appropriate
circumstances at the relevant time would have considered
the risk to be serious and obvious, reliance can be
placed by Mr. Duckenfield on the risk that was not
perceived by Mr. Murray and the risk that was not
perceived by Mr. Goddard.   He can say that when one
looks at the evidence (a) there is no evidence from
anybody that there was in those circumstances an obvious
and serious risk.   Indeed, the only evidence that there
is from the other two people in the Control Box from whom
we have heard who had the same or a better view or
perception than he had, that is, Mr. Murray and
Mr. Goddard, if the jury is to regard them as reasonable
and prudent Police Officers, then they did not perceive
the risk.

     I hope, sir, you appreciate the distinction between
the two.    I am not saying that the test is whether
Mr. Duckenfield perceived the risk.    What I am saying is
that Mr. Duckenfield, when the jury are directed upon
this matter if it gets that far, can say, "When one has
to have regard to what the reasonably prudent individual
in my position would have perceived, you have got two
people there who can represent the reasonably prudent
individual in my position - indeed, in a better position.
Who better can one turn to than those two for the clear
view that no serious and obvious risk would have been
perceived?"

     I come back to the point I made originally that when
one applies the approach of Mr. Justice Turner, then
there is no sufficient evidence and it should not go to
the jury.   My learned friend said, "Well, look at
Mr. Marshall, what about his evidence?   That is evidence
upon which the jury could come to that conclusion."    I
say to that this, sir, Mr. Marshall's evidence in the
passages to which you were directed by my learned friend,
was hypothetical, was made with the benefit of hindsight,
and, more importantly, in the context of the appropriate
test he was not put, having regard to the questions asked
by my learned friend, in all the circumstances which
existed at the time to those in the Control Room.    All
those circumstances were not put forward to Mr. Marshall
for his consideration and those circumstances not having
                                               MR. ISAACS


been put, namely, the crisis, for example, the shortness
of time, for example, then Mr. Marshall's view is one
which the jury could not rely upon in determining what
the prudent and reasonable Police Controller would have
perceived.   This is why there is such a danger in
splitting up - and this is what I said earlier -
splitting up the test into the step by step approach.




          The third point
                                                           71

                                       FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


      MR. ISAACS:    The third point I make is this, and it
follows on from that last point.   My learned friend said
the questions that could be put to the Jury might well be
these.   Was it obvious to the hypothetical person that the
pens were overcrowded?   Secondly, was it obvious to the
hypothetical person that fans might go into the central
pens?   But again the flaw in that sort of argument,
leaving that sort of decision to the Jury, is that it is
so selective.   The test would be, was there created by any
act or omission in respect of which there was a duty to
act, a risk, I would say of death, but even if it be of
physical harm, as a result of the decision to open the
gate and the failure to divert? My learned friend's
approach is selective.   That is the test in my submission
that the Jury would have to be asked to answer, and as I
say, and to be wearisome to say it again, there is no
evidence, taking Mr. Justice Turner's approach, for them
to come to any conclusion other than such a risk, that is
a serious and obvious risk, would not have been perceived
by the hypothetical person.

     By way of digressing, in relation to Mr. Justice
Turner, if I could add my observations on the question
that you asked, sir, my submission is this.  Mr. Justice
Turner as a High Court Judge in the Crown Court is sitting
as a judge in a superior court.  This, sir, with respect,
is an inferior court.  The authorities suggest that one
judge sitting in a court which is of a co-ordinate
jurisdiction should follow earlier decisions, unless he is
satisfied that they are wrong.  Even more so then in my
submission should, with respect, a tribunal in an inferior
court follow the decision of a superior court.

     Sir, a small passage from Halsbury's Laws, Vol. 26,
dealing with judicial decisions as authorities, at
paragraph 5-80, dealing with decisions of co-ordinate
courts, so another judge in the High Court essentially:

    "There is no statute or common law rule by which one
    court is bound to abide by the decision of another
    court of co-ordinate jurisdiction.  Where, however, a
    judge of first instance after consideration has come
    to a definite decision on a matter arising out of a
    complicated and difficult enactment, the opinion has
    been expressed that a second judge of first instance
    of co-ordinate jurisdiction should follow that
    decision, and the modern practice is that a judge of
    first instance would as a matter of judicial comity
    usually follow the decision of another judge of first
    instance, unless he is convinced that the judgment
    was wrong".
                                        FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


And, sir, if it applies in that way to judges in
coincident jurisdictions, so much so then when one goes,
with respect, further down the line.

     Sir, my fourth point is in relation to causation.   I
adopt what has been said by my learned friend Mr. Payne
just a moment ago, save for this, that in so far as it
affects Mr. Duckenfield then I submit that it is not only
acts which are not foreseeable which can break a chain
that emanates directly from him, it is also unforeseeable
omissions on the parts of others that can break the chain,
and on that basis I repeat the submission that I made
yesterday upon that particular subject, that if there is
such a break in the chain of causation in your judgment,
so far as the failure to act on the part of Mr. Murray and
Mr. Goddard is concerned, a failure to act which Mr.
Duckenfield could have expected and foreseen had there
been an obvious risk, then there is no chain of causation
leading from Mr. Duckenfield to any deaths.

      My fifth point is this, and it is one which I did not
raise yesterday but which I have considered overnight, and
I make the point briefly.   Sir, I feel that you will have
to leave to the Jury - this is my submission - the
possibility on the evidence that Mr. Duckenfield
appreciated a risk that would be created when fans entered
the Ground.   If one considers the risk being that fans
would enter the Ground and might enter an area which was
already overcrowded, you would have to leave to the Jury
this question, whether Mr. Duckenfield was not reckless
because (a) he considered where the fans were to go when
he gave the order for the gates to be opened, namely on to
the concourse, and (b) he considered at that time that
there was room in the concourse and on the terrace for
them by going in different directions.   It may be that he
was wrong about that but that is not the point.   It means
that on the Lawrence test he would have given some
consideration to not a risk that he necessarily foresaw,
but a risk that would have or may have been apparent to
the hypothetical individual, and have come to the
conclusion in relation to the fans coming into the Ground
that there was no risk, in which case on the Lawrence test
it goes into the lacuna area which you have read about,
and which you have been addressed about - not least by my
learned friend Mr. King - in which case Mr. Duckenfield
would not have been reckless because it would not be, and
this would be a point that the Jury could consider, it
would not be a case of failing to advert to the risk, or
of seeing an obvious risk and going on to take it
regardless, but having considered where they would go and
deciding, perhaps wrongly, that they would disappear or
disperse safely.   Sir, that is a matter that you will have
to consider, as to whether to leave that concept to the
Jury.
                                       FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


     Sir, the sixth point I make is this, and I do stress
it, in seeking once again to say that the case of unlawful
killing against Mr. Duckenfield and indeed against Mr.
Murray, because they are in a very similar position, save
for the question of causation, that there is a real risk
here that the Jury with 95 deaths may seek to find
scapegoats, and that there may be a temptation however
carefully directed that they will look with hindsight -
"Well, it must have been somebody's fault".  That is a
danger which, as I said yesterday, you must avoid and if
it means upsetting people by applying the law, grasping
the nettle and saying there is no evidence, applying the
appropriate law that can go to the Jury, then the risk
that scapegoats may be found outwith the law can be
avoided.  I do stress that point and I am sure it is one
that you have very much in mind if you do have to direct
the Jury on this particular point.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you, Mr. Isaacs.   Mr. Manning.

     MR. MANNING:   I am in danger if I continue to adopt
at the rate at which I am doing of having a very large
extended family, but I cannot improve upon both the law
and the eloquence of those who have spoken in this case,
and I say that with the greatest of respect to all of
them, and make that perfectly known.

     I adopted what I respectfully suggested was a
simplistic approach but if it be simplistic at least it
was in the good hands or in the clear words of Mr. Justice
Turner in the Zeebrugge case, which I referred to then and
do not intend to read again even though it is only a few
lines.  But I found it helpful; I think everyone would
find it helpful because it was much more in layman's
language and in words that you may very well care to adopt
when you are addressing the Jury.

     That I find myself in agreement with my learned
friend Mr. Isaacs as to the way in which that should be
adopted and accepted by you is no surprise, and the only
factor that I would draw to your attention so far as the
Zeebrugge case itself is concerned, in comparison to this
case, is that in the Zeebrugge case there was not at the
material time an emergency.  It is only when there is an
emergency that the case for the consideration of unlawful
killing comes to be the subject of the minute, painstaking
and necessary examination of decided authorities and of
very eminent people who have spoken to give us that
guidance.

     Again, it is quite possible for us, in looking at
those cases and in trying to find factors which either
distinguish between one another or bring the facts closer,
whether it is a coronial case or it is a divisional court
                                       FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


case, whether one Lord Justice of Appeal was sitting in
another tribunal and therefore could be said to adopt the
view and find a consensus, that we perhaps lose sight yet
again of simple elements and that simple element, I
respectfully suggest, is the difference between the facts
of Zeebrugge and the non emergency situation at the
outset, and the facts here when you have to look at them,
which was a real crisis of an unprecedented proportion.

     I don't intend to seek to distinguish between the
command, the ultimate decision maker and he who sat, if
not at his side then in front, as to who had a better
perception or indeed view, or anything of that nature.  It
seems to me that the law adopted broadly has to be applied
across the board.

     I, sir, associate myself with the last remarks of Mr.
Isaacs in that respect, that this is an enquiry into how
people died.  It is not part of anyone's function to find
people to whom the finger can conveniently be pointed and
that is why you have taken the trouble and given us the
indulgence of listening to us now nearly two days, over
matters of legal importance and significance, so that you
are helped I hope, not befogged but helped, by the way in
which you will address this Jury and give them the
necessary guidance as to the law, picking between
everything that you have had before you both in verbal and
in written form, and you will be able to give them that
direction, putting out of their minds if you want, again
in simple English, that it is their function to discover
how, and not their function to point a finger simply so
that at the end of the day there is a culprit, for that is
not the purpose at all.

     There is nothing further that I can add save to thank
you for your kindness and indulgence, and I sincerely mean
that because it has been difficult and I think it should
be said and I would have wanted to say it.

     THE CORONER:   Thank you, that is very kind of you,
Mr. Manning.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I only address you again on certain
points of law.  Sir, we have heard one or two comments
from my learned friends which almost became cri de coeur,
somewhat emotional, about scapegoats and so forth.  Sir, I
don't respond to them, not in any disservice to my learned
friends, because I know what we are dealing with are legal
submissions and what should properly be done on the basis
of the matter before you, and it is not an issue here of
scapegoats it is an issue of whether or not it is proper
that certain verdicts should be left to the Jury in the
case of certain individuals.
                                       FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


     Sir, could I just go through one or two of the points
now raised.  To my learned friend Mr. Payne's point that
if there is a novus actus here there can be no question of
an unlawful killing verdict, as I understood what he was
saying to you, sir, my simple answer to that proposition
is this, you are concerned certainly in the context of the
cause which everybody has put forward to my left, as one
capable of breaking the chain of causation which is the
decision to open the concertina gates and allow in, in an
uncontrolled manner, the large crowd of people without
taking steps to divert them from the centre pens, that
cause, that intervening act is one where the simple
question arises, is that on the evidence a substantial
cause of the deaths?   If it is a substantial cause then
there is a causative link.

     The fact that it is for the purposes of analysis the
only cause, if that be your conclusion, for the purposes
of leaving an unlawful killing verdict to the Jury, sobe
it, that is the consequence of it being a novus actus. I
have not, in fact, sought to put forward my own
professional opinion as to whether it is a novus actus or
not.  That is a matter, it   may be a matter left to the
Jury or it may be simply a   matter for you, sir, to say
whether the evidence is conclusive all one way, but
assuming it is for the moment conclusive all one way, it
cannot possibly have that consequence that the intervening
act therefore ceases to be a substantial cause of death.
Far from it, it becomes the cause of death, and on any
view is a substantial cause, and we are all agreed on an
analysis of the law that when one is looking to the
conduct or omission of any   person whose conduct or
omission is called into question, the question on
causation is was that a substantial cause of death?

     Sir, I won't repeat and don't seek to repeat all the
matters I already laid before you as to why there was, in
relation to that conduct and omission, evidence, and is
evidence, clear evidence, which the Jury are entitled to
consider, be it as to the state of the pens, be it as to
the likely route of those coming in, in all the
circumstances which my learned friends pray in aid there
is the evidence there for them to consider whether there
was an obvious and serious risk to the reasonably prudent
person, and the risk of course is the risk of physical
injury to those who are about to enter the centre pens, or
those already there, so when my learned friend Mr. Payne
refers to a failure to react to a risk already created in
the context of the events at Hillsborough, I had the
impression, I may be wrong, that he was referring to a
risk already created outside the concertina gates, for
example.  I may be wrong on that, but that is not the
relevant risk which you are looking to at the time of the
conduct or omission which I am directing your attention
                                       FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


to, namely the decision to let into the Ground a large
group of people through those concertina gates.  The risk
there we are talking about is the risk of injury, physical
injury, to those who are about to enter and those who are
already in the centre pens.




                                That risk is created
                                        FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


    That risk is created. That is the question. The
act which creates that risk, which is for the Jury to
decide, is the act of letting them in. The act of
letting them in without taking the various steps which
I suggest the reasonably prudent person would have
taken is creating the risk and that is the question,
therefore, in the two stage, Lawrence/Caldwell
analysis, which I need not go through, sir.

    In the case of Mr. Duckenfield, I do say,
therefore, there is evidence not simply that, for
example, he failed to react to a risk which has already
been created but we are talking about the creation of
the risk through letting people into the ground and
that is what I directed your attention to, sir.

    I repeat again that it would not be proper, in fact
it would be wholly wrong, to say that the only evidence
that the Jury can consider as to whether or not it
would be obvious to a reasonably prudent person of
those in the Control Box, the only evidence one can
consider as to whether or not it would have been
obvious to them that the centre pens were full and the
likely route of the fans in the circumstances in which
they found themselves, the only evidence one could
consider would be those in the Control Box because they
are the very people whose conduct is being called in
question.

    It was rightly pointed out, I think by my learned
friend, Mr. Russell, in distinguishing Mr. Justice
Turner's judgment, they are the actors in the immediate
cause and, therefore, it would be wholly wrong to say
it is to be determined simply by their evidence. The
Jury are entitled, of course, to take into account
their explanation and I would not in any way detract
from that because that is wholly within the Jury's
province but they are entitled also to take into
account all the other evidence as to the centre pens,
the state of them, the views one gets from the Control
Box, the views one gets from the gates, the layout of
the ground, the questions a reasonably prudent man
might ask and so forth.

    Sir, I do not go through them all and, as you know,
I have got my evidence all carefully scheduled on those
various issues but it would be wrong to fall into the
trap, if I can put it that way terribly gently, that
simply because those whose conduct is called into
question themselves deny it was obvious to them and so
forth is determinate of what would have been obvious to
the reasonable and prudent person in their positions.
                                        FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


One only has to state that perhaps to see that that is
correct.

    Equally, sir, my references to Elliott have been
somewhat misinterpreted. I cited Elliott to you for
two reasons. One was going to the actus reus and one
going to the mens rea. So far as the actus reus is
concerned, it is clear authority for the proposition
that when dealing with recklessness, manslaughter, or
any other crime where recklessness is applicable on the
Lawrence test that the issue is what would be obvious
to the reasonable and prudent person in the position of
the defendant but you do not give to that reasonable
and prudent person the peculiar characteristics of the
defendant which he may pray in aid as to why it was not
particularly obvious to him.

    I am not now talking about the circumstances in
which he finds himself but I am talking about the
personal characteristics. The 14 year old girl in
Elliott was not allowed to pray in aid that she was of
a young age, that she had no experience of white
spirit, that she was of low intelligence. Those were
factors which were peculiar to her and would not be
imbued and put into the reasonable and prudent person
in her position.

    The second point I was raising out of Elliott was
to do with the mens rea was that the defendant (if I
can call him that for the moment) knew of the risk or
had not given thought to the possibility of there being
a risk and what Elliott establishes on this
recklessness test is that it matters not if the
defendant were able to convince a Jury that even if I
had considered the risk it would not have been obvious
to me because that is exactly what the defendant in
Elliott was saying to the Court. "I did not consider,
I concede that, but because of my certain personal
characteristics if I had considered it I still would
not have realised it and recognised it".

    It was clearly stated there that was not the mens
rea. The mens rea is simply, did the person know of
the risk and go on regardless or was the person in the
state of mind that he had not turned his mind to the
possibility of the risk? That is why I referred to
Elliott on those two points. I do not think anything
said in Gray countermands that now that I understand
how others interpret it which is no more than saying
that sentence need not be there because as I understand
it - you know the sentence to which I am referring -
that what my learned friend, Mr. Russell, suggests is
being meant by the Lord Justice is that mens rea by
                                         FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


itself is not sufficient to create the crime. You have
got to have actus reus as well. I concede that
totally.

    That is a basic tenet of the criminal law but it
does mean, however, that failure to give any thought to
the possibility of the risk is sufficient mens rea. On
reflection, perhaps that is not what I thought at first
the Lord Justice was saying. What he was saying was,
simply having the mens rea without it being obvious to
the reasonably prudent man is not the offence. So be
it. It does not add anything but the way that it is
set out in the books and various submissions it stands
out in such an emphatic way as if it was given an
importance which on reflection it just does not have.
It is a matter of law, sir.

    The comments of my learned friend, Mr. Payne, as to
those whose conduct is called into question amounting
to a failure to react to a risk created elsewhere and
his submission that that under no circumstances could
amount to recklessness. In my submission that cannot
be the law. I may have misunderstood him.

     MR. PAYNE:   I said it was very unlikely.

     MR. KING: The reason why I say that cannot be the
case is, of course, if it were the case the judgment in
the Hong Kong case was the very judgment in which they
would have said so. Not only that, it is quite clear
in the Hong Kong case that the Privy Council were
saying that recklessness for manslaughter on the
Lawrence test applied to any case where there is an
allegation of manslaughter. In my submission, I
repeat, the only difference where you are dealing with
someone who has allegedly ignored or failed to act in
response to an obvious and serious risk of physical
injury to another, created by another, is that there
has to be a duty to act upon it.

    Of course, his failure to react to it has to be the
result of failing to see that which would have been
obvious to the reasonable and prudent person in his
position. Indeed, the analysis in Gray would support
that because the judgment in that case was to deal with
unlawful killing by neglect.

    I do come back to my point, sir, that in my
submission you are not here simply dealing with an
allegation of neglect and unlawful killing in simple
terms because the opening of the concertina gates and
allowing in an uncontrolled flow of supporters of
itself was a positive act. Obviously there are
                                        FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


elements in the totality of the conduct and omission
complained of which includes an omission which is an
omission to take steps to divert the spectators from
the centre pens.

    There is a creation, a positive act and an omission
together and it cannot be viewed simply as a neglect
case but even if, sir, you were to view it simply as a
neglect case there is nothing in the Gray judgment to
suggest that cannot amount to unlawful killing because
you have the various ingredients there set out.

    On the issue again which my learned friend, Mr.
Isaacs, raised on the suggestion that there could be a
novus actus in the case of Mr. Duckenfield through the
failure of others around him to act, I do repeat my
earlier submission that that, as a matter of common
sense as well as law, cannot hold in the situation
where the Jury were to conclude - and I say it must be
open to them - that there was a continuing duty at all
times on Mr. Duckenfield in the Control Box to have
regard to the consequences of that which had brought
about the opening of the concertina gates.

    The fact that there is more than one person whose
conduct or omission might be called into question
cannot break the chain of causation as between their
particular conduct or omission and the disaster if they
are coincident, if they are all happening together on
whatever view of the facts the Jury form in a situation
where A has a duty and B has a duty; A and B in that
analysis could be guilty of unlawful killing.

    The fact that each of them has failed to act in a
situation where the reasonable and prudent person in
their position would have reacted can be no answer to
either of them and that is why I say, sir, it is only a
circumstance that can be prayed in aid for the Jury's
consideration on the issue of whether or not a
reasonable and prudent person would have observed the
risk but is not conclusive as a matter of causation as
to whether or not the failure of one to observe the
risk has caused the disaster.

    Sir, my learned friend, Mr. Isaacs, made the point
as to whether or not Mr. Duckenfield in fact turned his
mind to the risk and came to the conclusion there was
no risk is patently a Jury question and indeed he was
advising you and submitting to you on the basis that he
would like to put that to the Jury as a possibility
when considering the issue of recklessness. I do not
make any comment on that at all, sir, because that is a
question which even Mr. Isaacs would say is a question
                                        FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


for the Jury when they are considering the issue of
recklessness against Mr. Duckenfield and I have made my
submissions already about whether gross negligence
applies there.

     THE CORONER: I think I understood Mr. Isaacs to
say if I were to decide to leave it then that is the
point which in those circumstances...

     MR. KING:   Yes, sir.

     THE CORONER: He did not quite use those words but
that is how I understood it.

     MR. KING: That is how I understood it too and
that is why I say, sir, I do not address you on it
because that is essentially a question which would be
considered by the Jury. If I were to address you it
would go on the issue of law whether gross negligence
existed. Sir, unless I repeat my 'offer' to direct you
as to the evidence which I say the Jury could consider
on the issue as to whether or not it was obvious to a
reasonable and prudent person as those in the Control
Box, that if a large number of people were allowed into
the ground in an uncontrolled way there was a real risk
they were likely to end up in the centre pens which
were already full and, therefore, there was a risk of
overcrowding and crushing, unless you want me to
identify the evidence to you, I have nothing more to
say. I have made clear that I am prepared so to do.

     THE CORONER: I do understand and, as I said
yesterday, I would like you to but I think it would be
a mistake. I think I had better say no.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: Sir, I hope I can be mercifully
brief. I have one very brief comment to make in
relation to some of the comments that have been raised
about novus actus. I think there was a tendency, with
respect, to overlook the fact that the words novus
actus interveniens are simply a legal shorthand for
saying that if an individual's acts or omissions give
rise to potentially causative conduct which is to be
regarded in law as liable and an unforeseen event -
unforeseen by him - occurs which overtakes that then in
law that person is not to be regarded as having caused
anything.

    That leaves the actual fact of what that person may
or may not have done at large, no doubt that will be
taken into the circumstances if the unforeseen event is
one which is an actual omission by another person in
breach of a duty to somebody else. There is no magic
                                           FURTHER SUBMISSIONS


about novus actus. It does not throw out of the window
all the background. It just says to an individual,
"You are no longer regarded in law as having set off a
train of events which led to someone's death". It is a
simple concept.

    The other point I would raise is in relation to the
Zeebrugge ruling by Mr. Justice Turner. Both myself
and Mr. Russell are playing away from home, so to
speak, and so we have not had access to a law library
but certainly when my learned friend, Mr. Isaacs, was
citing a passage to you as to the effect of courts at
the same level and binding decisions, he was citing
from Halsburv's Laws which I know is an old edition.
It is 1979 and certainly in my mind I am fairly clear
there is a more recent case which, if you are troubled
by it, I am sure we could find in the Sheffield City
Council law library which is to that effect, that
courts of equal jurisdiction should follow the decision
of another court unless they are satisfied that it is
wrong or if there are two conflicting decisions.

    Therefore, logically the court of an inferior
jurisdiction ought to follow the court at a higher
level. I believe my learned friend, Mr. Russell, may
also extend an offer. We both share the belief that
the Old Bailey actually sits as a High Court. We have
no actual legal basis for that but if it is right it
would bind you in this instance and we would both be
happy to pop off and try and find it if it is
necessary.

       THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, have you anything to
say?




                                   /MRS. McBRIEN.
                                                      83

                                     MISS ADDLEMAN



      MRS. McBRIEN: Sir, I would like to add to ray
submission the application of the "but for" to the
following possible cause.

      But for the closing of Leppings Lane to traffic at
about 2.30 the congestion would not have arisen outside
the Leppings Lane turnstiles which led to the opening of
the exit gate, Gate C, so not only was a dangerous vehicle
created but it was also driven in a reckless manner causing
injuries and death. Thank you.

      THE CORONER:   Thank you, Mrs. McBrien.

      MISS ADDLEMAN:  Sir, only two points I think.
Both are referable to comments made by my learned friend
Mr. Payne and can I say on the whole that I agree with the
matters which my learned friend Mr. Payne has brought to
your attention in his second address, but can I take issue
sir with something he said so far as the authority of
ex parte Higgins is concerned.

      As I understood it, I may be wrong about this, but
my learned friend Mr. Payne seemed to be suggesting to
you that this was a case where there was no evidence in
the view of the Court to support a verdict of unlawful
killing.
      In my respectful submission, sir, it seems clear
to me at any rate, that it was a case of insufficient
evidence and I gain support for that view particularly
from page 245, halfway down the page, the paragraph that
begins "Mr. Goghlan for the coroner ...."

      THE CORONER:   Yes.

      MISS ADDLEMAN:  ".... submitted that nevertheless
      there was evidence upon which a jury properly
      directed could have come to the conclusion that
      a verdict of unlawful killing was the proper
      verdict.  In this he was supported by
      Mr. O'Connor. Both of them referred us to
      all such passages of the evidence as they were
      able to suggest might amount to sufficient
      evidence to justify a verdict."

Sir, clearly that submission was rejected but clearly there
was some material on which the Court came to the conclusion.

      Sir, I think that in my respectful submission could
be an important point and one to be borne in mind.

      Secondly, sir, can I say that I agree with the
remarks made by my learned friend Mr. Payne with regard
to those passages of the Kong Cheuk decision which he
drew to our attention yesterday on pages 25 and there again
on page 26.
                                     MISS ADDLEMAN




      Sir, in that context can I say that of course I also
agree with my learned friend Mr. King when he says that
of course such circumstances as are envisaged there can
in fact arise, namely when one is considering the reaction
or lack of reaction and here I use the word defendant
as shorthand, reaction or lack of reaction to a situation
created by the obvious and serious risk of another.

      Can I also observe this: to envisage those situations
one has to stretch one's imagination to very extreme
examples and sir the one that I have in raind is a situation
for instance where someone, some individual committed an
offence of arson and set fire to a house. Thereafter
individual (B) comes along and thinks "Ah a fire" or indeed
perhaps thinks nothing, but pours petrol all over the fire.

      Sir, from this example I would submit that situations
do have to be extreme and therefore it does lend force
to my learned friend Mr. Payne's comments, that if one has
to get to that situation before one can consider that the
Diplock direction, vis-a-vis Lawrence, has to be modified,
one really must be getting perilously near at the very least,
in my respectful submission, to a situation where one has
to say, particularly bearing in mind this context, whether
it is safe to leave a verdict to the jury, but one has to
say can a person be reckless in those circumstances?

      I appreciate it does in fact only go to circumstances
but it is highly relevant in your considerations at this
stage, indeed it would be if you reject that first sub­
mission of mine.

      Sir, I think those are the only matters that I would
wish to draw to your attention.

      MR. RUSSELL: You will be relieved to hear that I
don't propose to add anything.

      THE CORONER:   Thank you, Mr. Russell.

      Well, ladies and gentlemen, can I just say that I
am most grateful to you, Mr. Manning has very generously
said that I have given you time but you too of course
have given me your thoughts and your time and I do
appreciate it very much indeed and I will obviously try
as best as I can to take on board what has been said.
It would be a lie to say that I had done no thinking on
this matter myself so I will also of course take that
into account.

      I don't think there is any merit or any need for
me to give any rulings or directions on your submissions.
May I say it will become apparent as I sum up what I
have accepted and what I have not or perhaps what I have
misunderstood I suppose is also a possibility, but I don't
think there is any need or any requirement for me to give
any direction and it also gives me an opportunity to
spend a little while before tomorrow morning to mull it
over and may be modify any thinking which I have done
already-  I hope that is acceptable to all of you.

      Nov/ before we go there is just a couple of little
procedural things which I want to sort out today because
it will save us time tomorrow.    It is this: I have
already mentioned that I want to introduce this one
exhibit.   It is, I hesitate to say, of no consequence.
It is of great consequence to Mrs. McBrien but it is not
going to make any difference to the final decision as to
where this particular mark appears on the plan, but so that
it is in the body so to speak of the documentation, I
hope you will forgive me introducing it after the
submissions. We should have had it on Monday but I
suppose the post and one thing and another. Anyway, be
that as it may.

      Nov/ the second thing I want to do is this: as you
know I have already told you I am going to let the jury
have the exhibits and at some point or other we are
going to bring into Court, I don't think it will be
tomorrow, it will be on Monday before they go out, a
video recorder and we will teach them how to use it so
that they can look at the videos if they wish. They
don't have to. The videos which are exhibited of course,
not 71 hours of other film or thereabouts that is
available.

      Apart from the exhibits I don't intend to give them
anything other than about 100 copies of the "Inquisition"
blank. They look like this. You know what they look
like.

      In addition to that I intend to give them - can
you just hand these out? This is just an example. This
is just one case, it is Colin Wafer. What I have done
in order to save them a lot of writing we have also
completed an Inquisition on all the parts that I consider
to be totally non-controversial such as v/here we are
sitting; the date; who the Coroner was or is; the name
and the medical cause of death.

      Paragraphs   3 and 4, which are the crucial ones,
"Time, place and   circumstances" will be left blank.   I
will explain all   this to the jury but I want you to know
what I intend to   do in case you have any comment.

      We have also completed the section which says:
"Particulars for the time being required by the
Registration Acts to be registered concerning the
death" because again that is really non-controversial,
it is names and dates.  It is really repetition to a
large extent of what has gone before.
                                                             86




      I will make it quite clear to them that they can
of course cross anything out they want and if they
don't like to use a typed version that is why I am giving
them blank copies as well so that if they wish they can
sit down and writ^ it all out by hand, it does not matter
to me, but I hope that you will see this simply as a means
to make life easier fbr the jury and to save them having
to write it all down in note form here because there is
no way they could remember every single name exactly right
and the dates of birth.

      Have you any comments on this?

      MR. MAXWELL: Could we have a copy of the reverse
side as well because apparently there are notes?

      THE CORONER:   I have not got a genuine puckka original
up here with me.   If somebody goes downstairs on my desk
there there are a few. The reverse, yes there is a reverse,
you are quite right.

      MR. MAXWELL:  Sir, it is simply that the numbers
are obviously referring to something on theback and I
wonder if you could tell us what   it is that is on the back?

      THE CORONER: Yes, I know what it is. It is a list
of the possible verdicts which are actually lifted from
the rules and the back sheet basically to give the name
and the date and the address, so it lists about 12 possible
verdicts from natural causes down to, or up to, if you
wish, unlawfully killed, but we will get a copy and you
will see what it is in a moment.

      That is unavoidable.  Theyhave got to have the
reverse because whether I give them a typed one or an
untyped one it is on the reverse because it is printed.




                            /The only way to get round it
     The only way to get round that would be to give them
completely blank sheets of paper and that in fact is
arguably not right.   I ought to say I do not use this
form normally. We use our own.    However, I decided to
in these particular Inquests, because there is argument
as to whether one should use the prescribed form and I
decided I would use it in order to avoid any difficulty.

     Now the second thing I want to give them - I will
try to give them some help with filling in paragraphs 3
and paragraphs 4.   One of the points which I will be
making to them is - as you can see it says, "Tine, place
and circumstances at or in which the injury was
sustained."   That is onlythe first sheet of sixteen
sheets, but it is just to give you an idea.

     One of the points I will be making to them is that
if they wish they could put the time of certification.
Personally I do not think they should, but they may want
to do that and that is a matter entirely for then.     i»7hat
I have done - you will recognise this document, it is a
truncated version of something you have already seen - it
gives the numerical number, the name, the thir*'! column is
the age, then the time and the doctor who certified the
deaths in each case.   The last column says "l^ate of
Hearing", that is the date when we had the interim
inquests.   I could have cut that out but it mi^'it just
help them in locating the cases in their minds.

     Again, I do not think there is anything
controversial about this and it is simply inten>.'J to
save them writing all these numbers down in court v.:!
will save us a considerable amount of time becai:'--. I -..’ill
be able to deal with it without having to wait : :r tie.n
to write.

     Can you see anything that worries you about t'i :t?

     You will notice on the Inquisition, by the wav, at
the top there is a number.   It is 13 on thiio one.   That
is the sequential numbering system.    In fact the numbers
are important because if they were, for example, to want
to look, say, at the plan where the deceased were last
seen alive for instance, those are all identified by
numbers and it would be impossible for them to work out
who is who without having some means of locating the
numbers.    However, I do not intend to give them either
an alphabetical or numerical list because once I go into
that then I am giving them stuff we have not had in
evidence and I do not want to do that.

     Is there anything else, apart from just having a
look at this back sheet?
     MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, there is one other matter.   It
will not surprise you that coming from me it concerns
photographs.

     One of the features of the photographs which have
been supplied to us taken from acetates, and I presume
the jury has photographs of a similar quality, is that
there is a considerable difference in quality between the
standard of the quality of reproduction in the
photographs we have been given and the quality of
reproduction that exists in the master copies.    I am
wondering whether it would be possible, or even
advisable, for the jury to be provided with one set of
all the photographs which have been adduced in the best
quality that is available, which will probably mean the
relevant masters being extracted from the bundles of
10" x 8" photographs that are held by the Uest Midlands
Police, so that if the jury wish to refer to a particular
part of a photograph which they find unclear on the
acetate reproductions which are in their bundle, they can
do so.   I have in mind in particular the photographs
taken inside the ground where some of the detail is very
small.   For example, trying to spot a police woman's hat
in the middle of a certain pen may be impossible on an
acetate reproduction, but is quite possible on the real
master copies from which the acetates were prepared.

     THE CORONER:   I have no particular objection to
that because we are not introducing anything new, we are
just producing better quality of the same.   The only
problem is whether we can do it within the time.    I
think the best I can offer you, Mr. Russell, is that we
will have a look and see whether it is feasible to
extract the photographs.   The jury is not going out
until Monday so the chances are we will be able to do it
because they do not necessarily need them tomorrow.   Ue
will do our best and see whether we can do that.

     I still would want to give them the files because it
is easier for them to handle them.

     MR. RUSSELL:   You can't give them the files because
the files include photographs which have not been made
exhibits.

     THE CORONER:   No.  I am sorry, you have
misunderstood me.   These folders, I mean.    Our exhibit
folders.   We have got to extract from the hundreds of
thousands of photographs which exist the ones which have
been exhibited.   That is the problem, whether we have
got the time to do it but we will do what we can.
     Has everyone seen the back of this now?
Mr. Maxwell are you happy with that?  As I say, in a
sense you have no choice because it is printed on.

     MISS ADDELMAN:   Sir, on the question of exhibits,
can I ask if this is in your mind, sir, to make clear to
the jury that at any time in order to assist in their
deliberations they are at perfect liberty to see any of
the exhibits?

     THE CORONER:   Indeed, that is the very point I was
just making.   The exhibits fortunately are contained -
in fact there are three volumes of exhibits.

     MISS ADDELMAN:   I do apologise if I have
misunderstood.

      THE CORONER:   I intend to give them the whole lot.
In fact we will give them the whole lot.    We will give
them an abbreviated set where we have extracted the
plans, you know, where people have put their crosses,
because it is much easier to leaf through them if you do
not have to leave through several hundred plans, which
they may not need but we will give them those as well so
that they can have a look.    We will provide them with
equipment so that if they want to look at the exhibited
video material they can do so in the privacy of their
room.    Of course, I will also tell them if they have any
problems all they need to do is to come back and I will
try to help them.

     MISS ADDELMAN:   Thank you, sir.

     MR. MANNING:   I am now on to a practical issue and
that is the time, or the times.   We know we are starting
at ten o'clock tomorrow.   It is going to be a very long
day for you as well as for the jury because obviously you
are talking to them and their concentration is...

     THE CORONER:   That is one of the reasons why I
decided to start at ten o'clock.

     MR. MANNING:   Yes, a ten o'clock start, obviously
breaks during the course of the morning.   Would I be
bold to anticipate that to go very much beyond four,
indeed, at all beyond four would be beyond anybody's
limit?

     THE CORONER:   I would be very surprised if I would
want to go beyond four.   It might be a minute or two if
I am just finishing something off but it would not my
plan to go beyond four because I think I will be a little
bit too tired.
     MR. MANNING:   Indeed, sir.   It is right, is it
not, that on Friday morning we still have the juror who
has an inability to come before one o'clock?

     THE CORONER:   One o'clock we start on Friday, and
on Friday I do intend to go on until about five, if that
is not too difficult because it redeems a little bit of
the time we have lost during the morning.

      MR. MANNING:   That was one of the questions I was
going to ask.    Two more questions:  would 10.30 be your
normal Monday intention, or would you like to wait and
s ee?

     THE CORONER:   Can I wait and sea on Friday, because
it depends to a large extent how far down the road I am
and I must admit I find it very difficult.   I have not
managed to get it right yet, as you know, in my timings!
This last week has been a little bit better.

     MR. MANNING:   The last question, sir, relates to
the last post, if you like, on Monday and that is until
what time would you intend to keep the assembly assembled
in the hope that the jury may come back or, indeed, are
you going to say to them that come 4.30 they should take
their suitcases to a predestined place?

      THE CORONER:   That is a very good question,
Mr. Manning.    Again it depends to a certain extent upon
what time I send them out, but let's imagine that...     In
fact it probably answers your penultimate question as
well.    I think it may well be that we might start a
little bit earlier on Monday than 10.30, unless I am
strongly persuaded otherwise.    However, say I can get
the jury out by eleven, then I would probably at about
3.30 or so, have them back and just check with them how
they are getting on.    I would not want them to feel
pressurised.    If they were to say, "We aren't ready yet
but we think in a couple of hours we might be in a
position to come back with an answer," then obviously I
would say we would press on if they feel up to it.    If
they said there was no way in which they were going to be
able to conclude the matter on Monday, then I would say,
"Press on until 4.30 and then off to your hotel and see
you in the morning."    Is that reasonable?

     MR. MANNING:   Thank you very much for that
indication.

     MR. MAXWELL:   Could you indicate when your
directions on law, or the main body of them, will be
given?   Would that be first thing tomorrow morning?
     THE CORONER:    It will not be first thing, but it
will be tomorrow, probably sometime during the morning.
I want to do it fairly early on, the main part.    It will
obviously have to be repeated from time to time, as I am
sure you will appreciate, but after a few introductory
remarks, so to speak, I intend to get on to the legal
direction, because I think it is necessary that the jury
has my thoughts on what the law is in their minds fairly
early on.   It if helps you, it is my intention to deal
with the "how" question, if you like, the bit we have
been doing since the 19th of November up to now, then,
and I will then deal with what we did at the interim
inquests last.    It has various advantages, not least
that we will actually be finishing up reminded that we
are dealing with ninety-five deaths and not other
matters.

     Tomorrow and Friday most likely I will be dealing
with the body of the matters we have been thinking about
for the last three or four months.

     MR. MAXWELL:   Sir, not simply touching wood but
gripping this substantial wooden structure in front of
me, it is your intention and expectation at the moment
that the jury will be sent out on Monday?

     THE CORONER:   That is what I want to achieve.   In
fact we would have achieved it if it had not been for the
fact we were losing three hours or so on Friday because
of the late start.   I am pretty confident that if we
could have had a full Thursday and a full Friday, all
things being equal I would have achieved it.   I just
hesitate a little bit about the timing on Monday because
I have lost a certain number of hours.

     Can I just say this as an aside.   Once or twice,
some of you - you mentioned it Mr. Catchpole and I think
it was you Mr. Payne, about having to shoot from the hip
because there were no pleadings, no nothing, one did not
know where one was and I must admit, particularly when
you mentioned it the first time I did get a bit worried
as to perhaps where I had made my mistake in this regard.
However, I was encouraged by somebody who read from a
Judgement, I think it was from ex parte Gray, where the
judge quite clearly says precisely that, that in an
Inquest there are no pleadings, there is no indictment,
there is nothing, one just shoots from the hip, so I feel
a little bit encouraged by that.

     MR. PAYNE:  Sir, I say I did say words to that
effect.   It certainly was not intended as a criticism of
any way in which you have conducted these Inquests.  It
was just a statement of fact.
     THE CORONER:   Mr. Payne, it was not intended...    I
was not in fact intending to criticise anybody either.   I
was just saying that oddly enough I had not noticed that
particular quotation.   I must have read it but it had
not sunk in, so I was pleased to see it.     That is allI
was saying, to finish on a slightly different note.

     Ladies and gentlemen,   thank you very much.



          (The Inquests were adjourned until
          ten o'clock the following morning7
