OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                              Date and time raised           <~?Q ,__________       Number
             ,( j ‘3
Title - T g i V ^ g c ^ i j P T     Q   :                    /L u f?    h h ^ H D O d > _________ Q Z C g & f i   ,
 Include source and any document number i f relevantj                                       Q»


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No
                                                                                                                             Receiver




                                                                                                                             In d e x e r
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                      S ta tem e n t Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                             In d e x e r
Indexed as indicated              VQq-x     > -iP o ;            ,



No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken                                                                                 0 /M              S IO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                         In d e x e r



When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
      HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                   (WEST DISTRICT)



              INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

        VICTIMS OF THE HIL LSB ORO UG H FOOTBALL

                     STADIUM D IS ASTER

                  ON THE 15TH APRIL,       1989



                 INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                         PHILIP HAMMOND




                             Before

DR.    S.L.    POPPER,    LL.B,    B.MED.Sci,   B M , B S , MRCGP

                  (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                                  At

                 The Medico-Legal Centre.
                      Watery S t r e e t ,
                        Shef f i e l d .

                                  On

                          2nd May 1990



                 TRANSCRIPT OF P ROCEEDINGS




        From the Notes of J.L. Harpham,- Ltd.,
             Official Shorthand Writers,
         55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
                          APPEARANCES:



MR.    D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors'   Group
                              Steering Committee

MR.    S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                              Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                              Forrest)

MR.         CALLAGHAN         Trent Regional Health Authority and
                              South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                              Ambulance Service

MR.         GREGORY           Sheffield City Council

MISS         THORPE           Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN              Police Federation of England and
                              Wales

MR.    P.    ISAACS           Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS.    B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable,   South Yorkshire
MR.    P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                    B

                                                            INDEX


                        DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Called




                                                                                               C-J
                          By THE CORONER ...........................................




                                                                                               01
                          Cross-Examined by M R . F R A S E R ............................


                        POLICE SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCK - Called

                          By THE   C O R O N E R ..........................................    7
                    D
                        DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Recalled

                          By THE   C O R O N E R ............................................ 10


                        DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called
                    E
                          By THE   C O R O N E R ............................................ 11




                                                        —   o o — oo-




                    G




                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
                        2nd May 1990

                                   INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF PHILIP HAMMOND

                                  MR. FRASER: The final evidence you will hear today
                           relates to Philip Harnmond. Philip's mother and father are
                           directly behind me and they have with them some family
                    B      friends, a social worker and Mrs. Hammond's brother who is a
                           social worker here in Sheffield.  The practice which
                           represents Mr- and Mrs. Hammond is a member of rny Group and
                           I therefore appear as their agents through the Steering
                           Cornrni ttee -

                                THE CORONER:   I have the impression that Mr. Hammond
                           was here on the day of the opening.   Do I recognise him?
                           Yes,you were here-    I must have seen you at some point.  In
                           that case I won't describe the format of the Inquest because,
                           you are probably familiar with that already and we will
                           start.

                                This is a resumed Inquest which was opened on 18th
                           April 1989 and on that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin, rny
                    D      Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

                                "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                                identified to PC 192 7 Taylor of the South Yorkshire
                                Police as that of Philipt Hammond by Brian Hammond, his
                                uncle.    He was 14 years of age having been born on 8th
                                December 1974 at Liverpool • He was a single rnan and he
                                Ii ved at                              I L i v e r p o o l . He
                    E           was a schoolboy by occupation     He died   at the Northern
                                General Hospital following an incident at the
                                Hillsborough Football Ground on Saturday, 15th April
                                1989-   PC 1972 Taylor caused the body to be removed to
                                the Medico Legal Centre and there he identified it to
                                Detective Constable Simon Weigold who subsequently
                                identified the same body to Dr. Slater.        It is the
                                family wish that the body should be b u r i e d - “

                                At that point I adjourned the Inquest.   Then I wrote
                           and you, Mr- Harnmond  signed the form for me on 30th April
                           1989 and what I asked you was to check whether we had got
                           the spellings and so on right and in fact you did    I want
                           to just double check that "Philip" has only got one "1", is
                           that right and no other name just Philip Hamrnond?  All the
                           other details I have read out are correct, aren't they?
                    G      (indicating agreement-)

                                Dr. Forrest did the blood alcohol estimations and in
                           the case of Philip these were less than 10 milligrammes per
                           100 mils.   I would pause here because I know this has
                           concerned you but I do want you to listen to what it
                           actually says.   It says, "less than 10 milligrammes per 100
                           mils".   It does not say "10 milligrammes per 100 mils".  It
                H

J. L. Harpham Ltd
doesn't say "9".   It says, "less than 10".  That can mean
anything from zero - well, not zero - but -01 up to 10 and
what it signifies, as I understand it, is negligible.   It
can't be measured.   That is why he expresses it that way.
It shows on the trace but you can't actually say how much it
is and so the mere fact that it is that, even if it were 10
it would still be negligible-   It might only be -1 and so you
shouldn't be concerned about this-    All right? He has got
to record it like that because otherwise he is not telling
us what he has read but it is the conventional way of
expressing a minute amount which he can't quantify and
which is of no significance.   Does that make it any clearer
to you?  I hope it does.    Mr. Fraser, do you just want to
ask your client whether he wants me to have another go?

     MR. FRASER:   It wasn't that, sir.   The reason the
family were concerned was that certainly in the local Press
- and this is not a criticism of the Press - in Liverpool
the blood alcohol levels were all recorded at the conclusion
of the first day's business and they are very concerned that
a 14 year old boy, for that is what he was, should have been
recorded as having alcohol in his b loodstream and that has
certain connotations for certain people which is unfortunate
for them but also unfortunate for the family.

     I have actually taken the liberty of speaking to
Dr. Forrest - to Dr- Slater - about this and I think I may
be able to deal with it with him but one of the things that
Dr. Forrest said, and I was looking for it in the
transcript, was that it could be the equivalent of having
drunk a couple of pints of beer the night before and the
family are very keen to allay that comment in relation to
their son and I think when Dr. Slater comes to the stand I
may be able to allay that fear for the Jury and for the
family in particular.

     THE CORONER:   I think Dr- Forrest was giving an
example to show that this might be a residual reading but he
wasn't saying this was the only way or that had to be the
amount.  It was I think an example of fading really-

     MR- FRASER:    I am sure that is what he meant but the
problem is that not everybody reads that information and
takes what he means.   They sometimes put their own
interpretation on it-

     THE CORONER:    It may be Dr. Slater will be able to
help on it -

     MR. FRASER:    I think he will,    sir.

     THE CORONER:    I will c a l 1 D r . Slater now.
                                                                     DR.   D A V I D NEI L S LA TE R




                                        DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Called

                                                By THE C O R O N E R ;

                          Dr. Slater, would you introduce yourself in the usual way.
                          Wy name is Dr. David Neil Slater.  1 am a Consultant
                          Histopathologist and a Fellow of the Royal College of
                    B     Pathologists.

                        0- You are going to tell me now about Philip Hammond who is
                           also known to you as No- 93 I think? - A- That is correct,
                           sir -

                        i- We have got him down as identified by Inspector Timms but
                           you are quite satisfied this is the lad we are talking
                           about, namely Philip? - A. Sir, there was initial
                           identification with DI Timms and then later a joint
                           identification with DI Weigold, sir. ,

                           Can you then take me through your post mortem findings?
                           My examination of Philip showed evidence of mild asphyxia.
                           There certainly was very mild blueness to the face, a small
                    D      number of haemorrhages to the face, and also small scratches
                           around the face but this asphyxia was possibly trivial
                           although present and the main findings and cause of death
                           lay within the chest.

                                Both lungs showed evidence of extensive bruising with
                           evidence of haemorrhage into the actual lung substance.
                           This was accompanied by a fracture to the second rib on the
                    E      right side and this was accompanied by a tear into the lung
                           on the right side with an accompanying haemorrhage of
                           approximately half a pint of blood and this was the reason
                           why Philip had actually died.

                                My autopsy showed evidence of medical intervention in
                           that three ECG electrodes were positioned on the body.  It
                           was my opinion that the fracture to the rib was not a
                           consequence of any attempt at resuscitation.  This was based
                           on findings that resuscitation fractures are usually either
                           symmetrical or on the left side-  It would be unusual for
                           them to be on the right side and certainly not on the right
                           side in this very, very high position.  So I am confident in
                           my own mind that this was an unequivocal traumatic fracture
                           that had occurred.

                                My examination showed that Philip was normally
                           developed with no evidence of any natural disease which
                           could have contributed towards death and clearly Philip
                           would have had a normal life expectancy.

                                I submitted my cause of death, sir, as respiratory
                           failure, that his respiration stopping, due to (1) traumatic
                           pulmonary contusion.  If I could explain that that is the
                    H
                                                          3
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                   DR.   D A V I D NEI L S L A T ER




                            medical term for bruising of the lungs and then as a
                            contributory cause of death I had fractured rib and
                            pulmonary laceration with haemorrhage.  Pulmonary laceration
                            is the medical term for cutting and tearing of the lung due
                            to the fractured rib, sir.

                        Q. You mention that there is marked coning of the cerebellar
                    B      tonsils? - A. Yes.

                        Q- That happens when you get anoxia in the brain, in other
                           words, when there is a reduction in oxygen going up to the
                           brain? - A. That is absolutely correct, sir.  When there is
                           not enough oxygen in the blood the brain becomes swollen.
                           Obviously the cranial cavity, the head, is a limited space
                           and the swelling of the brain causes death to occur more
                           quickly, sir, yes.

                        Q • Generally speaking, when that happens it is hopeless?
                        A. Certainly when there is brain swelling and, as you say,
                            compression like this, coning, irreversible brain damage is
                            present and the outlook is hopeless, sir.

                    D   Q   Can you just deal with what your view is in this case of
                            loss of consciousness? - A. Yes.  Of the autopsies I dealt
                            with at Hillsborough, this was an unusual cause of death, as
                            you will appreciate.  The cause here was the a c c u m u 1ation of
                            blood within the actual lung substance.  Now if we get fluid
                            on our lungs this can be removed by various means-        There
                            are medications that can remove this if you can get to
                            people quickly enough but when blood develops in the lung
                    E       substance this cannot be removed at all and so, in fact,
                            there is no known effective medical treatment for this-
                            Blood is a very heavy that accumulates in the lung arid in
                            fact there is no doubt that in this type of death
                            unconsciousness would have occurred extremely rapidly, if
                            not instantaneously, and there would then have been no hope
                            at all, sir.

                        Q. And no pain? - A. Certainly no pain,     sir,    no

                        Q- Or even perception being unconscious? - A- The person would
                           be totally unconscious with no perception of pain,
                           discomfort or anything, sir-

                        Q- Can I just turn to the marks of medical       intervention?  I
                           think you mention three ECG electrodes,       is that right?
                        A. That is correct, sir-

                        Q- Are these little things which are stuck on the chest,               aren't
                           they? - A- Yes.

                        Q- Apart from that did you see anything else? - A- Philip had
                           the three ECG electrodes to the chest.  The patients who
                           came from the Northern General, clearly we were very much
                H
                                                           4
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                        DR.   D A V I D N EI L S LA T ER



aware that medical or surgical intervention could have been
undertaken and therefore all these cases were examined
extremely carefully to look, for example, for needle marks.
If needle marks had been placed in the body I am quite
confident I would have found those.  There were certainly no
needle marks that I found in Philip, sir, and so clearly
there had been no injection of anything into Philip.

By extension, just crossing the t and dotting          the i, there
were no cannulae in situ anywhere?  These are          the little
plastic tubes which are put into veins and so          on? - A. Oh
no.  They are quite big things, sir, and they          would have
been unequivocally seen.

     THE CORONER;    Hr. Fraser.

     MR. FRASER:   I think it is right for the record that
the enquiry by the family as to whether or not there were
any marks of resuscitation was never in any way intended as
a criticism.

     THE CORONER:    Oh no.

     MR. FRASER:    I wanted to make the point lest other
people may have drawn the incorrect inference.   It is just
that Mrs. Harnmond has some experience and she just wanted
her own mind satisfied.

              Cross-Examined by MR. F R A S E R ;

Dr. Slater, correct me if I am wrong, but I think by the
time Philip had got to hospital he was dead? - A. Yes, I
shouldn't be surprised in my profession.   I was somewhat
surprised that Philip was taken to the Northern General
Hospital because my autopsy finding was such that I would
have thought he would have died extremely quickly and become
unconscious instantaneously at Hillsborough.   I have asked
the Officers involved with this and I understand Philip was
not seen by a. doctor at Hillsborough.  I think this explains
that only essentially lay people saw him and, in my opinion,
Philip would have been brain dead at Hillsborough.

So the hospital carried out what they thought was exactly
the right procedure but it was sadly of no avail? - A. That
is c o r r e c t .

The second matter you may be able to help the family on and
obviously the Coroner and that is the question of this
negligible alcohol reading.   It is something which you,
Dr. Slater, will understand has troubled the family a little
because on the opening day I think Dr- Forrest suggested
that a reading like that might be a carry over frorn a
previous evening's consumption of alcohol and that has
concerned the family.  Certainly it is known to the family
                                       DR.   D A V I D N EI L S LA T ER




that on the way to the ground Philip had a can of shandy-   I
appreciate this is not within your strict discipline but
could a can of shandy produce a reading of less than 10
milligrammes per 100 millimetres in the blood.-’ - A- There
are several points here.  Firstly, in very general terms, 80
milligrammes per cent of alcohol is equivalent to
two-and-a-half pints of relatively strong beer and so in
fact when you are talking in very trivial levels like this,
and below 10 was the figure I heard, you are certainly
talking there of well less than a pint of lager-    You are
probably in fact talking of less than half a pint of very
weak lager.

Can I draw the inference from what you have said that a can
of shandy could produce a reading of less than ten? ~
Yes, I think that is absolutely true.  I think there is
another important point that Dr. Forrest actually has given
a figure.  It is less than 10 and this could have been a
trivial amount.  When any individual dies there are natural
body processes which in fact do go on.  The person has died
but bacteria still live.  This bacteria can produce very
small amounts of alcohol.  This was a problem, for example,
at the Moorgate Tube disaster.  If the person has not been
refrigerated very quickly, in fact, these organisms can
produce very small amounts of alcohol which could be
registered by Dr. Forrest and I put this forward as a
possibility why a very, very small, trivial amount of
alcohol could be registered by a machine.

      THE CORONER:  In fact, I think I have        to say
Dr. Forrest did actually deal with this, it        is only fair,
and on the whole he agreed with that but he        thought in these
particular instances that was not likely to        be a reason for
the levels and he gave explanations for it,        because he
didn't find the high alcohols.  Do you want        to reput your
quest ion?

I think what you are saying is that if you drink any
alcohol, Dr. Slater, and shandy obviously contains some
alcohol? - A. Yes.

Particularly if you have drunk it relatively near to the
point of death when you measure the blood you may well find
something because presumably it will be absorbed? - A. That
is ri ght .

That would be right, wouldn't it? - A. This is a very low
level and not actually equivalent in scientific terms to a
pint or indeed a half pint of lager actually-

     MR- FRASER:   I am grateful, Dr. Slater.  I was keen to
make the point on behalf of the family-  Thank you-

     THE CORONER:   Thank you.   Dr-   Slater,     there are two
                                                P-S   JOHN KILLOCK



more things.  First of all, I would like you to stay when we
have finished this Inquest because there is something I wish
to consider and which I will say in a moment and so don t
leave the Court until I ask you to please?

    THE WITNESS:    Yes.

     THE CORONER:   The second thing is, subject to that,
this is in fact your last appearance before me-  You are not
appearing tomorrow or Friday.  If I have done my sums right
it is 17 cases I believe you did?

     THE WITNESS:   That   is right,     sir.

     THE CORONER:    Dr. Slater, I would like to take this
opportunity of firstly thanking you for helping us on that
day because not. only were you there on the Sunday and the
Monday I know that 17 cases is a lot and you really worked
very, very hard.   I also recollect, you actually accompanied
me when we went to Hillsborough itself on the 15th.    Your
support then and your help then was appreciated by me and
also appreciated by the families-    The families did not see
you in the mortuary when you were working but they have seen
you in Court and I think I can safely say that the way you
have presented your evidence has been sensitive, helpful and
kind and I very much would like to thank you on behalf of
all the people, not just this family, but. all the people for
the way you have presented your evidence in these very
tragic circumstances.   Thank you.

      MR- FRASER:   Sir, can I be associated with those
remarks as a member of the Committee and as a person who has
stood before you and represented in excess now of fO
families.   Without question, those to whom Dr- Slater has
spoken have felt the benefit of a quiet word with him in
private.   They have very much appreciated it.  Thank you,
six'.

          POLICE SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCK - Called

                     Bv THE C O R O N E R :

Mr- Hillock. - A. Police Sergeant John Killock, sir, of the
West Midlands Police.  I have previous taken the Oath-

Sergeant Killock, could you take me through the
circumstances as we have them? - A. At about 0920 hours on
Saturday, 15th April 1989, Mr. Philip Hammond senior saw his
son, Philip Hammond, leave the family home with the
intention of travelling to Sheffield in order to watch the
Semi Final football match to be played at the Hillsborough
St ad iu m -

     Philip was known to be in possession of a ticket for
                                                                   P. S.   JOHN K I L L O C K




                        the West Stand terraced area and he travelled with a friend,
                        Mr. Ian Southgate.       They travelled on a coach organised by
                        Am b e r 1 ine Coaches of Liverpool and upon their arrival in
                        Sheffield walked to the ground and entered the stadium via
                        the Leppings Lane turnstiles-       They then walked through the
                        tunnel and into Enclosure No. 3 where, at approximately 1330
                        hours, they took up a position about halfway down near to
                    B   the fence separating Enclosure 3 and Enclosure 4.

                             They were joined by Mark Peter Preston who states from
                        1400 hours onwards the crowd in Enclosure 3 gradually
                        increased until by 1445 hours he was unable to move.

                             At 1455 hours when the teams took to the pitch there
                    C   was a surge from the crowd behind and Ian Southgate states
                        that Philip was pushed forward and out of his sight.  He did
                        not see Philip again-

                             Mark Peter Preston says that when the teams took to the
                        pitch he was holding Philip's hand but the pressure from the
                        crowd was pushing them gradually forwards and he slowly lost
                        his grip for at 1502 hours there was a further surge from
                    D   the crowd which pushed Philip forward and out of his view.
                        He did not see Philip again.

                             Shortly after 1505 hours, following the severe crushing
                        in the West Stand terracing, Police Constable Stephen Taylor
                        went into the tunnel leading to the West Stand terraces.   At
                        the end of the tunnel he saw a boy who he now knows to be
                        Philip lying on the ground.   The Officer, with assistance
                    E   from Police Constable Andrew James Shiel, carried Philip and
                        placed hirn in an ambulance which was in attendance at
                        Leppings Lane-

                             Attempted resuscitation was then carried out by Police
                        Constable Taylor, Ambulance Officer Jane Moffatt and
                        Ambulance Officer Alan Smith.  The ambulance was then driven
                        to the Northern General Hospital by Police Constable Shiel
                    F   and during that journey the Police Constable and the
                        ambulance crew continued attempted resuscitation.

                             Upon arrival at the hospital Philip was taken into the
                        Casualty Department where further treatment was carried out
                        by a doctor- who unfortunately has not been identified, sir.
                        After some twenty minutes the doctor stated he could not
                    G   detect any pulse or signs of life and Constable Taylor took
                        Philip into the plaster room which was being used as a
                        temporary mortuary at the h o s p i t a l .

                             Dr. Janet Rosemary Doore shortly afterwards examined
                        Philip in the plaster roorn and certified life extinct.

                             At 1900 hours Police Constable Taylor escorted Philip
                    H   to the gymnasium at Hillsborough Stadium where a temporary


                                                      8
J. L. Harpham Ltd
           At 0500 hours Police Constable Taylor escorted Philip's
      body to the Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the
      identification to Detective Constable Weigold.

           On 16th April, following identification by Detective
      Constable Weigold, Dr. David Slater carried out an autopsy
      and submitted a report giving the cause of death.

           Evidence is included regarding the analysis of the
      blood sample taken from Philip where the presence of ethanol
      was detected.  The witnesses proving continuity of that
      blood sample are Detective Constable Green, Detective
      Sergeant Turner, Detective Sergeant Fletcher and the
      analysis was carried out by Dr- Robert Alexander Forrest.
      That concludes my evidence, sir, and there is visual
      evidence.

Q. Can you just hold on for a moment or- two?   I just want to
   look at one or two things.   With regard to paragraph four of
   the summary I think what Ian actually says - he doesn't say
   the crowd surged.   I think you will find this on page eight.
   He says Philip had been pushed forward-    Is that right, or
   have I rnissed it? - A. Page eight, sir?

Q. Yes.  He says, "By 2.50 it was packed solid" and he goes on
   to say he was standing with Philip and describes his own
   position.  He goes on, "By this time Philip had been pushed
   forward and I did not see Philip again after about 2-55"? -
A- That is what he says, yes.

Q-    In fact, at page nine - and I am just trying to get this
      right - this is Mark Peter Preston's evidence, he does
      descx’ibe a surge? - A. He describes it as a surge.

Q. That     is right.  Ian in fact having lost sight of Philip does
   say,     "The next thing was I felt a sharp push".

Q.    If you turn to page 14 I think I am right in saying there is
      a time of 1502 which I think you mentioned in the summary,
      paragraph six-  Wait a minute. - A- Paragraph five, sir-

Q- Paragraph five is a constructed time in the sense that you
   worked out from the fact that he said, "About a minute of
   the game started"? - A. Yes, he doesn't specifically mention
   that time.

Q. He does actually say, "There was a hell of a big push from
   behind"? - A. That is right.

Q- Page 25, Stephen Taylor's evidence,               this is one of the


                                          9




                            By THE        CORONER:

     D t . Slater, I d o n ’t suppose for a minute it will change what
     you have already said but I want to feel as reassured as I
     can be that   the family have got this right. You       have heard
     what I have just read to you-      This is a Police Officer, not


                                     10
                                                                                    n.T.   M I C H A E L L AY T ON




                          a doctor and not an ambulanceman.    It            U  l . ^ ^
                          possible to restart a heart   1=   .    ^       into cardiac
                          course but at some points If a perso      g       certainly
                          arrest you can sometimes restart it:-       ' ,       5ust
                          theoretically possible-   From the
                          heard, the possibility I wonder,                         tL i r
                    B     person, is whether or not they are actually feeling
                          own pulse, sir-
                                                  ,•         -c -
                                                                p - A   No  their own pulse.
                     Q.       Whether they are feeling a puli=e.      •   ,
                                            i     - a Y p s this goes through the finger as
                     Q        T h elr own P ^ ] .           n is so unlikely the heart could
                              you know, i=i ,                   feel he would have been brain
                              have been restarted because I                      evidence
                              dead and my impression there, having heard the eviden       ,
                              they probably were feeling their own pulse.

                              Because in fact, particularly if you use your thumb, which
                              is what a lot of people do, you can ±eel your own pu
                              quite easily, can't you? - A. Absolutely, ^ir, yeto.

                              Yp , tha t' is a good point, I hadn't thought of that.                       So
                    Dc        whai you are really saying that even having                                   ‘red
                              makes no difference to your opinion,
                              my opinion at a l l , sir.

                          . I just wanted to hear that because it is obviously very
                            important for the family? ~ A- Yes.

                              I still don't,     want you to leave because I might                need you.
                    E'l •
                              Yes .
                                      THE   CORONER:     Did you want to ask anything?

                                   MR.      FRASER:   No, sir, I am grateful           for     yt>u taking the
                              point to      clarify it for the family-

                                      THE   CORONER:     I am very anxious that as             far at. we can
                               we deal with     it-
                                      MR-   FRASER:      If you hadn't clarified it, sir,                I would
                               have attempted to do so.

                                        DETECTIVE      INSPECTOR M IC HAE L LAYTON - Called

                    G                                      Ry THE C O R O N E R ;

                               Mr  Layton. - A. Michael Layton, sir, Detective Inspector in
                         Q.
                               the West Midlands Police.    Sir, an ,
                                                                    « a.inat:ion has been mad
                               Of video film and photographic evidence and Philip has D<-<-n
                               Tdent i fied alive in Enclosure No. 3 at !503 hours on a
                               photograph which has been given the r e f e r e n c e number
                               PR1/10A.    On a photograph referenced PR1/15A        11 ip
                H              shown alive in Enclosure No- 3 and that photograph, -ir,


                                                                    11
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                            D.I.   M I C H A E L L A YT O N




                           timed at 1504.      Sir, Mr- Hammond, Philip's father, has seen
                           these photographs and has been able to confirm these
                           ident if icat ions.

                                Mark Peter Preston has viewed visual evidence and he
                           has identified himself on a BBC video tape referenced MAP 1
                    B      and timed at 1438:44:11.    He states, sir, at this time
                           Philip would have been next to hirn although he can't
                           actually be seen on the video.    Sir, he signed a plan
                           indicating the position he believes he was in on the
                           terraces at t-his particular time and that, plan, sir, is
                           referenced M P 1 . Sir, in respect of Philip I haven't
                           actually done a plan of rny own because I feel to all intents
                           and purposes the plan MP1 actually reflects the photographs
                           we have already referred to-

                        Q. That will be C 2 17.   Could you come across? - A- (moved to
                           p l a n ) Sir, as I have said, this is Mark Preston's plan and
                           the point that he indicated is in Enclosure No- 3 and the
                           point he has indicated is in this position here ( indi cat- in g )
                           and as 1 have said 1 believe the photographs we have already
                           referred to actually shows the same approximate location in
                    D      Enclosure No. 3.

                                THE CORONER:        Any questions,    Mr. Fraser?

                                MR. FRASER:        No, thank you,    sir.

                                MR.   LIMB:          sir.
                    E                                       sir.
                                MR.   CATCHPOLE:

                                THE CORONER:   Is there anything else?  Do you wish me
                           to read what Mr. Wardrope said at the opening with regard to
                           Philip?

                                MR. FRASER:   No, I don't think so, sir.  Mrs- Hammond
                           is going to have a chat with Dr. Slater afterwards and those
                           matters which remain a little unresolved can be resolved in
                           the privacy of a private conversation.

                                THE CORONER:        Yes -

                                MR. FRASER:    I rise again because the family of this
                           young man particularly want to thank through you the people
                           who have helped their son on the day and particularly they
                           want to thank the Officers of the West Midlands Police for
                           the sensitive way they have dealt with a very difficult
                           problem over the last twelve months.   The loss of this young
                           man has obviously caused great distress and the West-
                           Midlands Police Officers, in Mrs. Hammond's words, were
                           exceptionally sensitive in the way they have dealt with
                           their investigations.
                    H
                                                             12
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                             THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed.   I am sure
                        from what I have seen of the West Midlands Police Officers
                        in this Inquiry I would second that.  Thank you v e r y , very
                        much for mentioning it.  It is good for the Officers to know
                        you have recognised their efforts to help as best as they
                        can.
                    B
                              I would just like to say obviously it is very, very sad
                        for you that you should have lost this lad in very tragic
                        circumstances such as these.   I only hope I haven't upset
                        you more this afternoon than, if you like, you were already
                        upset.   The object of the exercise was not to do that-   I
                        have two objectives.   One is that the Jury should know what
                        has happened so that they can understand what is= going on-
                        That is the legal objective, if you like, but I have a very,
                        very clear objective which is as far as you are concerned
                        you should feel so far as we are able we have put things
                        before the Jury so that they can understand what has
                        happened and so you can understand what was done.   Because
                        you have had contact with the West Midlands Police a lot of
                        this may be within your knowledge but that doesn't matter.
                        It sometimes helps to be able to hear it again.
                    D
                             I think Dr. Slater was very, very clear what his
                        feelings were with regard to Philip and unfortunately it
                        would seem that whatever had been done he couldn't have been
                        saved in the circumstances.  That doesn't bring him back, I
                        know that, and I am very, very sorry indeed.

                    E        Ladies and gentlemen, this is the end of the Inquests
                        we are hearing today.   I don't want you to go just yet
                        please because I want to reconsider something with regard to
                        one of the Inquests which was done and I need a few minutes
                        to think about it.   If you would be good enough to stay and
                        I will deal with it or not once I have made up my mind.   Can
                        all the legal representatives please remain-   I will resume
                        and just say what we are doing so that we all know what we
                        are up to.  I need a few minutes to apply my mind to the
                        question.  Thank you all very much indeed.

                              (The Inquest into the death o f Philip Hammond
                                 was adjourned until a date to be f i x e d )



                    G




                    H

                                                    13
J. L. Harpham Ltd
