    Transcript created by Merrill Legal Solutions


Owning Organisation:        South Yorkshire Coroner

Title Memo:                 Pre Inquest Review Audio Cassette No. 4

Description:


This transcript was produced in April 2011 by Merrill Legal Solutions from the digitised version
of the audio cassette copy of this recording, after enhancement by BR Consult to reduce noise
and improve audibility of the incoming radio transmissions.




 MERRILL
 LEGAL SOLUTIONS
    Digital transcript of Wordwave International, a Merrill Communications Company
                      101 Finsbury Pavement London EC2A 1ER
                   Tel No: 020 7422 6131 Fax No: 020 7422 6134
        Web: www.merrillcorp.com/mls        Email: ukclient@merrillcorp.com
0 0 :0 0 :1 1


CORONER:              —in firms and let me know whether you anticipate one thing (several
                      inaudible words) because we have to plan how we’re going to produce
                      them and we need to know in our own terms how many we want.

                      Now, secondly, it’s going to be a jolly expensive exercise for you
                      because for the transcripts, as you know, you get a bill from the city and
                      it is expensive, but that’s how it is. So, you’ve got to think hard. I’m not
                      asking you to waste your money. If you know you’re going to want a
                      daily transcript then obviously tell me. If there are some of you who say,
                      “Well, we don’t want a daily transcript but there may be the odd occasion
                      where we may want a day’s transcript,” then indicate that to me as well
                      and we will do our best to oblige. What we will not be able to do is to
                      have an industry where on very short notice we will be able to cough up
                      a transcript. I want to be as helpful as I can on this but I want you to
                      understand that we are intending to have them available because I want
                      them for a start. They will cost you money unfortunately, or fortunately -
                      depends which way you look at it. That’s really all I have to say on
                      transcripts. Is that clear?

MALE SPEAKER:         Sir, normally if the court is producing a transcript there is a cost for the
                       production and then that is split between the numbers of persons who
                       want an individual copy.

CORONER:              Yeah, well I’ll think about it because we’ll write to you about that I think.

MR RUSSELL:           Well, sir, if you’re going to request the copy it may just be that all we
                      would be involved in is the photocopy charge which, of course, would be
                      much more palatable.

CORONER:              Even that is expensive; that is the point, as some of you know who have
                       had transcripts from the interim proceedings because it is laid down in
                      the coroner’s copy of documents regulation 1988, which no doubt you’ll
                       look up when you get home. That is what we’ve been basing the costs
                       on basically.

                      Somebody asked me in one of the letters how long these inquests will
                      take. Well, your guess is probably as good as mine. We are planning to
                      start on 19 November; we intend to rise on or about 18 or 19 December.
                      I do not think we will have finished by then. If it’s obvious that we are
                      going to finish within a day or two we’ll carry on for another day or two,
                      but I think it’s unlikely. We will then probably resume on —what date
                      was it? - 7 January and carry on till we finish.

                      Now, there are problems of course because if we have illness,
                      particularly amongst the jury, we may have to adjourn. Depends on the
                      type of illness but I can’t, of course, give undertakings that nobody will
                      fall ill. Hopefully not, but this is a question which is unpredictable.
                      Secondly, of course, I can’t say how long you all, gentlemen and ladies,
                      are going to be with your cross-examinations or, indeed, your legal
                      submissions. So, I’m in the dark to a certain extent as far as that is
                      concerned.
00:04:00


www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                     2
                      However, I am going to try, as far as I’m able, to group witnesses so that
                      people who are saying similar things are coming at the same time, which
                      I think will speed things up a little bit. I can’t tell you how many
                      witnesses we’re going to have either but I will be surprised if it was less
                      than were called at Lord Justice Taylor’s inquiry, which were 174 I think.
                      It wouldn’t surprise me if it isn’t more. That doesn’t mean to say that
                      they will all be lengthy but I expect there will be quite a few witnesses.
00:04:46
                      Any comments on length? Don’t suppose there’s much one can say, is
                      there? I am very conscious, of course, not only that it’s difficult for all the
                      families but it’s also going to be very hard for the jury, but I don’t know
                      what I can do about it. I’ve thought quite hard about how to do it and I
                      can’t see any way round it other than the way I am tackling it.

                      Perhaps I should just mention another thing about timing. On
                      28 November we cannot use the council chamber because there’s a
                      council meeting and I’ve had to agree not to be there. Similarly, it may
                      be that on 6 December we will not be able to use the town hall. What’s
                      the other date? 28 November, 6 December and 9 January is another
                      council day where we will definitely not be able to use council chamber.
                      Our intention is to start on 7 January but as we get nearer the time we’ll
                      think about that a bit harder.

                       I am considering, and I haven’t taken a decision on this yet, that on
                      28 November it might be worth, provided we can arrange it, to take the
                      jury out for another site visit but I’d rather a little bit longer and let them
                      see the surroundings and everything else. Perhaps, Mr Catchpole, you
                      could check with your clients whether they would be willing to allow us to
                      come -

MR CATCHPOLE:         I am sure that they’ll be willing to allow it.

CORONER:              That, at least, would mean that we weren’t totally wasting the time and it
                      might be of benefit to the jury to see the ground again and to refresh
                      their memory. I know things have changed a bit because some of the
                      barriers have disappeared and so on but that’s just how it is.

MR CATCHPOLE:         It’s certainly my instructions, sir, are that the ground’s available at any
                      time that you require it.

CORONER:              Oh, that’s very kind of you, thank you very much indeed. We’ll let you
                      know about that a little bit nearer the time. So, I’ve dealt with the dates
                      when we can’t sit. If we do the visit and then I’m hoping that we will
                      actually be able to sit on 6 December, it’s only really 9 January where
                      we definitely will not be able to sit and, of course, there’ll be another day
                      in February, if we’re going on that long, but I hope not.

                      I do intend to call a few experts right at the end. These will include - I
                      haven’t yet formalised my thinking on those so I can’t really tell you more
                      than the fact that I will be calling a few experts to deal with the special
                      things. You must remember that even the experts’ evidence is going to
                      be restricted to what is relevant to an inquest. I know that civil matters
                      have been dealt with, so in that sense I’m lucky because very often what
                      people want from an inquest is the ammunition for the civil trial but that
                      doesn’t seem as if that’s going to be necessary. We still have to take
                      into account that we don’t deal with the civil aspects as such.

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                    3
0 0 :0 8 :4 6
                      Listing; I think I’ve already dealt with to a certain extent. It’s going to be
                      difficult; we’ll do our best to minimise inconvenience and to make things
                      as sensible as we can, but I’m afraid witnesses are going to have to be
                      prepared to be shifted around at relatively short notice because it’s so
                      hard to predict how long any particular person is actually going to be
                      giving evidence for. We’ll learn from experience as we go along. I’m
                      sure I’ll make mistakes.
00:09:19
                      I’ve already said the inquest is public so the press will be there; we know
                      that from last time and they’re entitled to be. They aren’t here today
                      because I didn’t consider this an appropriate meeting for them to be
                      there. They are not hopefully going to report and you should not discuss
                      it either because what I’m very concerned about is that when the jury
                      come together again it is they who reach the verdict. It is not I and it’s
                      certainly not you, and it’s not even you up there; it’s the jury who have to
                      make up their minds on the facts. I want, as far as possible, to ensure
                      that that happens.

                      That’s about it as far as I’m concerned. Shall we start again with you, Mr
                      King, and work our way round just in case there’s something?

MR KING:              To be honesty I don’t have any further comment now. I’m happy to
                      know that we’re going to have a further meeting -

CORONER:              Yes, I’ll deal with that when we’re - have I forgotten anything Mr
                      Chairman? Oh yes, that’s right. I had written it down and I’d forgotten it.
                      The order in which you gentlemen and ladies will be asking questions of
                      the witnesses - I start off in an inquisition and ask whatever I want.
                      Strictly speaking it isn’t the person’s witness but if somebody represents
                      a particular witness, he asks questions last; everybody else asks them in
                      whatever order I decide.

                      I would prefer it and I think it was done in Lord Justice Taylor’s setup
                      that you agreed amongst yourselves in what order you wanted to bat.
                      I’m quite happy to be reasonable about that. Not only am I quite happy
                      to be reasonable about it, you’ve already probably noticed that I tend to
                      go round and then I start again at the beginning because, although one
                      has to draw the line somewhere, I want everybody to feel that they
                      haven’t been prejudiced because they’ve gone first and something has
                      occurred. So, don’t feel that if something occurs to you within reason I’m
                      amenable to allow anything reasonable to be done - that’s a terrible
                      sentence, but forgive it.

                      Now, anything else?

MR KING:              No, thank you, sir.

CORONER:              M rs...? Now then, if we turn to the point of another meeting. Itsounds
                      to me as if there are going to be various legal submissions which have to
                      be made. We could do those on the 19th but then we lose a jury day, so
                      to speak. If it is agreeable to you, there’s no reason why I shouldn’t
                      decide to commence the inquest on whatever day. When is the place
                      going to be available?

MALE SPEAKER:         Friday the 16tn.

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                  4
00:12:49
CORONER:              Either Thursday or Friday.
00:12:51
MALE SPEAKER:         Friday.

CORONER:              Friday. If we met on Friday the 16tn, and I think we’ll meet in the council
                      chamber. That will be a formal session. So, if you like, the inquest will
                      commence on the 16th but without the jury being present simply and
                      solely for legal submissions. Then we can deal with those and I can give
                      you any rulings or I can think them over the weekend. Monday morning
                      when we start with the jury we can get straight into that.

                      Is that convenient? Mr Isaacs?

MR ISAACS:            I hesitate to say that it’s inconvenient, Sir. Perhaps I speak on behalf of
                      some of my learned friends who, like me, have commitments and whose
                      commitments have been arranged so that the inquest will start on the
                      19th. For my part I would much prefer to be making such submissions as
                      have been made and to be listening to the submissions that are going to
                      be made on the first morning. I appreciate what you say, Sir, about it
                      being the lose of a jury day but in the context, with respect of an inquest
                      that is going to last seven to eight weeks, perhaps one day is not going
                      to make that much difference.

CORONER:              What does everybody else think about that?

MALE SPEAKER:         Sir, I would like to endorse what my learned friend has just said; it’s very
                      reasonable, especially those who have other diary commitments —

CORONER:              In other words what you’re saying is that you’ve booked the 19tn but if we
                      bring it forward it is going to make it awkward for you. That’s what
                      you’re saying.

MALE SPEAKER:         Sir, yes, but subject, of course, to checking with our respective offices.

CORONER:              All right. Well, (several inaudible words), in that case we will start on the
                       19th in the morning with legal submissions. We’ll rearrange the jury so
                      that they come on the 20th instead of the 19th. Well, perhaps before I say
                      that, this is a difficult question for you: how long do you judge that the
                       legal submissions are going to take? A very hard question but can you
                      just give me an indication?

MALE SPEAKER:         I would have thought, Sir, we could do them in the morning.

CORONER:              In the morning?

MALE SPEAKER:         I would have thought so.

CORONER:              Yeah. You would agree with that would you? Okay then, we’ll probably
                      get the jury to come —I’ll think about that because it depends on what
                      else we need to do, but anyway I’ll consider that. W e’ll meet then on the
                      19th for legal submissions, okay? Yes, Mr Catchpole?
00:15:20
MR CATCHPOLE:         Sir, there’s only point, would it be possible for the list of witnesses who
                      you intend to call on the first or second days to be available before on
                      the Friday to be sent through to the various solicitors?

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                5
00:15:33
CORONER:              Yes.

MR CATCHPOLE:         I am very grateful.

CORONER:              No problem.

MR KING:              Sir, I’m sure you haven’t forgotten that you will consider the overall point
                      of perhaps circulating the witnesses in full.

CORONER:              The witness list.

MR KING               List.

CORONER:              Yeah. That is something which I will think about. If I decide to do it then
                      I will. If not, we will discuss it on the 19th and you can have another go at
                      me, but I have taken on board what you have said.

                      Perhaps I could just say one thing about that and maybe you could help
                      me. One of the factors that influences me in the circulation option of
                      such a list is this: from what I’ve already told you it must be obvious to
                      you that I’m considering quite a lot of people as potential witnesses.
                      This is, of course, because I’ve got to base my judgment on what I read
                      because I haven’t heard them.

                      Now, it is possible that when we get cracking that we may find - let’s
                      imagine that I’ve got 50 supporters as potential witnesses on my list. It
                      may be that as we get along that we discover that the evidence is
                      coming out in such a way that there’s really no need to hear 50 people.
                      Now, one of the disadvantages of me circulating a list to you is that it
                      means I have to delete people whose names are on a list which you
                      have seen. If I don’t circulate it I can do what I like because I can make
                      a judgment.

                      Now, I mean obviously if I put somebody’s name down, the reason why
                      I’ve done it is because I think he’s saying something which may be of
                      interest. So, I wouldn’t delete them just for the heck of it but neither
                      would I want necessarily to waste their time or our time in repeating
                      these. Have you any views on the revision of any circulated list
                      downward? Of course, I might also add names upward.

MR KING:              Sir, that would be eminently sensible and, if I may say so, one of the
                      advantages of the list is that we can all apply our minds the whole time
                      that we’re progressing, as we look down the list, as to whether that
                      group of witnesses could, in effect, become agreed evidence.

CORONER:              Does anybody disagree with Mr King’s comments?

                      Well that does make it a little bit easier for me because I was a little bit
                      concerned, maybe from various experiences, that anything that’s
                      published becomes law and I wouldn’t want that.
00:18:23
MALE SPEAKER:         Sir, can I just add (several inaudible words) Mr King (inaudible) position
                      to be in on this point? One of the advantages as we certainly see it of
                      having a comprehensive list is that there are a large number of us who
                      have actually seen a lot of the witnesses that you may well wish to call.

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                                 6
                      We have had that benefit and it may be that we could say, as a
                      suggestion obviously only to yourself, there may be someone else you
                      might like consider calling or that, as things progress, we could -
00:18:47
CORONER:              Well, that’s right that was one of the points of Mr King. I mean I wanted
                      to tackle it the other way. I wanted you to tell me who you wanted but I
                      can see that it does create a problem because you’ve actually got to
                      double-guess me, so to speak, and I can see that. It is a valid point and
                      I am certainly very seriously considering the point that you’ve made.

                      Are we all happy? Mrs McBrien, is it all clear to you? Well, it may not all
                      be clear to you but is there anything that you want to say on these
                      procedural aspects? But you must shout! Or come down here so I can
                      hear you.

MRS McBRIEN:          No, (several inaudible words). It doesn’t mean that we will wait until the
                      19th for you to make a decision as to when, what time the evidence is to
                      be heard and the 3:15?

CORONER:              No, we will almost certainly start with evidence on the 20tn.

MRS McBRIEN:          Okay.

CORONER:              Okay?

MRS McBRIEN:          Yes.

CORONER:              On the 19tn we are starting so you should be there because in the
                      morning we will deal with legal submissions, in the afternoon I’ll deal with
                      anything I want to say to the jury and anything that is agreed, which we
                      can put to the jury, and then we’ll probably start with real evidence on
                      the 20th. That may be videos, you see. We may use the afternoon for
                      videos, but I’ve got to look at that and do some sums and decide how
                      best to use the time.

MRS McBRIEN:          Yes. So, it will be the 19tn (overspeaking) —

CORONER:              Definitely the 19tn, exactly as you’ve been told.

MRS McBRIEN:          —that the evidence will be put.

MR KING:              Sir, I think you’ve actually misunderstood the question.

CORONER:              Have I? I am sorry.

MR KING:              I think the lady is saying is it the case that it would only be on the 19m
                      that a decision will be made as to the ambit of the cut-off time. In other
                      words, if that’s when the decision will be made.

CORONER:              Oh yes. Yes, I beg your pardon I did misunderstand you. I am sorry.
                      Thank you, Mr King. That is correct. Obviously I’ve heard what you’ve
                      said and so I’ll probably be thinking about the matter between now and
                      then but I will want to listen to legal submissions on that point on the 19th
                      and I will then, in the light of what is said and also any further thinking
                      which I have done, take a view on it.
0 0 :21:12

www.merrillcorp.com
                                                                                               7
                      Perhaps I ought to ... no, I think we’ll leave it like that. So, the answer
                      is: no decision on that today.
00 :21:22
MRS McBRIEN:          Sir, we wouldn’t be able to prepare the witnesses that (several inaudible
                      words).

CORONER:              Well, that is true but then we are talking about an inquest which will last
                      at least five weeks and probably eight, and maybe even longer. So,
                      there is going to be quite a bit of time to do additional work.

                      If I were to change my mind on this, on the cut-off point, so that I were to
                      decide that I wanted to alter it, before I did then I would let you and
                      everybody else - the parties - know. I don’t want to encourage you to
                      think that I will do that.

MRS McBRIEN:          Thank you.

CORONER:              There remain strong reasons actually for saying that; it isn’t just
                      obstinacy. Okay, ladies and gentlemen, I think that’s it. I am most
                      grateful to all of you for being here. I hope it’s been of use and that
                      we’ve made a bit of progress. It’s going to be a very difficult inquest I’m
                      afraid and we just have to do the best we can.

MR KING:              Thank you, sir.
00:22:33




www.merrillcorp.com
