                                                                                           M I R . 15


                                                                                                                 ' b ] |.S "
        OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                            Date and time raised .                           Number



        Title                         O'!          Q l-                           G x- o v a 5 C 2 _    c r ^ o S ° ) 0

>   J            source anc* anY document number if relevant)
                                                                           Ctpza-
        Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No ____
                                                                                                                     Receiver




                                                                                                                     Indexer
        Document registered/indexed as indicated

        No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                 Statement Reader
        Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                     Indexer
        Indexed as indicated

        No(s) of actions raised

        Examined - further action to be taken                                                                              SIO




        Further action No(s)                                                                                         Indexer


    When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
  HER M A J E S T Y ’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                      (WEST DISTRICT)



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

    VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                IAN THOMAS GLOVER




                      Before

DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B. B.MED.Sci,     EM. B S . MRCGP

             (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                        At

           The Medico-Legal Centre.
                Watery S t r e e t ,
                  Sheffield.

                        On

                   4th. May 1990




           TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




     Fro.m the Notes of J.L. Harpham. Ltd.,
           Official Shorthand Writers,
      55. Queen Street. Sheffield SI 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:



MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors’ Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Chief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable,   South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR.   JACKSON
                                    INDEX
       A
                                                Page


   OPENING BY THE CORONER

   PROFESSOR ALAN USHER Called
       B
           By THE CORONER                         2.
           Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER           4,

   OFFICER GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS Called

           By THE CORONER

   DETfitTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

           By THE CORONER                         6,
           Cross-Examined   by MR. LIMB           7,
           Further by THE   CORONER               7,

   PROFEJSSOR ALAN USHER Recalled

       D   By THE CORONER




       E




       F




       G




       H



i ..
i’riday. 4th May, 1990


               THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                       IAN THOMAS GLOVER


       HR. FRASER:   Sir, the evidence now relates to Ian
  Thomas Glover.   Sir, Ian's father and a Mr. Pedder are
  in court.   Two members of Ian's family simply feel
  that although they have come over from Liverpool to
  attend the inquests they really cannot come into court.
  I am sure you understand that, sir.

        THE CORONER:      Yes, indeed.

        MR. FRASER:   Sir, they are with us via the
   facility of the video link and in the circumstances I
   introduce them as well.

        THE CORONER:    Thank you.       They are welcome and
   it is quite understandable.

        MR. FRASER:    Sir, Ian's family is represented by
   a practice which is a member of my group and I
   therefore appear on their behalf as agent in the usual
   way through the steering committee.

        THE CORONER:    Let me explain to you what we are
   going to do so you can follow the sequence because it
   is easier for you to understand the procedure.

        I am going to read to you the evidence which we
   took on the opening when I dealt with the release of
   the body.   That was on the 18th of April, 1989.   When
   I have read that to you I am going to just confirm that
   the details are correct.   Then I will tell you what
   the blood alcohol level was and when we have completed
   that Professor Usher is going to give us the
   pathological evidence.

        When that has been done a West Midlands Police
   Officer will present a summary of the evidence and will
   tell me and particularly the Jury, the facts and then
   Inspector Layton will deal with the visual evidence.
   He will describe it and then come over here on these
   big plans and show us what he is talking about.




                           - 1 -
      If I tell you what happened on the 18th of April,
1989.    Neil Anthony Parkin the acting Coroner's
Officer said:

     "The body which is the subject of this inquest has
     been identified to PC 465 Glave of the South
     Yorkshire Police as that of Ian Thomas Glover by
     Joseph Glover his brother.

     He was 20 years of age having been born on the
     10th of January, 1969 at Liverpool.

     He was a single man and lived at
             Liverpool.   He was a street paver by
     occupation.    He died at Hillsborough football
     ground following an incident there on Saturday,
     15th April, 1989.   PC 465 Glave caused the body
     to be moved to the Medico Legal Centre and there
     he identified it to Detective Constable Simon
     Weigold who subsequently identified the same body
     to Professor Usher.

     It is the family wish that the body should be
     buried."

As I did with everybody I wrote to the families and I
sent out a form to double check the evidence and John
Glover signed it.   That must be you?    (Y e s ) You
signed it on the 28th of April and you confirmed the
name was right.   I think we said
Liverpool, but is that the         listrict?

     JOHN GLOVER:       We live on the borderline between



     THE C O R O N E R : S o   the correct address ought to be
                                     Liverpool.

     All the rest of the information was in fact
correct.   Now Dr. Forrest did the blood alcohol levels
and he told us all about these on the first day and in
the case of Ian the result was negative.

               PROFESSOR ALAN USHER Called

                       By THE CORONER:

Alan Usher, Professor of Forensic Medicine and Home
Office Pathologist? - A. Yes.

Professor Usher this is about a lad who was identified
to you as Ian Glover? - A. Yes.
What number did you have? - A. Number 37.

Can you tell me what your findings were? - A. Yes, sir.
The body I examined was that of a slim but muscularly^
built young white male with light brown hair, 172 cm in
height, weighing 65 kg.   He body presented both
externally and internally the typical appearances of
traumatic asphyxia.   There were a few grazes and
scratches, only minor any of them, and there was some
swelling of the brain which is fairly typical of this
condition.

Apart from this he was normally developed and healthy
and he had an average expectation of live in my view.

I give the cause of death as traumatic asphyxia.     That
means he died because his chest wall was compressed so
it could not move in and out.   When that happens you
are not able to breathe properly and you die really in
that way.   Mercifully, anyone caught in that position
once the chest becomes fixed they become unconscious
very, very early, between ten and twenty seconds.
Once this boy was unconscious then he would have no
knowledge or any sensation subsequent to that.    He
would take between four and six minutes to actually
die.   It would only be the first ten to twenty seconds
he would be aware of.

Professor Usher, there is one point I want to check.
Can you look at your PM report where you have got
"Skeleton"? - A. Yes.

Can you tell me whether there is any indication in your
findings whether there were any broken bones of any
sort? - A. No, sir.

I take it if you say, "No bony disease or injury", that
it would include in particular the neck?   If there had
been a broken neck you would have recorded it? - A. Oh,
yes.

The reason why I ask this is because at one point there
was some concern that this lad might have had a broken
neck, but there is no question... - A. It is a very
common mistake, made by people who see the head lolling
on a dead body.   We often get stories when we examine
- even routine PMs - that the neck is broken.   It very
rarely is and it was not on this occasion.

You can assure the family about that? - A. Yes.
             Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER:

Perhaps if we could pursue the problem about the neck a
little further.   I hear what you say, Professor Usher.
When Ian came home, when the family saw  him, he had in
fact got a collar on his neck and thepeople who looked
after Ian and brought him home actually told the family
that they thought the neck was broken.    Just to
reinforce the point, Professor Usher, can you assure
the family beyond any doubt that Ian did not have a
broken neck? - A. It was not broken.    The collar is a
device sometimes used by undertakers to put beneath the
chin to stop the mouth from falling open before rigor
sets in.

     MR.   FRASER:     Thank you.

     THE CORONER:        Any questions?

     MR. LIMB:       No, thank you, sir.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:       No, thank you,   sir.

      OFFICER GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS Called

                      By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:   Geraldine Elizabeth Evans, Officer
of the West Midlands Police.

Yes, Officer? - A. At about 1100 hours on Saturday,
15th April, 1989, Ian Thomas Glover and his brother
Joseph Glover left the family home to travel to
Sheffield with the intention of watching the semi-final
football match which was to be played at the
Hillsborough Stadium that day.    Both were in
possession of tickets for the Leppings Lane terraced
area of the ground.

At about 1430 hours the brothers arrived at the stadium
and entered through a turnstile before going through
the tunnel and into enclosure 3.   They took up a
position in the centre of the enclosure which at that
time was packed with spectators.    Joseph states that
following a surge in the crowd he and his brother were
pushed forward in the enclosure and that he managed to
get out on to the pitch via a gate in the front
perimeter fence.   He then saw his brother Ian in a
distressed condition standing in the crowd about four
feet from the front of the enclosure.

About twenty minutes later Joseph saw his brother being
pulled from the enclosure and on to the pitch by two
police officers who have not been identified.
                          Joseph attempted to resuscitate his brother who was
                          then placed on a temporary stretcher and carried across
                          the pitch by a number of persons into the gymnasium
                          where a temporary mortuary had been set up.

                          Sir, I have to include here that I have spoken with
                          Joseph this morning and he wishes to state that in the
                    B     gymnasium a doctor was present and when he examined Ian
                          he did in fact find a pulse and attempted to
                          resuscitate him for about fifteen minutes but was
                          unsuccessful.

                          At about 1540 hours PC Glave assumed responsibility for
                          the body of Ian and shortly afterwards the officer was
                          present when Dr. Alan Paul Redgrave examined the body
                          in the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

                           Later that day Mr. John Glover identified the body of
                           his son, Ian Thomas Glover, to Police Constable Glave,
                           and the officer later escorted the body of Ian to the
                           Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to
                           DC Weigold.
                    D      At 1100 hours on Sunday, 16th of April, 1989, following
                           identification by DC Weigold, Professor Alan Usher
                           carried out an autopsy and submitted a report giving
                           cause of death.

                           This concludes the summary,     sir.

                    £   Q. I think it is only fair to say that Joe, when he made
                           his first statement, referred to the doctor? - A. Yes,
                           sir.

                        Q. But he never mentioned anything about the pulse being
                           found? - A. No, sir, that is something he has brought
                           to my attention this morning.

                                MR. FRASER:      I have no questions,   sir.

                                MR. LIMB:     I have no questions,   sir.

                                MR. CATCHPOLE:      I have no questions, sir.

                                THE CORONER:    Perhaps before we listen to
                           Inspector Layton, you know we are resuming an inquest
                           this afternoon and we will be dealing with some of
                           these points about pulses and so on then.   I mention
                           that now so that you know we will be dealing with this
                           matter in relation to that other inquest, but of course
                           it will apply generally to all situations.



                    H
                                                   - 5 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
     DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                  By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:   Sir, I am Michael Layton, Detective
Inspector of the West Midlands Police.

Yes, Inspector? - A. Sir, an examination has been made
of video film and photographic evidence and Ian has
been identified alive in enclosure number 3 on a BBC
video tape referenced MAP.l and timed, sir, at
1456.32.02.   Joseph has been identified on a number of
photographs, sir, but specifically referring to a
photograph PR.1/10A, which is timed at 1503, Joseph is
shown on that photograph, sir, on the pitch, basically
in the circumstances described in the summary.

1503? - A. 1503, sir.   Sir, in the summary you will
see reference to circumstances described by PC Fojut of
the South Yorkshire Police.   He initially made an
identification from clothing and felt that he at one
stage had assisted to carry Ian across the pitch.

When you say "in the summary", that is in the printed
version but not in the version we have presented to the
court, that is right? - A. That is right, sir.   The
printed version where copies have been supplied.

That's right. - A. Sir, it is now apparent again from
having spoken to Joe this morning, his recollection is
that no uniformed police officers were present when Ian
was carried across the pitch.

The evidence of PC Fojut was based on identification of
clothing, as opposed to... - A. That is right, sir.

That is, of course,   is relatively weak identification?
- A. That is right,   sir.

If a brother says there was not a police officer there
we are probably inclined to believe the brother? - A.
That is right.

Which is why we have not dealt with it in the evidence?
- A. That is right, sir.   Sir, can I then refer you to
a plan which has been given the reference number
MWJL.59 and that is a plan of the terraces?

C.244. - A. Sir, that plan, MWJL.59 refers to the
identification made on video by Mr. Glover.     In fact
this is enclosure number 3 and the position we believe
that Ian is shown at that time is in this location
approximately h e r e . The dotted line indicates the
barrier that subsequently broke so we are looking,      sir,
in enclosure number 3.

     MR. FRASER:     No questions for the officer,   sir.

              Cross-Examined by MR. L I M B :

This is just a question concerning Joseph Glover.   You
mentioned when referring to photograph referenced
PR.1/10A that that was one of a number of photographs?
- A. That is right, sir, yes.

Can I ask this:  is that photograph the first of a
sequence of photographs showing Joseph on the pitch or
are there previous ones?

     THE CORONER:    In other words, you are trying to
find out whether 1503 hours is the earliest?

     MR. LIMB:     Sir, exactly.

     THE WITNESS:   Sir, the earliest photograph
showing Joe on the pitch is PR.1/8A, but in fact it is
still at the same time, 1503.

                 Further by THE CORONER:

That is a photograph of Ian? - A. No, sir, of Joe,
actually on the pitch.   It was referred to in the
visual evidence, sir.

That is right.   This is an important point.   Joe, of
course, is a surviving brother? - A. That is right.

What about photographs of Ian?    Have you got any of
him? - A. No, sir, the only visual evidence we have is
the video evidence that we have referred to which is
timed at 1456.

So 1456 is   Ian on the terraces and enclosure.      1503
Joe out on   the pitch? - A. That is right.

Then in what Joe said, according to the summary, he
said that about twenty minutes later he saw his brother
being pulled from the enclosure.   What time did he go
out on to the pitch according to his statement?   I see
what you are driving at. - A. I think he makes
reference, sir, in the summary to seeing Ian some four
feet from the...   I think that was my recollection,
sir.

That is right. - A. It is apparent from those
photographs that Joe is actually - as you look from the
pitch to the terraces that Joe is to the left of gate 3
in the first section of fencing, looking inwards.

Yes.   What he says - I will read you the relevant bit
from his statement.   He is talking about the gate on
to the pitch - not gate C, not the perimeter gate -
just show us which gate he is talking about. - A. we
are talking about this gate he r e .

He says:

     "I managed to get out on to the pitch because the
     police had opened the small gate.   This was the
     second time the gate had been opened."

Then he talks about it being opened the first time   and
then he got out at the second opening of gate 3.     Then
later on he says he saw his brother and he says:

     "About twenty minutes later two police officers
     pulled Ian out.."

and attempted resuscitation, or words to that effect.

     THE CORONER:       Does that assist you?

     MR. LIMB:      It does,   thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER:   I have got that right, Inspector
Layton? - A. That is right.

            PROFESSOR ALAN USHER Recalled

                     By THE CORONER:

 Professor Usher, thank you for coming back.   This was
 a point which arose after you left and I just want to
 clarify it first.   You will recollect that you
 explained to us that this youngster had had his chest
 compressed, lost consciousness and would have died, I
 think you said, between four and six minutes.   In this
 particular instance he was in company with his brother,
 probably at twenty past three, probably later than
 that, and the brother has told us through the officers
 that when he got into the temporary mortuary a doctor
 saw him and the brother says the doctor detected a
 pulse and tried for ten or fifteen minutes to revive
•him but in the end had to give up because he thought it
 was hopeless.   Assuming for a moment that that is
 correct and he did feel a pulse, can you help us about
 timings and how you relate that to the period which you
 have mentioned? - A. I think the only way that could
 have happened would be if this lad had sustained severe
brain damage but not quite got to the point where the
respiratory and pulse centres faded out.

He did not say there was any respiratory effect.   He
said there was a faint pulse. - A. The two centres are
close together.   If that was the case then if he had
been revived he would have been severely brain damaged.

Is it a possibility that if you get to that point in
fact further damage to the cerebral centres can occur,
at least to the brain stem centres, can occur, which
would lead to death? - A. Oh, yes, that is very likely.

The other possibility is, of course, there may have
been a mistake about the pulse? - A. Yes.

Because it is not easy to feel a pulse if it is very
faint? - A. That is right, or if it is very slow.    It
is often the case that in cases of cerebral oedema, so
it really means that either the doctor was mistaken in
thinking he could feel a pulse or that this lad was
severely brain damaged and then went on to die.

Would it make any difference to your opinion as to his
state of consciousness? - A. He would have been
unconscious all through that period.

No question of his suffering pain? - A. No, he would
have been unconscious.

     THE CORONER:       Mr. Fraser?

     MR. FRASER:   No, sir.      Thank you for coming
back, Professor Usher.

     MR. LIMB:      No, thank you, sir.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:      No, thank you, sir.

     MR. FRASER:   Sir, just before you conclude taking
the evidence, I rise again at the specific instruction
of Ian's family.   They are very conscious of the
efforts that were made to save Ian on the day and they
are very appreciative of everybody at the ground who
did everything they possibly could and thereafter.

     Sir, they are particularly impressed by the way
the people of Sheffield, with whom they had dealings on
the day and since, responded to this tragedy to their
family and they very much appreciate that.

     Finally, sir, this family is a member of a group
formed to support families following the loss of their
loved ones.   You will have heard of it, sir. The
                        Hillsborough Family Support Group.   They say that
                        without the support of that Group the distress and the
                        grief they have suffered would have been much greater.
                        They are pleased to have been able to have the support
                        of people in a similar position to them.   It has
                        helped them enormously and they wish to thank that
                        Group through you, sir.
                    B
                             THE CORONER:    Thank you very much indeed.   Mr.
                        Glover, and I know the rest of the family whom I cannot
                        see but who may be able to see me, thank you very much
                        for saying those very kind words about the people of
                        Sheffield.   Also for saying what you have said about
                        the support group because as far as I remember you are
                        the first family which has actually mentioned that
                        particular support group in this way, but it is rather
                        nice for the other families to know that they have been
                        of help to you and to your family at this very, very
                        tragic time.

                              It must be obvious to you that we are all very
                        sorry that you have lost Ian.    I think obviously your
                        son, who was there, it must have been an awful
                    D   situation for him and we feel for them in this terrible
                        loss;   not only the loss but also the trauma which he
                        experienced, particularly your son when he saw his
                        brother and he could not get at him.    That must have
                        been a very, very difficult thing for him to sustain
                        and we feel for you as far as we are able in the
                        circums tances.
                    E
                             Thank you for coming.   I hope you have understood
                        the point about this breathing and so on.   It is a
                        difficult problem, but I wanted Professor Usher to say
                        because otherwise you would go away and when you
                        thought about it later you would not be able to work it
                        out.   It is better to hear it now so that you know
                        there is some rational explanation to these things.

                          (The inquest into the death of IAN THOMAS GLOVER
                                was adjourned to a date to be fixed)




                    G




                    H
                                             -10 -

J. L. Harpham Ltd
