HER MAJESTY *S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
              (WEST DISTRICT)
                                                42
     INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

             STADIUM DISASTER

          ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989




                   Before

. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP

          (Her Majestyâ€™s Coroner)




                     At

              The Town Hall,
                Sheffield.

                     On

            31st January, 1991




        TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




  From the Notes of J .L . Harpham, L t d .,
       Official Shorthand Writers,
   55, Queen Street, Sheffield SI 2DX
I




                           INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT

                                                      Page

    S .M c A .D . GRAY Sworn

          By The Coroner                               1
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne                 15
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning               15
          Cross-Examined by Mr. King                  16
          Cross-Examined by Mrs. McBrien              17
          Cross-Examined by Miss Addleman             20
          Cross-Examined by Mr.  Isaacs               20
          Further Cross-Examined byMr. King           23

    C.E. GRIFFITHS Sworn

          By The Coroner                              25
          Cross-Examined       by   Mr.   Payne       36
          Cross-Examined       by   Mr.   Isaacs      38
          Cross-Examined       by   Mr.   Manning     42
          Cross-Examined       by   Mr.   King        42

    C . JONES Sworn

          By The Coroner                              47
          Cross-Examined by Mr.           Payne       55
          Cross-Examined by Mr.           Isaacs      56
          Cross-Examisned by Mr.           King       56
          Further by The Coroner                      59
          Cross-Examined by Miss           Addleman   60
          Further by The Coroner                      61

    C.E. GRIFFITHS Recalled

          Further by The Coroner                      63

    C. JONES Recalled

          Further by The Coroner                      63

    A.F. OWEN Sworn

         By The Coroner                               64
         Cross-Examined        by   Mr.   Payne       74
         Cross-Examined        by   Mr.   King        74
         Cross-Examined        by   Mr.   Church      74
         Cross-Examined        by   Mr.   Payne       77
         Cross-Examined        by   Mr.   King        78
                     INDEX TO TRANSCRIPT (Cont)




     J.L. KENWORTHY Sworn

          By The Coroner
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Manning
          Cross-Examined by Mr. King
          Further by The Coroner
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Isaacs
          Further Cross-Examined by Mr. King

     B.W. DEVONSIDE Sworn

          By The Coroner
          Cross-Examined by Mr. Payne

PROCEDURAL MATTERS
           FORTY-SECOND DAY'S PROCEEDINGS

            THURSDAY. 31st JANUARY 1991

      THE CORONER:  Good morning.   Mr. Gray I believe
 is the first witness.

         STUART McARTHUR DAVIES GRAY Sworn

                  By THE CORONER:

I think it is Stuart McArthur Davies Gray, is that
right? - A. Yes.

Is it still                                  in
Shropshire? - A. That is correct.

I think you are the General Manager of the
Kidderminster and District Health Authority? - A.
Since Monday I am the General Manager of the Health
Service in Stoke-on-Trent, so I have moved.

Same job, different area? - A. Yes, different area.

Just so that we get this right, you are not a medical
man?    This is not a criticism of you in    any way,but
just to get it right, this is the administrative side
of the Health Service? - A. That is right, yes.

You are also a football supporter and have been for 24
years   or so now? - A. That is correct.

Is it   Liverpool that you have supported    for about 15
years, 16 years, something like that? - A. Yes, that
is right.

You follow them, not only at Anfield but also abroad?
- A. I have.

I have noted from your statement that you were
actually at Heysel, I see, when there were some
problems there, is that right? - A. That is correct.

It is not terribly relevant, but you are obviously
very interested in football.  Is it right that on 15th
April 1989 you, with your brother and various others,
decided to come to Sheffield to watch the semi-final?
- A. Yes, we did.

You had, I think, a terrace ticket, is that correct? -
A. I did.

You, of course, came from Shropshire.  What time did
you leave? - A. Probably about half-past 9.
                                                     S. M. D. GRAY

     Q.    Do you know what time you arrived in Sheffield? - A.
           It was about 20 minutes to 2.
B
     Q.   I think apart from a bit of slow-moving traffic on the
          Ml* or somewhere, it was not too bad the journey as
          far as you were concerned, is that right? - A. No.
          There was an accident on the M62 and there was quite a
          build-up of traffic coming off the motorway leading
          into Sheffield.                                    5

          You had stopped en route for a bite to eat, I think,
          somewhere near Huddersfield, I believe, is that right?
          - A. That is correct.

          You were unlucky because you saw a home-made sign, I
          think you describe it as, which said "5 minutes to
          ground - park here", or words to that effect? - A.
          That is right.

    Q.    Do I take it that you had not been to   the ground
D         before, you were not there in 1988? -   A. I had been at
          Hillsborough before but had come from   a completely
          different direction, and I don't know   Sheffield at
          all.

          Anyway you accepted what it said, parked and then
          discovered that you had an awful long walk? - A. Yes,
          that is right.  It must have been well over a mile
          from the ground and it was one of several signs on the
          way down to the ground that indicated 5 minutes to the
          ground.  If we had known it was that distance we would
          not have parked there.

    Q.    I will say no more about that. How long did it
          actually take you to get to the ground, would you say?
          - A. About three-quarters of an hour walking downhill.
    Q.    Were there other supporters walking along as well? -
          A. Yes, there were quite a number of supporters
          walking from the same direction.

          Can you remember whether they happened to be mainly
          Nottingham or Liverpool supporters? - A. Mainly
          Liverpool supporters.

          I see, so you were in the Liverpool quarter, or
          sector, whatever the right word is? - A. That is
          correct.

    Q.    Did you notice or observe anything about the
          supporters as you were coming along? - A. Not
          particularly, nothing unusual in the sense of I go to
          a lot of grounds and a lot of games and there was
          nothing particularly unusual.



H
        no^ strike you that there was any excessive
 drinking, or anything like that? - A. No, on the
 contrary.

 You thought there was rather less? - A. Yes, I noticed
 on the way down there was, I think, some sort of club
 on the right-hand side on the way down and they were
 actually stopping people going in there.

The club people were? - A. Yes, they were actually
stewarding it and actually relatively close to the
ground I came across one or two pubs where people were
drinking outside, but that was all.

So, in other words, the further away you were the less
there was.  It was as it got nearer the pubs seemed to
be open? - A. Yes.

That was your impression? - A. That was my impression.

But even in that area I take it you were not
particularly concerned about what was going on, would
that be a fair remark? - A. We weren't particularly
concerned except for the fact that clearly we wondered
when we were actually going to come across the ground.
We actually expected to get there a lot sooner than we
actually did, and of course as time pressed on you
begin to panic a bit.

Yes, because you want to see the beginning? - A. That
is right.

In fact, I think you arrived at Leppings Lane what
time?   - A. It was about 20 minutes to 3.

Do you remember when you approached the ground that
you had to turn right into the turnstile area, or did
you sort of approach it straight on? - A. We
approached it straight on.

In other words, you had come off a big roundabout,
would   that be right? - A. That is correct.

May I   just ask you this. Can you recollect when you
were near the ground about, or indeed anywhere else,
whether you yourself were either stopped and asked
whether you had any alochol, or whether you had a
ticket or anythiing like that? - A. No, we weren't
stopped by anyone.

Did you notice whether this was happening to anybody
else, as a matter of interest? - A. No, there were
clearly, as very often at a big match, a lot of people
asking if we had spare tickets, but there was no one
                                          s . M. D. GRAY


actually asking us if we had a ticket, or anything at
all.

Let us deal with that questiosn of the spare ticket,
because I think this was happening from quite a long
way back from where you had parked as you were
approaching the ground, is that right? - A. That is
right.  The whole way to the ground we were being
asked by people.

Would you be able to say how many approaches you had,
as far as you can tell? - A. I would think about 20 or
30.

The other thing I am interested in, the people who
were asking for spares - if you do not remember just
say you do not remember because you may not have
thought of this - were they walking in the same
direction as you, or were they coming against you, so
to speak, working their way through the crowd looking
for people who might have spares? Do you see what I
am asking? - A. Yes.  The majority of people who asked
if we had spare tickets were actually some way from
the ground, so there were not that many people close
to the ground asking us for tickets.

Were they still coming towards the ground at that
point? - A. Most of the people who actually approached
us were actually coming away from the ground.

So they were walking away from the ground asking for
spares? - A. That is right.  I assume clearly because
there were none to be had outside the ground.

You arrived at the ground,I think you said, at 2.AO? -
A. That is correct.

At that   time I take it there was quite a crowd? - A.
There was quite a crowd outside the ground.

Can you remember the configuration of Leppings Lane,
in the sense that it has got perimeter gates and then
an area   in front of the turnstiles?  Does that   ring a
bell with you?   Let us show you on the model. If you
would just turn round and Sergeant Griffiths will
point to Leppings Lane, and then take it in towards
the perimeter gates.   Those are like park gates and
then those are the turnstiles.   Okay? Does that
refresh your memory as to what it looked like? - A.
Yes, it does.

What I am trying to find out is was the crowd when you
approached it on the outside of those perimeter gates?
    A
                                                                    5

                                                       S. M. D. GRAY


             Point to the perimeter gates again. - A. Yes, there
             was a substantial crowd outside of there.
    B
        Q.   Did you see whether those gates were open or shut? -
             A. I can't recall.

        Q.   Did you see whether there was a cordon or Police
             horses around that gate? - A. I certainlky remember
             seeing Police horses.

        Q.   How many did you see as a matter of interest, as far
             as you remember? - A. I would have expected to see
             more than I did.  I only saw four, I think.  I have a
             much clearer recollection of the turnstile area.

        Q.   In that case we will go through it a little bit
             faster.  We have heard a lot of evidence about the
             turnstiles.   Did you have any difficulty traversing,
             as far as you can remember, the perimeter gate area? -
             A. It was certainly very busy outside.   In fact, when
    D        we came across the crowd outside we really did not
             make much progress at all, and clearly we were looking
             to see how we could get access to the turnstiles.
             That was really when we realised how many people there
             were outside.




    E
i




    F



                                           /Q.   So what did ....




    H
                                            S. M. D. GRAY


Yes, so what did you do? - A. We decided not to push into
the crowd and we just stood back and we moved to the
right hand side of the turnstiles away from them - in
fact near to those gets you referred to.

The perimeter gates? - A. The perimeter gates.

Did you go anywhere near a little bridge? - A. I don't
recall a little bridge.

When you were on the right hand side of those gates were
you already on the inside of them or the outside?   If
you can't remember... - A. I really can't recall.

How did you yourself get into the ground? - A. Well, it
was almost as if a funnel opened in front of us, which
was a gate.   We were some of the first people through
this gate and we had no sooner just gone through the gate
than we saw the tunnel into the ground.

Sergeant Griffiths, could you point to Gate C, which I
think is the one?   Is that the gate? - A. I am sure that
is the gate.

You must have been standing quite close to that gate if
you were one of the first people through, would that be
fair? - A. We were actually leaning against it.

Were you squashed up against it or at that point was it
relatively clear? - A. It was relatively clear.

Do you remember whether it opened fully when you went
through or only partially? - A. It opened fully.

Did you stay within the concourse area?   In other words,
in the area just on the other side of the gate, or did
you go straight down the tunnel as soon as you got
through it? -A. We went straight to the tunnel.

You don't know what happened to the gate behind you? - A.
No, I don't.

Whether it stayed open or shut? - A. No, I don't.

You think you were one of the first through? - A. Yes.

What mode of entry did you have?   Did you just walk in?
Were you pushed in?   Were you rushed in?   Tell me what
happened in your words. - A. Well, we clearly saw that
was the way into the ground.   By this time it was
getting near enough to kick-off.   We assumed the teams
had come out because of the noise, so it was almost a
trot to get to the tunnel.   There was no pressure at
all.   We were some of the first through the tunnel and
                                            S. M. D. GRAY


then we entered under the tunnel and found our way into
the crowd in the Leppings Lane end.

The tunnel, what was that like?    Was that clear, or
full, or what? - A. It was certainly clear until you got
to the end of it and then it was just full of people at
the far end but I was conscious as we walked through the
tunnel and through it of a substantial number of people
behind us. We were certainly aware of that and I think
that is why we speeded up, really.

You wanted to get ahead of them, so to speak? - A. Well,
we were ahead and...

And you wanted to stay there? - A. That's right.

You said you knew the kick-off was imminent.   Was that
because you looked at your watch or was it just because
you heard the noise from inside the ground or because you
could see the players on the pitch? - A. Well, we heard
the noise, which we were certain were the teams coming
out on to the pitch.   As you come into the tunnel and
get near the far end you can actually see just over the
top of the goal and you could see the players on the
pitch.

So you could definitely see them on the pitch? - A. Yes.

As you entered the tunnel? - A. Just as we entered the
tunnel.

This was the pre kick-off? - A. Yes.

You came down and at the exit of the tunnel, the other
end, were you able to enter the terrace?   What was the
mode of entry into the terrace as far as you were
concerned? - A. You certainly couldn't have gone straight
ahead.   It is quite a narrow tunnel and we were to the
left hand side and we simply pushed into the left hand
side to get away from the main flow of people behind us
who were coming in in large numbers at this point.   All
we were able to do was push left.   After that we managed
to get three or four steps to the left with substantial
difficulty and that was the only way we got into the
crowd at all.

Take just this section, entry into the tunnel and three
of four steps left.   What was your assessment of the
situation on that terrace at that time?   Not with
hindsight or the benefit of everything that happened
later but at the time. - A. Well, I was immediately
concerned because there were already people being pulled
out of the crowd above us into the stand and the pressure
grew very quickly indeed.   As somebody who is used to
                                              S. M. D. GRAY


big football crowds I had never witnessed anything like
it before.   Almost immediately we had pushed in left you
were aware you couldn't move and you were aware,
obviously, of what was going on around you.

You say people were being pulled up into the stands at
that point? - A. Yes.

Had you ever seen that before, people being pulled up? -
A. Only once before.

Where was that? - A. That was at Goodison - Everton's
football ground.

Not at Hillsborough? - A. No.

I think you did tell me you were at the 1988 match as
well? - A. That is correct.

Were you in the same part of the ground or were you
somewhere different? - A. No, I was in one of the stands.

Having taken your steps to the left, describe to me what
happened then as far as you were concerned? - A. Almost
within - I'm sure it was only a matter of seconds of
pushing in there was a surge from behind.   When I say it
may have been three or four steps, it was probably only
one or two.   We had only just really got in and there
was this surge from behind.   Before I knew what had
happened I had probably gone down a dozen or so paces
down the terracing, half way between the back of the
terracing and the fence at the front.   I wasn't walking
or anything.   I think probably my feet were off the
ground most of the time.

So your movement was involuntary from there up to that
position? - A. Totally involuntary and in a forward
position.   I couldn't push back to stand at all.

At one point I think you spoke to your friend Edie and
you mentioned you could see a particular player.   Can
you tell me when that was? - A. Within seconds of...
Almost as we moved to the left.

Was that before this surge or after? - A. Immediately
before.

His comment was he couldn't see the pitch? - A. That's
right.     He was actually facing me and couldn't turn
round or anything.

Did you   seethe match kick-off at all? - A. Yes.

You did   seeit kick-off? - A. Yes.
                                                                    9
A
                                                     S. M. D. GRAY


    Q.   Did that happen before or after the surge? - A.   After.

    Q.   Have you any idea was the time interval was?   If you
         don't... - A. I would think from the period of the surge
B        to the kick-off would probably be about six minutes, five
         or six minutes.

    Q. We know what time the players came on the pitch.   I know
       you have said when you came in it was eight minutes to,
       but we know what time the players came on the pitch and
       it was 15.54? - A. Right.

    Q. Which is six minutes to three and you, of course, had
       seen before you had got through?    That is correct? - A.
       Yes.   I mean, we are talking about a minute or two here
       or there and I can't be absolutely certain.

    Q. That is why I was careful to warn you because it is very
       difficult to estimate time. - A. No, the players were
       certainly on the pitch when I came in through that
       tunnel.

D




E




F




G                     Q. You were now, having been
                                                            10

                                                S. M. D. GRAY


Q. You were now, having been carried forward into a new
   position - you will show us in a minute on a plan where
   that was - was that where you then, in fact, remained
   until you made your escape, if I can use that word? -
   A. No, it wasn't.  I was actually further down the
   terracing thereafter.  It was just almost like a
   continuous push forward and you could not do anything
   to actually arrest that surge.  It wasn't like the
   original surge from the beginning when it was very
   fast, but you just found yourself being pushed further
   and further down.

0.    So what you are saying is that there was a surge - you
     got in because you were ahead of the crowd, then there
     was a surge which carried you forward, and then there
     was steady pressure which moved you forward? - A. That
     is correct.

Q. Would that be what you are saying to me? - A. That is
   correct.

Q.    Was it at that point that things became sucn that you
     just could not move at all? - A. You could not move at
     all.

0. I think you used quite graphic language in your
   statement as to now you felt? - A. Yes.

Q. It was at that point, when you had been compacted
   forward, that you could not move? - A. That is correct.

Q. You have already told me, but this part of the
   experience certainly was completely different to
   anything that you had ever experienced before? - A. I
   had never experienced anything like this before.

Q. There were people near you, we don't need to dwell on
   it, but who obviously were pretty ill, weren't they? -
   A. Yes, that is correct.

Q.    And you were in a very unhappy position of not being
     able to help them because you could not move, that is
     right, isn't it? - A. That is right, you couldn't even
     move your arras.

Q.    Those people who were close by you in that pen, you
     have no idea who they were, that is right? You have
     never found them or traced them since? - A. No, I
     hav e n 't.

Q. Is it right that people were being passed forward over
   your heads? - A. There were people being passed over
   our heads from the back and there were people being
   pulled up into the stands, which I could see.
                                           S. M. D. GRAY


Were you facing the wrong way, if I can put it like
that? - A. I was facing side on so I could see at the
back and also at the front.

The people who were being passed over your head, I want
just to explore this with you, if your arms were fixed
were there other people around you whose arms were
fixed as well? - A. The people I recall quite
graphically, one or two people in particular who were
passing over our heads were actually passing over our
heads by their own propulsion.  They were actually
doing it themselves, they were not actually being
passed by other people.

So they actually had movement? - A. Yes.

Or power, which you yourself did not have? - A. That is
correct.

Were you able to assess them in any way, in the sense
did they look to you in the same condition as the
people who were immediately around you? - A. That is
difficult to say.  I don't actually think they could
have looked any worse than one or two people next to
me.

You were sideways on, you have told me, so you could
see the front.  Could you see the little gate in pen 4?
- A. Yes, I could.

You could? - A. Yes.

You were facing that way? - A. Yes.

Do you recollect anything about it? - A. I think the
most graphic thing is that I recalled, first of all I
noticed one or two people being pulled out of it, and
then the gate closing, almost being shut behind, and
then it was opened permanently and I remember clearly
the Police Officer at the gate who was helping to pull
people out.

In fact, you can describe this Police Officer, you have
said that? - A. I can, yes.

Just give us a brief description of him. - A. The thing
that I remember him by, he was completely bald.

We have seen him and we know who he is.  I think that
you, in fact, speak of him quite highly.  I think it is
only fair that we should say that, isn't it? - A. Yes,
I would certainly say that very much because he was
responding as fast as he could to help people out.
                                          S. M. D. GRAY


When the gate, you say you saw it open and then it
appeared to you to shut, was he already there?  Can you
remember? - A. I wouldn't want to say --- he was
certainly there at the point when the gate was opened
permanently but there were one or two people I noticed
getting out through the gate, but by and large most of
the people were actually being pulled out over the top
of the fence.

The closure which you have described, was it, as far as
you could see, a full closure or not?  Do you know what
I mean by that, or did it just open and then appear to
come back and then open again, and what was the time
interval in all this? - A. My recollection is that it
was not exactly a full closure.  I think there were one
or two people managing to get out and my impression was
that the gravity of the situation became apparent and
the gate opened permanently.  That was my impression of
it.

It is very difficult to give timings but can you say
whether the interval, the time that you are talking
about, was long or short? - A. Between the gate opening
permanently and ...?

Yes, and the first movement of the gate that you saw? -
A. Not very long at all, a matter of minutes.

That is quite a long time actually, a couple of
minutes.  Was the game in play? - A. The game was not
in play when I first saw people going through the gate,
but when the gate was opened permanently the game was
in play.

You eventually were able to make your way out through
the tunnel, that is how you got out isn't it?  In fact,
when I say make your way, you finished up near gate C,
I think, is that right? - A. I still don t know to this
day how I got out of the ground.  I remember feeling as
though I was just going to faint and then remember
almost wakening up at the back of the ground, leaning
against a wall, so I don't know how I got out.

I understand that once you had regained your breath, so
to speak, you in fact attempted to help various people,
is that right? - A. That is correct.

Is it right, of course, you did not know any of these
people who you were helping? - A. No, I didn't.

I think I am right in saying -- do you know who they
were, the people whom you sought to help?  Have you
identified them now? - A. Certainly one of them
definitely, yes.
                                           S. M. D. GRAY


Who was that? - A. John McBrien.

Was it because you had a good recollection of him? - A.
Yes, indeed.  I still have a very vivid recollection of
him.

You attempted to resuscitate him but it proved to be
hopeless, is that right? - A. Yes.  There were quite a
number of people lying on the ground.

On the ground you mean? - A. On the ground, and a lot,
well quite a few people, trying to resuscitate one or
two individuals.  I saw John lying on the ground, he
was the first person I really came across, and I
attempted to resuscitate him.   I could tell that he had
vomited and the first thing I tried to do was clear an
airway down his throat.  I then tried to give him heart
massage and mouth to mouth resuscitation, and I recall
next to me was a male nurse, I think it was, from
Sheffield.  He shouted out that he was a male nurse and
if anybody wanted any help, and whilst I was working on
John he was working on somebody next to me.   He just
said to me, "Are you all right", and I said "Yes, but
... , and it was quite clear after a few minutes that
there was nothing else we could do.

Well, I know, I am sure the family are most grateful to
you for trying which is, after all, all that one can
do.

     THE CORONER:   I will let Mr. Payne start, but can
we leaf through and see whether we can find the
photograph with Sergeant Swift on it? There is one at
14.59, I think.

     MR. RUSSELL:   It is C367.




Q.   THE CORONER:    Can you turn to
                                                                     14

                                                          S. M. D. GRAY


    Q.      THE CORONER:   Can you turn to the bundle and look
         at C.367? At that point I think you are still
         wearing your helmet.  Is that the one? - A. That is
B        correct.

    Q. If you look at the bottom of it you can see some
       little red numbers on it? - A. Yes, L4.

    Q. What next? Can you see the numbers?          Read further
       on. - A. Yes, it is 14.

    Q. It is very difficult to read but in the end we worked
       it out as 14.59 I think? - A. Right, yes.

    Q. That, in fact, is the time.  Does that surprise you?
       The match kicked off at 14.59 and I think this is a
       minute wrong because it has got to be 14.58, has it
       not?

         MR. KING:        No, sir, the other way.    It should be
    15.00 hours.
D
    Q.        THE CORONER:  So that would be just after the
         match kicked off that this photograph was taken? - A.
         Yes.

    Q. Would that fit in with your recollection? - A. Yes,
       it would.

    Q. We will get you to walk round and show us on the plan
       where you were.  I think if you would mark your first
       position where you had stepped in and where you were
       talking to your friend, and then I think the position
       where you just could not move at all any more? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. Can you a mark a figure 1 on the first one please?
       Could you mark the second with a figure 2? - A. Yes.

           MR. BEECHEY:    This will be C.416, sir.

    Q.        THE CORONER:   One   more question to do with the
         outside of the ground;    do you by any chance remember
         whilst you were in the    Leppings Lane area did you see
         a Land Rover? - A. No,    I didn't see a Land Rover.

    Q. Did you hear any announcements over loudspeakers
       either from the rear of you or from the front, the
       tannoy systems? - A. Would that be whilst I was in
       the ground?

    Q. No, no, outside the turnstiles? - A. No, I didn't
       hear anything.
                                                                  15

                                                       S. M. D. GRAY


                      Cross-Examined bv MR. PAY N E:

    Q. When you went through Gate C, how many were there in
B      your group? - A. There were three of us at that time.

    Q. Did you go straight through as soon as it opened? -
       A. Yes, we did.

    Q. Describe to the Jury in what manner you made your way
       across the concourse? - A. We were walking fast
       across the concourse and continued in that vein right
       through the tunnel.

    Q. Were you conscious of other people coming through
       Gate C at the same time as you, apart from your
       group? - A. Oh yes, there were a number of people
       came through with us and just as we entered the
       tunnel I was certainly conscious of a large number of
       people coming through behind us.

    Q. Were they travelling at the same pace as you? - A.
D      No, I think it is fair to say that the pace speeded
       up behind us.

    Q. Then you got into Pen 4? - A. Yes.

    Q. Almost immediately there was a big surge from behind
       you? - A. That is correct.

    Q. I have taken you through that to bring out the fact
       that the whole episode happened very quickly? - A.
       Y e s , it d i d .

    Q.   That is from being outside the gate until getting
         into Pen 4 and the big surge coming was one close
         sequence of events? - A. That is correct.

                    Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNI N G:

    Q. Mr. Gray, when in the previous year in 1988 you had
       had a seat, had you been conscious - and I think it
       was around half time - that people had, in fact, been
       lifted from the Leppings Lane terraces into the stand
       above? - A. Was that the year before?

    Q.   Yes, the 1988 match? - A. I don't recall that.

    Q.    I thought you must not have done because you said
         that you had not seen it except on one occasion at
         Goodison or something like that? - A. That is
         correct.

    Q. In answer to my learned friend, Mr. Payne, you said
       all of this happened as a close sequence of events.



H
                                                                 16

                                                      S. M. D. GRAY


       So far as the people coining behind you were
       concerned, I took it from your evidence to perhaps a
       little quicken your pace to stay ahead of them before
B      they got to the tunnel? - A. Yes, it was quite clear
       a substantial number of people had followed in behind
       us.  The number that went through with me initially
       was pretty small really and there wasn't any
       particular problem but as soon as one got near the
       tunnel you were conscious of a large number behind
       you.  Just simply by looking round you could see a
       large number of people.

    Q. A large number of people in a sort of mass almost? -
       A. That is correct.

    Q. Travelling faster than you were travelling? Walking
       faster than you? - A. Marginally I would think, yes.

    Q. At one stage, I think it was early on you actually
       used the word trotting? - A. Yes, I mean that is
       really to describe just slightly faster than walking.
D
    Q. These people were walking at a speed which was
       catching you up? - A. That is right.

    Q. You were anxious not to be caught up, I suppose, to
       try and get in through the tunnel and gain a position
       on the terrace before the mass behind you? - A. You
       are certainly conscious that the game was just about
       to kick.  You are wanting to get into the ground and
       so forth and so on and you are well aware of the
       numbers of people behind you and you are just wanting
       to get into the ground.  Certainly this seemed to be
       the opportunity to get into the ground quickly.

    Q. Would you have been worried from where you were
       outside the tunnel on your way there if, for example,
       you had stopped to tie your shoe lace? - A. Yes, you
       would have been.

    Q. Can you just perhaps put that into slightly more
       words? - A. I think certainly with the experience of
       going to football grounds and in large crowds you are
       aware you really do not stop for anything.  I was
       certainly conscious of a large number of people
       behind me aiming towards or heading towards a narrow
       entrance to the ground and it wasn't a place you
       would have stopped for anything.




                    Cross-Examined bv MR. K I N G :




H
                                                                   17

                                                        S. M. D. GRAY


    Q. Mr. Gray, you obviously have vast experience of going
       to football matches? - A. Yes.

B   Q* Both in the stands and on the terraces? - A. Mainly
       on the terraces.

    Q. Tell me, it appears from the photograph we have seen
       of Sergeant Swift, the bald Officer, which we know
       was taken at three o'clock, you obviously got on to
       the terrace before three o'clock because the
       photograph shows the gate open and Sergeant Swift
       helping and so forth? - A. Yes.

    Q. When you got on to the terrace in the pens, your
       immediate reaction it appears was that you were
       concerned there and then as soon as you got on to it?
       - A. That is correct.

    Q. What was it, as soon as you got on to it, as one of
       the first people from your evidence who had come
       through Gate C, about the terrace, those centre pens,
D      which you were concerned about? - A. The main concern
       was simply the number of people who were crushed
       together in the terrace.  Normally even if one
       arrives in a ground with a large crowd late there is
       always freedom of movement but the thing that struck
       me initially and immediately I got on to the terrace
       was that there was nowhere you could move.  It really
       was crushed packed tight.

    Q. Let me go back slightly in your evidence to when you
       go through Gate C. You say you went towards the
       tunnel.  Why did you choose to go towards the tunnel?
       - A. When we went through the gate it was almost the
       obvious way in because it was the only entrance I
       could see.  I wasn't aware of any other direction to
       go in.  It was the entrance I saw and clearly in the
       middle below the stand, in the middle, it was going
       to give access to the ground.

    Q. When you, as one of the first through Gate C, were
       you conscious of anybody trying to direct you in any
       particular way? - A. I didn't see anyone at all.

    Q. By which I mean either Police Officers, stewards or
       anybody else? - A. I didn't see a steward at all.

    Q. There was obviously nothing to prevent your getting
       to the tunnel or entering the tunnel? - A. Nothing at
       all.


                  Cross-Examined bv MRS. McB R IE N :




H
                                                    S. M. D. GRAY


Q. Mr. Gray, did you see any Police Officer on the
   terrace after going down the tunnel? - A. No, I
   didn't see any Police Officers in the terrace at all.

Q. Would you expect to see them normally? - A. I would
   have expected more to have seen stewards than Police
   Officers.

Q. But somebody? - A. Yes.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I was wondering, sir, if we could
refer to a plan of the concourse area please?  It is DJB/3
and it is C.50.

       THE CORONER:    We have not got a C.50.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   It is a plan indicating the position
at which John was placed in the concourse area.

     MR. KING:   Sir, it may be in relation to what I can
call the mini Inquest in relation to Mrs. McBrien's son.
It was something that was produced then.

     THE CORONER:   We will find it for you, Mrs. McBrien.
Do you want to carry on while we are looking for it.

     MRS. McBRIEN:      I think m y questions were relating to
that.

       MR. CATCHPOLE:    Sir, I actually have a   copy of C.50.
I do    not know if it is of any assistance.




                                           /THE CORONER.
                                          S. M. D. GRAY


     THE CORONER: Could you lend it to the witness.  I
am not going to let you go into too great detail on
this, Mrs. McBrien, because it is quite outside my
parameters, and I make that clear, that I am not going
to give you a privilege which I give to nobody else,
but I will let you do a little bit.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I have been handed a copy of the
particular exhibit, C50.   Would you like me to pass it
to Mrs. McBrien?

     THE CORONER: Yes, please.   Right, Mrs. McBrien,
now go ahead.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  A P.C. Baron marked on that plan
where he placed John.   I was wondering if Mr. Gray
could look at the plan to see if it corresponded to
the point he found him.

     THE CORONER:  The question is, can you see there
is a spot on that plan? - A. Yes.

Which is marked.  Is that where you recollect
resuscitating? - A. It is precisely the spot.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  How many people did you try to
help, Mr. Gray? - A. After we had left John there was
a young lady with a gentleman, and she was breathing
but she was lying on her back and we made sure that we
got her onto her side and we told this chap what to
do.  This was the other gentleman I referred to who
said he was a male nurse from Sheffield.  So we gave
some advice to him and moved this girl onto her side,
and there was another gentleman in the concourse area
who had had his shirt taken off and there were one or
two people trying to resuscitate him and were actually
doing it incorrectly, so I simply just gave some
advice and helped a little with him, but he was
actually breathing, but I don't actually know what
happened to him ultimately.

Do you know what time it was when you were helping
these people? - A. It was almost certainly around 20-
past/25-past 3.

Was John lying on his back when you found him? - A.
Yes, he was.

Did he still have the buttons of his shirt fastened? -
A. Yes, he did, and one of the most distinctive
features which helped me identify him was his scarf,
and he still had that round his neck.
                                            S. M. D. GRAY


     MRS. McBRIEN:  I just want to say, before I
forget, on behalf of my husband and family I would
like to say how grateful we are for the efforts that
you made to try and resuscitate John, especially as
you had been injured yourself in Pen A.  Thank you
very much.

     THE WITNESS:     Thank you.

         Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN:

Mr. Gray, I wonder if you could just clarify for me
the circumstances surrounding the opening of the gate
in the pen where you were.  You have described, have I
got this right, two openings of that gate, or possibly
one.  Do you know whether it was one or two openings?
- A. Is that the gate outside?

Yes.  I am sorry, the gate on the perimeter track in
the pen where you were. - A. I certainly did not
regard it as an opening as such.  I saw one or two
people clearly getting access to the pitch through
that gate.  I was certainly conscious of the gate
being opened when the Police Officer was pulling
people through as fast as he could.  So that is the
only distinction I could really make between it being
opened and not.

So it may well have simply been one opening and a
difference as to when you actually noticed what was
going on   at that gate? - A. You see, Ihad assumed
that one   or two people had managed     to open it
themselves and climb out.   The difference then was
that when the Police Officer was there he actually had
the gate open and was pulling people out.

But that was an assumption on your part.  You saw
nothing to actually suggest that people had managed to
open it? - A. No.  From my position it was an
assumption as to what was happening from that point.
Certainly when I saw the Police Officer it was quite
clear.

     MISS ADDLEMAN:    I   see.    Thank   you very much.

     MR. ISAACS:    I am sorry, sir, may I just ask a
question that perhaps I should have asked earlier?

     THE CORONER: Indeed.

          Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

Mr. Gray, it actually arises out of some of the
questions asked by Mr. Manning and Mr. King, just to
                                          S. M. D. GRAY


clear up a point in my own mind.  You were one of the
first coming down the tunnel after Gate C had opened?
- A. Yes, that is correct.

I am just reviewing what you have told us.You were
going at   a brisk walking pace.  Whether it be called a
trot or not, it matters neither here nor there.    I
think you have told us that the tunnel was relatively
clear, but at the end of the tunnel there were, as you
could see, a body of people? - A. It was clearly
solid.

As you got to the mouth of the tunnel you could see
that, or   as you came down the tunnel? - A. As you came
down thetunnel.  The tunnel actually, it was
relatively straightforward going down the tunnel.    It
was when you got to the bottom end of it that it was
packed solid across the end.

But not actually into the tunnel at that stage? - A.
Yes, I mean it was almost where you could get access
into the terracing, it was at that point it was solid,
but it had not at that stage backed up the tunnel.

When you got to the exit to the tunnel, you were
clearly able to go to the position that you have
marked on the plan - perhaps Sergeant Griffiths, who
has just turned it off, would put it back up again -
and made your way a little bit to the left? - A. That
is correct.

I can see, if I may say so, you are a sensible
football supporter.  When you went the distance that
you did, you did not rush pell-mell into the bodies
that were in front of you? - A. No, I did not.

As I understand your evidence you say this, that you
went quite tentatively to get to the position that you
got to? - A. You certainly could not have gone
straight ahead, it would have been quite impossible to
go ahead.  It was just packed solid and all I did was
moved slightly left and pushed in a pace.

And carefully? - A. Yes.

The last thing you would have done would have been to
continue into that terrace at a fast speed, pushing
people out of your way? - A. I think, if I may say,
through experience of going to football matches and
large crowds you certainly would not have pushed
willingly into a crowd like that.  You would not have
done so because you would have recognised very clearly
the dangers of doing that.  It was so packed solid and
knowing that there were people behind us in the tunnel
                                         S. M. D. GRAY


you knew there were dangers, so you simply got out of
the way and that is why we moved left.

So anybody who did do that would have been acting very
foolishly indeed? - A. I would have thought they
should have recognised that clearly there was a major
crush already taking place.  I don't think anyone
could have got access.

What other people could or could not have done
obviously is a matter that you cannot talk about, but
in terms of what you did, you recognised the situation
and went slowly when you got to the exit to the
tunnel, but then this surge came up behind you from
people who did not appear to be doing that? - A. I
think one has to just reflect carefully on the
circumstances when I arrived at the end of the tunnel.
It was clearly packed solid and my first priority was
to get into the side, which is the way one usually
enters a terracing.  You usually try and move left or
right and so, therefore, I could see a way of getting
into there, but only by about a yard.

And you went carefully? - A. I don't think one had a
choice whether one went carefully or not.  You went
where you could get off the main stream of the tunnel.

But when you entered it you did not go pell-mell, you
went really at walking pace but very slowly to edge
your way in? - A. I was still travelling at the same
speed down the tunnel and it was a question of getting
out of the way of the main tunnel.  One normally goes
into a terracing left or right when you come through
any tunnel into a ground, and it wasn't a question of
carefully, it was a question of just getting out of
the main tunnel.

But when you went in, I understand you to be saying
this, you certainly did not cause any surge and push
into the people who were in front of you to cause them
to go down the terrace, it came from behind you? - A.
That is correct.

So when you went in you must have gone in carefully,
do you see what I mean? - A. I see exactly what you
mean.  I am not sure I would choose the word
"carefully" because it is a question of just
automatically doing as you always do when you go into
a ground.  I moved left onto the terracing which was,
for me, the only place I could have gone.

But then behind you comes a group of people who,
whatever they did, thereafter, a matter of seconds,
you and many others were pushed down? - A. There is no
                                           S. M. D. GRAY


doubt in my view at the time that one or two people
might have been able to move left or right, it was
still packed solid, but a large number of people
behind me could never have gone left or right into the
places that we could have gone.

No, and so what happened, the surge came all the way
down but people on the face of it did not seem to draw
up as you did? - A. I doubt very much - well, they
couldn't have done anything in the numbers that were
coming through the tunnel.

They could have stopped? - A. I don't believe that
they could have done.

        Further Cross-Examined by MR. KI NG ;

As a man of experience at football matches why do you
say you do not believe they could have done? - A.
Simply the numbers involved were so great coming
through behind me and the tunnel is relatively narrow.
If you have got a substantial number of people packed
into a terracing and a substantial number of people
behind you, it is fine for one or two people to find a
space, or at least get into the crowd, but for the
numbers we were talking about and the space available,
there was no way in which they could have done what I
was able to do on my own.

     THE CORONER: Mr. Gray, I am most grateful to you.
Thank you very much indeed for your help.

      MR. MANNING: Sir, I wonder if you would allow me
to make a remark about Mr. & Mrs. McBrien and their
loss.

     THE CORONER: Yes.

     MR. MANNING:  I do not think they are to be
witnesses to be called by you, are they?

     THE CORONER: No, because they were not there.

     MR. MANNING:  Of course, and there have been
occasions when certain people have come into the
witness box and when I and one or two others have made
remarks about the regret.  We have seen Mrs. McBrien
sitting along this bench and she is almost part of the
team, sometimes not able to find the legal language,
but none the less has very much done what she felt was
right.  I think it may be one of those days when her
husband is here with her and it would be remiss not to
say how very much we are sorry that she is having to
take part in this because she lost her son at this
                                          S . M. D. GRAY


game, and I just wondered if you would allow me, on
behalf I am sure of all my colleagues, to make that
remark.

     THE CORONER: I would be very happy to allow you
to make that remark.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you very much, Mr. Manning.

     THE CORONER:  I think what we will do we will
break now for our coffee and then we will carry on.  I
think that will actually give us quite a good split.
So quarter-of-an-hour.

               (Short Adjournment)
                                            C. E. GRIFFITHS


             COLIN EDWARD GRIFFITHS Sworn

                    By THE CORONER:

Are you Colin Edward Griffiths? - A. Yes.

Is it still
     , Wales? - A. Yes.

You are 20 now? - A. Yes.

Are you still a baker? - A. Yes.

You are a Liverpool supporter as well? - A. Yes.

You wanted to come to see the semi-final in Sheffield on
the 15th of April, 1989? - A. Yes, that's right.

I think you came on a coach? - A. Yes.

Was it a properly organised coach?     A proper supporters'
coach? - A. Yes.

What time did it leave Flint? - A. I think it was about
eleven o'clock.

I have to make another confession.   I don't quite know
where Flint is in relation, say to Liverpool.   How close
to Liverpool is it? - A. It's about half an hour away.

Half an hour farther away? - A. Yes.

You left at about eleven and I think Smith Shearing Ltd.
was the coach company? - A. Yes.

Was it just one coach that left from Flint or were there
several? - A. There were two.

On your coach there were several people including a young
man called John McBrien, is that right? - A. That's
right.

Was he a friend of yours? - A. Yes.

So you knew him? - A. Yes.

Having journeyed, what time did you arrive in Sheffield?
- A. I can't remember what time.

You can't remember? - A. No.

Is that because you now can't remember or did you never
remember the time? - A. I wasn't really bothered what
                                           C. E. GRIFFITHS


time we got there.   I didn't have my watch on so I
didn't...

So when you put in your statement a time, that time is
totally wrong? - A. I can't remember what the time is, to
tell you the truth.

What I am trying to find out is whether in fact this time
which you put in the statement has any semblance with
reality?   I will show it to you. - A. I think it was
about that time, somewhere around there, because we all
got off the coach together and walked down.

Now what you said in your statement was 2.45.   That is
quite close to kick-off. - A. It was around that time.

What makes you say that?   I want to be sure that you are
sure about that. - A. Well, I can't really remember.

You can't remember? - A. No.

Do you remember where you parked?   Were you parked on a
hill somewhere? - A. Yes, close to some houses.

Was the coach held up at all on the journey? - A. Yes.

You do remember that? - A. Yes.

Do you remember for how long? - A. It was a good hour.

On the motorway or somewhere else? - A. On the motorway.

You got off the coach.  Was the coach stopped at any
point and searched? - A. No, not our coach, but the one
in convoy got stopped.   Ours went straight through.

So that one was stopped and you just passed it and went
on? - A. Yes.

So he was behind you? - A. That's right.

How long did it take you to walk from where you got off
the coach to Leppings Lane? - A. About twenty-five
minutes, thirty minutes.

What distance would you say it was?   A mile, half a
mile, two miles? - A. About a mile.

Were there lots of people going down to the ground? - A.
Yes.

So you think about twenty to twenty-five minutes? - A.
Yes.
                                               C. E. GRIFFITHS


When you got to Leppings Lane were there a lot of people
there? - A. Yes.

At the entrance.   If you arrived at 2.45, as you said,
and it took you twenty-five minutes to walk, were you
aware you had already missed the kick-off? - A. No.

Did you know what time the kick-off was? - A. Yes, three
o'clock.

Did you think you had missed the kick-off or not? - A. We
rushed down to get to the ground, I remember that, but I
can't remember anything...   I remember queuing up to go
in and that's about it.

So you knew that it was   tight? - A. Yes.

If you add the times up, 2.45 plus twenty minutes, even,
it is five past three? - A. Yes.

The kick-off has gone? - A. Yes.

You didn't say to John,   "My goodness, we have definitely
missed the kick-off"? -   A. Well, we had tickets, so...

I am not saying you wouldn't have got in.   I am trying
to find out the timings, that's all. - A. Well, I don't
really know the time.

Perhaps you can tell me this:  when you got to Leppings
Lane was there a large crowd? - A. Yes.

Had you   ever been to    Hillsborough       before? - A. Yes.

Did you   know there were outer perimeter gates - blue
park-like gates? - A. No.

Can you  just look at     the model? Which way did you
approach the ground?      - A. We came    down here.

Do you remember those big gates which you are now
approaching? - A. Yes.

You do remember those? - A. Yes.

Was the crowd which you saw outside those gates or on the
inside of the gates? - A. Just inside.

So there wasn't a crowd outside? - A. Not yet, no.

Were the gates open or shut when you approached them? -
A. They were open.
                                          C. E. GRIFFITHS


Did you see any Police horses around there? - A. Yes,
there were about three.

Were they on the outside of the gates or the inside, as
far as you remember? - A. They were on the inside.

You didn't see any Police horses on the outside of the
gate as far as you recollect? - A. No.

What were they doing? - A. They were trying to get
everyone in order.

Were they having any success? - A. No, not a lot.

Why was that? - A. Well, there were too many people round
the gates and more people were coming all the time to try
and get in.

Was there any pushing forward? - A. Yes, there was quite
a bit.   We had to take a friend ofours out because he
had asthma.

When you say take him out, do you mean... - A. Well, we
went to the side, where the...

Near the river? - A. Yes, by where the gates were.

You had initially gone into the crowd and he was getting
a bit breathless in there? - A. Yes.

Did you see any Police Land Rovers at any point? - A. No.

Did you hear any announcements from the Police over loud
speakers? - A. No.

Either from behind you or from the front? - A. None at
all.

Did you see any Police Officers standing on a little bit
elevated and shouting or waving to people not to push or
anything like that? - A. No.

Did you hear anybody in the crowd saying that? - A. No,
not really.

How deep in the crowd were you when your friend said,
"Oh, my goodness, I can't breathe, get me out of here"? -
A. We were quite close to the wall, I think.   I think it
was a wall.   I am not quite sure.

Was it difficult to get out of the crowd? - A. Yes.

But you did manage it? - A. Yes.
                                              C. E. GRIFFITHS


You were then standing along the river banking with your
friend and John McBrien, is that right? -A. Yes.

At that point things weren't too bad, is that correct? -
A. Well, we saw them trying to shut the gate, but I don't
think they did it, really.   The horses were moving as
well.   There was a lot of crushing at the front.   The
horses were moving up so they could let a bit more room
in but...

But that didn't help? - A. No.

You said you thought you saw them trying to shut the gate
but they didn't succeed.     Why not? - A. There were too
many people.    If they had done they would have trapped
all the people in the gate.      No-one could have moved.
It was just like a box really.

Too many people on the outside of the gates, do you mean?
- A. Everywhere.

At some point you saw a big blue gate open, is that
right? - A. That's right.

Were you close   to it at that   point? - A. Yes.

Were you against it or still     on the river bank? - A. We
were a bit further away.

Did you see it open wide or just a little way? - A. We
saw it open a little bit and then it opened after that.

Let's take this slowly.   It opened a little bit? - A.
Yes, and a few fans went through then.

Did it shut again? - A. Yes.

You, John and your other friend didn't go through at that
point? - A. No.

A few fans went through at that point.   Did you notice
whether a Police horse came across to try and help to
shut the gate at that point? - A. No, I didn't see it.

Then you say the gate opened again? - A. That's right.

So it opened twice? - A. Yes.

The second time did it open wide? - A. Yes.

Can you remember whether both leaves opened?   It is a
concertina gate, isn't it?   Or was it just one leaf? -
A. I think it was just one.
                                          C. E. GRIFFITHS


What happened? - A . Everyone went through.   We saw it
opening and we went to go in.    We got in and that was it
then.

When you saw it open were you told to go in or did you
just go in? - A. Well, we went...  The crowd took us
really.

Were you carried in or were you able to walk?   When I
say "carried" I don't mean physically lifted, but was the
crowd which was going in towards the gate so large that
you really had to go with it? - A. We had to go with the
pace.

So what was your impression of the crowd that was
entering that gate?   Was it a slow entry or a fast
entry? - A. It was quite fast.

Were you one of the first people to get through or were
you in the middle of this crowd? -A. I think I was near
the front, actually.

Did you notice whether anybody fell over? - A. I didn't
see, no.

You didn't see anybody knocked over, or anything like
that? - A. No.

You and John and your other friend were still together? -
A. Yes, there was a group of us.

How many of you were there altogether? - A. I think there
were six.

I forgot to ask, but I take it you all had tickets? - A.
That's right.

While you were standing near that river bank, or, indeed,
when you were walking down from the coach park, had you
been asked for spares or tickets at all? - A. No, we
didn't, but...

Did you notice people standing around in that area who
appeared not to have tickets as far as you could see or
hear? - A. Well, I couldn't really tell.

You then came into the large area on the other side of
this gate? - A. Yes.

What happened then? - A. Can you say that again?

When you had come through the big concertina gate, you
came into a largish concrete area? - A. Yes.
                                              C. E. GRIFFITHS


What happened then? - A. Well, the first thing we went to
get a programme, but we didn't get a programme.

Why was that? - A. Because they were too dear.

They were there but you didn't want to spend the money!
Fair enough! - A. Then we went to the toilet and in the
toilet we got split up and there was just me and John
then.

Can you remember where you tried to get your programme
from? - A. By the toilet on the left.

Walk up to the model again.  Show the young man where the
toilets are.    Now point where the programme seller was?
- A. The programme seller was round about.

Near that wall? - A. Yes.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     Near the gate, sir.

     THE CORONER:     Near the gate in the wall.

So you tried to get a programme.   You decided it was too
expensive.   You went to the toilet.    Got splitupfrom
your friends and you and John were left, just the pair of
you? - A. Yes.

Then you came out of the toilet and what happened then? -
A. We went down the tunnel.

When you first came to the tunnel did you look down it?
Could you see the pitch at all? - A. No, all we could see
were just people round there.

How full was it when you... - A. The tunnel was empty but
you could see people on the terraces.

Could you see beyond the people to what was happening on
the field? - A. No.

Was it easy to walk down the tunnel?     - A. Yes.

You didn't have to run? - A. No.

There wasn't anybody pushing you forward, or anything
like that? - A. No.

Just normal progress? -     A. Normal.

When you got   to the end of the tunnel just before you
came on to the terracing, what met your eye?     Tell me
what you saw   and did. - A. The first thing was to try and
get a place. We normally     stand behind the goal, or try
                                                                   .32

                                                      C. E. GRIFFITHS


         and stand behind there, so we went to try and stand by
         there.   We made our way down a little bit and then it
         was just solid then.

B   0.   Let's takeit before it became solid.
         your way.    How easy or difficult was
                                                    You said you made
                                                  it to make your
         way? - A. It was quite difficult.

    Q.   Are you a regular attender at football matches? - A. I
         haven't been to one since.

    Q.   Before that? - A. Yes.

    0.   Do you usually stand behind the goal? - A. Yes.

    Q.   I am not asking you about what it was like when it became
         solid, but when you first entered that terrace and you
         were making your way to find your position, what was that
         like in comparison to other big matches you have been to?
         - A. It was more chocka than normal.    There were more
         people.

D   Q.   Can you remember what was happening on the pitch at that
         time? - A. No, I can't.

    Q. Do you recollect the players being announced? -A. I
       didn't hear them, no.

    0.    Did you see them come out on the pitch at ali? -A. No.
         I only saw one player and that was the goalkeeper.

    Q. What was he doing when you saw him? - A. He was just
       warming up, I think.




               Q. When did you see that goalkeeper.
                                          C. E. GRIFFITHS


When did you see that goalkeeper, as soon as    you got
onto the terracing or later? - A. As soon as    we got on.

As soon as you got on? - A. Yes.

You said you got up to a crush barrier,   that is right,
isn t it? - A. That is right.

I think you were at this side of the crush barrier and
you got John to go to the other side? - A. Yes.

That is right, so did he duck underneath?   - A.Yes,    but
I went to duck underneath and then ....

Sorry? - A. I went to duck underneath and as I went
that way we got split up then, when there was a push.

I see, so he ducked underneath and then you were going
to follow him, that's right? - A. Yes.

And then there was a push? - A. Mmm.

What sort of a push was that? - A. It was   quite aheavy
pusti.

Quite a heavy push? - A. Yes.

And that split you from him? - A. Yes.

Was that, in fact,   the last time you saw him alive? -
A. That is the last time I saw him alive, yes.

Did you get pushed   forward or where were you pushed to?
- A. John went to the left and I went to the right.

You didn't see what happened to him? - A. No.

But where did you end up? - A. I can't remember, quite
honestly.

Do you remember hitting another barrier? - A. Yes, I do
remember.

You do remember that? - A. Yes.

Did anything happen to that barrier? - A. Yes, the
barrier broke.

That is what I am interested in at this stage.  I want
you to tell me, when you hit, or when you came up
against the barrier .... - A. There was a couple of
people in front of me, they must have snapped the
barrier, apparently.  There was like metal sticking up
and I didn t see it, and I hit my ribs on that.
                                        C. E. GRIFFITHS


Are you saying that by the time you got to it - the
barrier, of course, has got uprights? - A. That's
right.

And then they have got cross-pieces - A. The bar, yes.

Are you saying that you hit the upright? - A. The
upright, yes.

Could you see whether the horizontal bit, the crossÂ­
piece, had already disappeared by the time you had hit
it? - A. Yes, it had.

It had gone? - A. Yes.

Did you hear it go or was it just that you got up to
the barrier .... - A. I saw people falling forward from
when the barrier went.  I can't remember if it was them
or not, you see, because they were pushing.

So you were having a push from behind which was
carrying you forward and then you noticed people fell
forward? - A. Yes, sort of went like that.  They all
came down.

Do you have any recollection as to what was happening
on the pitch at that time?   I think you have already
said you have not but I just want to double check. - A.
At the time the barrier ....

Yes. - A. I remember seeing Peter Beardsley having a
shot at goal.  That is the only thing I did see, I
didn't see where the ball landed, I just saw him shoot.

You saw him shoot? - A. Yes, and that was it.

Was that at the time when you felt this barrier go? -
A. It was around about then, yes.

Can you remember whether there was a loud shout at that
point, when Beardsley .... - A. There was quite a
shout.

It is to be expected. - A. Yes.

I just want to be quite clear, you told me about John
splitting up from you. - A. Yes.

It sounds as if there were two barriers which you were
associated with. - A. Yes.

One when you ducked underneath, at least when he ducked
underneath? - A. Yes.
                                             C. E. GRIFFITHS


And the other one where you hit the support? - A. Yes.

Are you quite sure that John disappeared before you got
to the second barrier, or was it at that point that you
lost him? - A. It was one of the pushes.  I am not sure


Which one it was? - A. No.

I think you then grabbed hold of this upright,        is that
right? - A. Yes, to try and hold myself up.

Was it still standing up? - A. Yes.

And you just held on for dear life, I think? - A. Yes.

Eventually I think you managed to get out, is that
right? - A. Yes.

Were you able to see the perimeter fence     from    where you
were? - A. Yes.

You could see it?   - A. Yes.

Could you see the   little gate   in the fence?     - A. No.

Did you see any Police Officers? - A. Yes.

Where were you when you really first noticed Police
Officers?  You have told me .... - A. I can remember
one of them, it was a woman, she had blonde hair.

A woman with blonde hair? - A. Yes, or I think it was
anyway, and she was just telling everyone to get back
but there was no way you could have got back.

When you say she was telling people to get back, was
she shouting to people to get back? - A. Yes.

Was she moving her hands as well or not? - A. Yes.

Was she standing on the .... - A. She was standing on
the fence.

On the fence? - A. Yes.

Did you shout for any gates to be opened or did you
hear any shouts like that? - A. Yes, I tried but
nothing happened.

You didn't see the gate, did you? - A. No, but there
was a load of people in front, really squashed and
their faces were blue.
                                          C. E. GRIFFITHS


What you are saying is that it appeared that nothing
happened? - A. Yes.

But you never saw it, is that true? - A. That is true.

How did you get out actually, come to think of it? - A.
I can't remember getting out, to tell you the truth.

You had better look at page 3 of your statement of 19th
May.  I am not trying to catch you out or anything, I
am trying to help you.   (The Witness was passed
a statement) If you read that first paragraph and then
giye it back to me and I will ask you something. - A.
This is the wrong person.   I am not Christopher.

So let's get back to the gate.  You don't know how you
got out? - A. No, I can't remember.

I am sorry, you are quite right.  What I want you to do
is go up and mark on a plan the barrier where John
ducked under, and then the barrier where you hung on
for dear life.  (The Witness marked Exhibit C417)
Thank you.  Just to go back to when you felt there was
a surge which was carrying you forward from the first
position to the second position, is that right? - A.
Yes.

That is when you and John had sort of ____   - A. Split
up.

Split up, and at about that time you also noticed that
the people in front of you seemed to fall forward, is
that right? - A. Yes.

You associate it with around the time when Beardsley
had a kick but you don't actually know what happened to
that? - A. Yes.

That is what you are saying? - A. Yes.

            Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

Could you open the folder that is in front of you at
277, please? Just look down the list of times, would
you, down the internal column, and look down until you
get to "15.04.52, Peter Beardsley's shot hits
crossbar".  Do you see that? - A. Yes, I've got it.

That is at about the time that you were at position 2?
- A. Yes.

Look a little bit further up this column and you see
14.59, gate open, do you see that? - A. Yes.
                                          C. E. GRIFFITHS


You see that on the chart? - A. Yes.

You had not seen that, you have told us, because you
did not see the gate at all? - A. I am confused. I'm
not with you.

You don't know what that means?  I just want to be
quite clear.  I don't want to lead you into something
that you don't know anything about but I want to draw
attention to the time at which gate 3 was open.  Do you
know which gate 3 is? - A. No.

Did you see a gate open at all? - A. Yes.

Where was that? -   A. It was by the side of ____

     THE CORONER:     I think he is talking about gate   C,
Mr. Payne.

     MR. PAYNE:   Did you see a gate open at all in
front of you when you were in the pen? - A. When I was
in the pen?

Yes. - A. No.

But if what we can see here is right, then by the time
Peter Beardsley's shot hit the crossbar the gate had
been open for about five minutes? - A. Yes.

Now, had you been pushed down from position 1 to
position 2? - A. Yes.

Just before the Peter Beardsley shot happened? - A.
When he was having a shot.

That is when you were pushed down? - A. Yes.

Where did the push come from? - A. I don't know, it
just come.  I don't know how it just come.

You have marked the chart. - A. Yes.

And it pushed you .... - A. I don't know where the push
come from though.

No, it pushed you down the terrace? - A. Yes.

And it was that push which caused the people to fall in
front? - A. There was a few that tripped over when that
push come.  It come from nowhere really.

Is that when you think that the barrier broke? - A. It
could have been or it could have happened earlier with
tne pressure on it.
                                                     C. E. GRIFFITHS


Q. The Jury has heard from other people that they saw at
   that time that the gate was open? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you see that? - A .    I can't remember.

     THE CORONER:   He has said he did not see the gate,
Mr. Payne.  I do not see any point in asking him the
question.

     MR. KING:   Sir, there is a point.  It is rehearsing
the evidence in a way which suits my learned friend.

      THE CORONER:      Well, I have...

     MR. KING:   I am sorry, sir, but that is the purpose
of what is happening.  It is obvious and should be stopped.

      THE CORONER:      I have just   done so.

      MR. PAYNE:     I am not going   to argue it.

                   Cross-Examined bv MR. ISAACS:

Q. Colin, could I just ask you one or two questions? -
   A. Yes.

Q.   You went through Gate C? - A. Yes.

Q.   Which is that gate      where one side was open and quite
     fully? - A. Yes.

Q. You reckon that you were one of the first people to
   go through? - A. I was one of the few, yes.  I was
   with m y friend.

Q. You said that you went in with the crowd? - A. With
   m y friends and the crowd followed behind.

Q. You have said it was quite a fast entry.   Those were
   your words? - A. It was quite steady, yes.

Q. I am not trying to trick you.  I just want to go
   through it so that I can get to the point I am asking
   you about.  You came out of that crowd because you
   went to the toilet? - A. No, that is a different
   time.  I went to the toilet when I was inside the
   ground itself.

Q. Yes, this is what I am talking about.  Let us try and
   go through it again.  To get into the ground you went
   through what we call Gate C? - A. Yes, I am with you
   now, sorry.
A
                                                                 39

                                                    C. E. GRIFFITHS


    Q. When you went through Gate C into the ground you told
       us that the crowd went through quite fast and you
       were about the beginning of the crowd.  You were one
B      of the first? - A. Yes.

    Q. You came out of that crowd that went through? - A. To
       go to the toilet, yes.

    Q. You went to the toilet? - A. Yes.

    Q. You went to get a programme but you did not buy
       one? - A. No.

    Q.   That was you and your friends? - A. Yes.

    Q.    Did you see where the crowd that you had been part
         of, that you said went in quite quickly, did you see
         where that went? - A. No, I know some of it went down
         to the very far end which is on the corner.

    Q. Could you show us on the model? Just so that you
       know, Sergeant Griffiths will show you where the gate
       you went through was? - A. We went through there and
       down here and there was a few went down here.

    Q. Some went down the right hand side? - A. Yes.

    Q. Is that where you are pointing? - A. Yes.

    Q. Round the side of the West Stand? - A. There is like
       a little building there, where you go, or there was.
       You go through here and a few went down here.

    Q. You are pointing down round the right hand side of
       the West Stand.  You saw some go there? - A. Yes.  I
       couldn't see though because I went to the toilet.

    Q. No, but the crowd must have gone somewhere that you
       had been part of that you were no longer part of
       because you had gone to the toilet and then went
       towards the programme seller, that is right, is it
       not? - A. I don't know.  I am lost.  You have lost
       me.

    Q. Let us try again.   Sergeant Griffiths will show you
       with the pointer.   You go through Gate C? - A. Yes.

    Q. As part of a crowd? - A. Yes.

    Q. You are in that concourse area? - A. Yes.

    Q. You come out of the crowd and you go towards the
       toilets and then towards the programme seller? - A.
       Yes.



H
                                             C. E. GRIFFITHS



The crowd you are part of must go   somewhere.      That
follows, does it not? - A. Yes.

So far as you are aware   they kept on going somewhere?
- A . I didn't notice.

You did not notice? - A. I don't know.

Some went down, you have told us, the side of the
West Stand? - A. Yes, some.

We have been told, you see, that some went down that
tunnel where you eventually went? - A. Yes, they must
have, mustn't they?

Come back again.  How long was it that you spent
going to the toilet and then to the programme seller
after you came out of that mass of people that went
in through that gate? - A. It was only about two or
three minutes.

Two or three minutes? - A. Yes, itwasn't    long.

Wherever that crowd had gone that you    had been part
of? - A. Gone.

By the time you had done that? - A. There was just a
few people outside by then.

Then you went down the tunnel? - A. That is right and
there was no one in the tunnel.

No one in the tunnel? - A. No.

You get to the terrace? - A. Yes.

Did you have any difficulty getting on to the
terrace? - A. Yes, I had a lot.

You managed to make your way to the place that you
have shown us? - A. Yes.

Nobody pushing you from behind? - A. You always get a
bit of pushing, yes.

But nothing unusual? - A. It was a bit stronger than
normal I should say.

Were there people behind you when you went down the
tunnel? - A. There was a few people.  There were
quite a lot of people come after.
                                            C. E. GRIFFITHS


There was not a large crush? - A. No, not then there
wasn't anyway.

You have told us that there were not many people in
the tunnel? - A. Yes.

It was easy to go through the tunnel and nobody was
pushing you forwards? - A. No, there was no one in
the tunnel.

So you get on to the terrace? - A. Yes.

How long are you at the place you have marked point
1, marked with the cross, before you are then pushed
down? - A. Only about two or three minutes.

When you got to that position waiting two or three
minutes? - A. I would just say that I can't recognise
the time then because everything was happening so
quickly.

I am   not asking you the exact time or, in fact, how
long   to tie you to a minute but it gives us an idea
that   it was not just seconds.  You had been there for
some   little time? - A. Yes.

Before you were then pushed down again? - A. Yes.

When you were in that position, before the push came
that pushed you down to the second place you have
marked? - A. Yes.

You were in a state where you were prepared to watch
the game and see what was going on? - A. I was, yes.

You did not think up to that moment that there were
people being hurt and crushed ahead of you? - A. Yes,
you could hear them.  I wasn't watching the game
then.  There was a crush, wasn't there? At point 1 I
was ready to watch a match and after point 1 there
was just a crush and I didn't see anything after
that.  I only saw the shot.

When you were at point 1, are you following me?   - A.
Yes.

Before the push came down that took you to point 2? -
A. We had ducked under because we wanted to get
nearer to the pitch.

Yes, and so at that stage you were intent on watching
the game? - A. Yes.
                                                 C. E. GRIFFITHS


It was only when you got to point 2 after you had
been pushed down that the crushing, so far as you
were concerned had started? - A. Really, yes, I
suppose.

That is the   position? - A. Yes.

As you have told the Coroner it was about        the time
that Beardsley had the shot? - A. Yes.

That you were moved down from 1 to 2? - A. Yes.

              Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING;

You went in the gate, programme, toilet, across the
concourse, down the tunnel? - A. Yes.

The tunnel was empty? - A. Yes.

Push on to the terrace? - A. Yes.

Stand at point 1? - A. Yes.     We ducked under the bar
at point 1.

You are going too fast for me now.  You stand at
point 1 and are prepared to stand at point 1 to watch
the game? - A. Yes.

Ducked under the bar? - A. Yes.

Surge? - A. Yes.

Down to point 2? - A. Yes.

At which incident whether you are just leaving point
1 or on your way down to point 2 because it is a few
seconds only Beardsley shoots, and we now know from
the film that it hits the crossbar? - A. Yes.

From thereon in a big crush and you are grabbing on
to what is left of the barrier for your life? - A.
Yes.

               Cross-Examined bv MR. K I N G :

Mr. Griffiths, just help us a little.  You have been
to many football matches I gather? - A. Yes.

You explained how when you first went in through Gate
C you had to go with the crowd, is the way you put
it? - A. Yes.

Do I understand from that, Mr. Griffiths, that was a
situation where you were in a relatively large number
                                                C. E. GRIFFITHS


     of people and you were following the people in front
     and the people behind were following you? - A. Yes.

Q. When you are in a large group of people like that, is
   it your experience that you just go with the crowd?
   The momentum of the crowd carries you along? - A.
   Yes.

Q. I ask you that because we have heard questions being
   put to people about how an individual could come to a
   halt and stop, for example.

     MR. ISAACS:      I am sorry, sir, but what m y learned
friend accused Mr.    Payne of he now does himself.   He had no
need to explain to    this witness why it was he was asking
that question.   He   only has to     ask the question.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am entitled to put to him what his
experience is and to comment on whether or not it is
possible from his experience to do that which I have just
put to him, sir.  That is not rehearsing the evidence.  I
was rehearsing an issue or question which had been put and
he is entitled to answer on it.  I did not give evidence of
what had been said by other witnesses which is very
different.

       THE CORONER:   Ask the question.   Carry on.

Q.         MR. KING:   Mr. Griffiths, I am sorry about
     this.   Let me go back.  I am trying to gain your
     experience as a football fan about being taken along
     with the crowd.   If you are in a crowd of people
     being carried along in the way you describe, is it
     possible for you as an individual, in your
     experience, to come to a halt? - A. No.

Q. In your evidence you talked about how you were being
   pushed when you got on the terrace in the surge? - A.
   Yes.

Q. Obviously you yourself would have people in front of
   you? - A. Yes.

Q. You yourself would be pushing? - A. Pushing people.

Q. You would be pushing the people in front of you,
   would you not? - A. Yes, that is right.

Q. Would you be willingly doing that? - A. No, no.

Q. Would you have a choice about it? - A. No.

Q. When you yourself got on to the terrace and you were
   asked by the learned Coroner what it was like when
                                                C. E. GRIFFITHS


     you first entered, the first words I wrote down you
     said was that it was more chocker than normal, is
     that right? - A. Yes.

Q. I know what you mean by chocker.

       THE CORONER:    I know as well.

Q.        MR. KING:   I never know whether words are the
     same the whole country over.  What do you mean by
     more chocker than normal? - A. More people in there
     than what you would normally expect because I was
     there the year before and there wasn't that many
     there then.

Q. You have the experience of being on terraces at big
   games? - A. Yes.

Q. When you got on the terrace yourself at the beginning
   of it you formed that view? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, do you know this young
man as a matter of interest?

       MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes, we have met.

     THE CORONER:   It does not matter but it makes it
easier for you if you know him.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    We have met since the tragedy.  I am
not sure if m y question is appropriate anyway.  There is a
photograph of John seen alive at 15.03, PR1/10A.

       THE CORONER:    Have we got it as an exhibit yet.

     MRS. McBRIEN:      I think Mr. Catchpole has a
photograph.

     MR. CATCHPOLE: We do not have it as an exhibit but I
am sure we have got enough copies as it was in the
composite bundle.

     MRS. McBRIEN:   In fact, there is a whole series of
them where John was.

       THE CORONER:    We do not need to look at them all.

      MRS. McBRIEN:     No, I will just use that one.

     MR. RUSSELL:  Sir, she says it is in a series and I
see that two frames further on there is an exhibit, C.354,
which is in the bundle.

       THE CORONER:    Have a look at C.354, Mrs. McBrien.
                                                                 45

                                                 C. E. GRIFFITHS



         MR. RUSSELL:   Sir, C.354 is the photograph which Mr.
    Glover identified himself on when he was giving evidence at
B   the Inquests.

         THE CORONER:   Can you see your son on that one, Mrs.
    McBrien?




E




F




G                                    /MRS. McBRIEN:   I have.
                                          C. E. GRIFFITHS


     MRS. McBRIEN:   I have identified John on all of
these photographs but it was not mentioned at the
Preliminary Inquest.   Only one photograph was
mentioned then.

     THE CORONER: That may be so, Mrs. McBrien.   There
may be thousands of photographs.   We do not need to
mention every photograph where something is done,
because the Jury do not need to know.   What they need
to know is one, if it is relevant.   So the fact that
there are more does not matter.

     MRS. McBRIEN:  I thought that perhaps Colin could
identify himself on those photographs because those
are the photographs where John is seen.

      THE CORONER:  That is a good point because it
might help us as to which barrier he and John parted.
What I would like you to do is to pick the latest at
which you can see John and see whether the youngsters
can identify themselves on that.   I am not objecting
to the point.   I think it is quite a good point, in
fact.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:   Sir,   we have got an acetate.

      MISS ADDLEMAN:  Sir, it will take Mrs. McBrien a
minute or two to go through the photographs.    I wonder
if   it would be convenient at this stage for the next
witness to perhaps be called and this young man to
come back shortly after.

     THE CORONER: We could do that.  This is the one
you referred to first of all, is it not, Mrs. McBrien?

     MRS. McBRIEN: Yes.

     THE CORONER: Can you give the hard copy of it to
the youngster and ask him whether he can find himself
on it easily.  (Handed)   It is not easy, I can tell
you.  You see the difficulty is, Mrs. McBrien, that
what he said is that he and John got split up.   So
even if John is there, unless he can find himself, we
do not know whether that was before or after the
split, do you understand?

     MRS. McBRIEN:  Yes.  What Colin said was that it
was about 3.04 when John was moved down the other
barrier.  The photograph I am referring to John is
seen alive one minute after the barrier broke.

     THE CORONER: That may be so.  That is a
possibility.
Can you find yourself on that photograph? - A. No.
                                            C. E. GRIFFITHS


You cannot find yourself? - A. No.

     THE CORONER: What I suggest we do, Mrs. McBrien,
is to allow this youngster to do what Miss Addleman
has suggested, give him the photographs and allow him
to have a real good, hard look, because what we need
is for him to be found on it.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes.

     THE CORONER: If he cannot find himself it does,
not actually help us.
Can you see John on it? Do you want to take time?    It
is easier for you if you take time. - A. Take time.

     THE CORONER: Go and sit down somewhere and we
will take the next witness.  I think that is a good
idea and then we will bring him back and see whether
we can help you. I can see what you want and it is
also a good point.  It is just that he may not be able
to help us.  We do not know.

             CHRISTOPHER JONES Sworn

                  By THE CORONER:

You are Christopher Jones, are you not? - A. Yes.

                             - A. That is correct.

You are about 19 now, are you not? - A. I am still 18.

Still 18? - A. Yes.

I did not look at your date of birth.  Are you still a
student? - A. No, I work for the Council.

On 15th April 1989 you wanted to go and see the semiÂ­
final? - A. Correct.

You went with a whole group of people on a supporters'
coach, is that right? - A. That is correct.

From Flint, I take it? - A. Yes.

What time would you say you left? - A. We left at 11
o'clock from Flint.

What time do you think you got to Sheffield? - A. It
was about 10-past/quarter-past 2.

How sure are you of your time with regard to that? -
A. Very sure.
                                                  C JONES


Fairly sure? - A. Very sure.

Is that because you actually looked at your watch, or
what? - A. Yes.

Good for you!  Two of the people who were on that
coach were Colin Griffiths and John McBrien, is that
right? - A. That is correct.

Did you actually know John? - A. Yes.

He was a friend? - A. Yes.

When you got to Sheffield, we have already heard that
there were two coaches, is that right? - A. Yes, that
is correct.

Was the first one checked? - A. Both coaches were
checked by the Police, everybody for tickets, and it
was said that we were an official supporters' club and
a mark was put on the front of the coach to show that
we had been checked.

I see, so they actually did check your coach? - A.
They did check our coach.

And they checked for tickets as well? - A. Yes.

There wasn't anybody on your coach that did not    have a
ticket? - A. No, nobody is allowed    on the coach if
they have not got a ticket.

So they were satisfied, put the sticker on and you
went through? - A. Yes.

And the other coach did as well? -    A. Yes.

Having got to where you were supposed to park, I take
it you then all walked down towards the ground, is
that right? - A. That is correct.

I think you passed some big stores, did you not,
Halfords and Gateway? - A. Yes.

On the way down were you checked again at all by
anybody? - A. No, not by anybody.

You were not? - A. No.

Did you notice anything at all about other supporters
who were walking down which caused you any concern or
worry? - A. No.  Everybody was walking down in good
spirits.
                                                C JONES


You did see quite a few Police Officers around,
though, when you were walking down, is that right? -
A. Around by the coaches, yes, by the coaches mainly.

What time do you think you actually got to the ground?
- A. It was just, say, after half-past 2.

About half-past 2? - A. Or just thereafter.

What was it like when you got there? - A. It was just
a mass of people.  There were no queues, nothing.

Were the crowds outside the perimeter gates? Do you
know what I mean by the perimeter gates? - A. Yes, the
gates.

The big gates? - A. Yes.  Not at that time, I don't
think they were.
Were the gates open or shut, as far as you can
remember? - A. They were open.

So you managed to get in through those gates at that
point without too much difficulty? - A. Yes. You had
to sort of make your way in through people because it
was nearer the gate.  It was getting to the stage
where it was going to be past the gate.

Was it difficult to get through at that point? - A.
Yes, it was difficult then.

So are you saying that you did not stop behind the
people in front of you, you sort of manoeuvred your
way through them? - A. We sort of went to the side to
see if there was any room near the front, or the
middle, where we could just sort of join in.

So from what I understand you to say, there was a big
crowd there, you have told me that, but you did not
try and stay at the back of the crowd, you actually
tried to get as far forward in the crowd as you could?
- A. We didn't know if the crowd was towards the stand
or the ground part.  We hadn't a clue.

Could you see the signs above the ground? - A. No.

Are you saying that what you were trying to do is to
find out whether you were in the right place? - A.
Exactly, yes.

Did you, in fact, ascertain whether you were in the
right place or not? - A. We couldn't really tell
because it was just a mass of people.  Normally you
can tell by orderly queues, but there was none of
that, so you didn't know where everybody was going.
                                                                 50

                                                           C JONES


         So what happened then, tell me? - A. We went through
         the gates, moved to the side and we quite easily, it
B        wasn't hard, worked our way into the middle and that
         is when it started getting very crowded.

         What happened then? - A. We were moving forward,
         moving back, we were going everywhere, and then our
         friend had an asthma attack and he was screaming for
         us to get him out and we couldn't.  We were trying to
         pick him up and then a few more fans tried to help us
         and then a mounted Police Officer tried to make a bit
         of a way and in the end we got him out.  That was the
         last we saw of him and we were sort of still in it
         then.

         So did you move out with him or not? - A. We just sort
         of got him out and then more fans joined again, so we
         were back in the crowd of people again.

         What happened after that? - A. We were in, say, for
         another five minutes and we had had enough, and we
         moved out to the sides.

         That was John ....? - A. About six of us moved out to
         the sides, excluding the lad who had the asthma
         attack, we lost him.

         Because he was already out? - A. Yes, we had just
         moved down to by the turnstiles but away from it.      We
         weren't bothered if we got in or not.

         Then what happened then? - A. We were by the barrier
         at the end of the turnstile and we were just standing
         there to see what would happen, if the kick-off would
         be delayed.  Then there were a few more fans just came
         by us and a fan got ejected and the gate was opened
         and people just started to go in. As was said before,
         we just got carried in with some of the fans.

    Q.   Did you go in when the fan was   ejected, or on the   next
         opening? - A. The first opening.

    Q.   Your recollection is that you went in the first
         opening? - A. Yes.

    Q.   You are sure about that? - A. Yes, 2.48.

    Q.   Because your friend remembered it the other way round.
         - A. 2.48 we went in.

    Q.   Do you remember the gate shutting? - A. Yes, because I
         looked back to see how many fans, if they were leaving
         it open completely for fans  to come in, and I looked
         back and they were shutting it again.


H
                                               C JONES


What time interval was there between you getting ---
A. You are talking 30 seconds, if that.

Very short? - A. Yes.

You say that you were actually carried in with the
fans? - A. Yes.  It wasn't a big push but you couldn't
stop and say, "No, I'm not going in".  You were just
taken in.

Having got in then, did you go to the loo? - A. Yes,
we all went to the toilet and that is where we got
split up.

Did you all look at these programmes? - A. We sort of
went to the toilet while some of the others read the
programmes and that is how we sort of got lost from
Colin and John.

So it was then that you separated from John and Colin?
- A. Yes.

Did you then come out of the toilet presumably? - A.
Yes.

And you went down the tunnel I take it? - A. Yes.

Can you remember when you went down the tunnel whether
the gate was open again or not, the big gate that you
had just come through? - A. No, I didn't bother
looking back.

Were there crowds going down the tunnel then or not? -
A. I can't recall, but it was quite empty.

It was empty? - A. Yes, everybody just walking down
freely.

I just want to go back one moment to the outside and
just ask you whether you heard any Tannoy messages or
any other messages over loudspeakers? - A. No, not at
all.

Nothing? - A. Nothing.

You said the entry was at 14.48, do you remember?   Is
it because you looked at your watch, or because you
now know that that, in fact, is when the ejection took
place? - A. Because that is when the ejection took
place.

You have learnt that since, you did not know it at the
time of course? - A. No.
                                                 C JONES


I am not blaming you, I just wanted to check whether
you by chance looked.  Which pen did you enter? - A.
Pen 4.

When you first went into the tunnel, you can see the
pitch from the concourse end, did you see it? - A. No,
I couldn't see the pitch.

When you got to the outside of the tunnel to go into
Pen 4 what was that like? - A. There were just bodies
sort of lying in the front of the tunnel.  You
couldn't see the pitch.

You could not see the pitch? - A. No.

How did you get onto Pen 4 then? - A. We had a look
towards Pen 3, we could see it was crowded, so we
decided to have a look at Pen 4 and see if that was
okay and we just moved towards the left a little bit
and stayed towards the back.

Were the players on the pitch at that point? - A. I
don't think so.  I think they were just about to come
on.

You did see the players on the pitch in due course,
did you not? - A. They came on but I can't remember
seeing any of the faces.  I knew that they were on.




                         /Q. Yes, but you knew
                                                    C. JONES


Yes, but you knew they were there? - A. Yes.

So how difficult was it to get on to pen 4 at that point
as far as you were concerned? - A. It was difficult but
we had a stead stop to start with, but we weren't taking
any notice of the pitch because the game hadn't started.

It would be fair to say that once you had taken that
position you would have been satisfied with it? - A. I
would have been satisfied staying there for the match.

At that point the players, although you can't remember
the details, were already on the pitch? -A. Yes.

What happened after that? - A. â€˜Well, the players were on
the pitch and then it started to get a bit more crowded
and we were moving down the step, trying to get back up
the step, and suddenly it became very crowded and before
we knew it we were near the front.

Are you saying that that was the very sudden... - A. That
was the very surge.   We just couldn't get our feet.   We
were down the front before we knew it.

Unexpected as far as you were concerned? -A. Yes.

When you got to the front can you remember what was
happening on the pitch at that point? - A. No, I wasn't
bothered about watching because...

Have you got any further awareness of what was happening
on the pitch at all? - A. No.

At that point you were jolly uncomfortable and in fact
crushed? - A. Yes.

Did you see the perimeter fencing? - A. Yes, because we
were nearly right in front of that.

Were you anywhere near the little gate? - A. We were to
the left of it, say, ten yards.

Could you see it? - A. We started to have a look to see
where we could get out because it started getting very
uncomfortable and we could easily see it.

What was the position with regard to that little gate at
that point? - A. The position I was standing in?

Yes, was it open or shut? - A. The gate was shut.

At that point? - A. Yes.
                                                  C. JONES


When you said you were looking around to get out, were
you talking to your friends at that time about it, or
not? - A. There were quite a few people around us, little
children.   They started screaming and one of my friends
said a lad had broken his ankle by the side of us, so we
started shouting for the gate to be opened, to a
Policewoman and all she kept repeating was, "I haven't
got a key."

What did she look like, can you remember? - A. I can't
remember.

Did you see any Policemen? -A. Yes, but I wouldn't know
what they looked like, they were walking up and down.

You are saying you were shouting to a Policewoman.     She
said she didn t have a key.    How long did that go on
for? - A. I don't know the time length.    It was short, a
couple of minutes I would say.

What happened then? - A. I thought the gates opened just
with the pressure but by all accounts the gate was
opened.

But you didn't see it? - A. I didn't see the gate get
opened, no.

Did you get through   the gate? - A. Yes.

Did you see a Policewoman there when you got out? - A.
No, because we sort of scrambled out of the gate.

So you don't know whether there was a Policewoman there
then? - A. No.

You certainly don't know... - A. No, we didn't take any
notice.   There was   a Policeman who tried toferry us
away to another pen   because one of my friends did get
moved to another pen, but we said, "No, there are people
in there getting crushed, little kids", and we tried to
get on the fence to help.

You are saying the Police Officer was trying to move you
further out of the way? - A. Yes.

You decided to stay because you wanted to help? - A. Yes.

You are quite sure about the business with the key
because as far as I know there were no keys to those
gates.   Are you sure that that is what she said? - A.
That is what she shouted back.

Could you hear it? - A. Yes.
                                                 C. JONES


How close to her were you? - A. We weren't far from the
front because we said to each other that was disgusting,
they hadn't got a key to open it.   That was our initial
reaction because we did discuss it.   We mentioned it to
each other.

Although you were being crushed and you were shouting and
saying, "Open the gate , you were still in a position to
converse with your friends at that point? - A. Well, we
were sort of saying, "They haven't got a key.   We can't
get out."   That is what we said to each other.

At some point you saw some Police Officers climbing into
the pen? - A. Yes, they did start to move into the pen.

When was that?   Were you already out by then? - A. We
were already out, yes.

You don't know what was happening on the field at that
point? - A. No, I didn't take any interest in it.

So you can't say when that was? - A. No.

I want you to show us the position where you were - your
first position. (The witness marked the plan)

     MR. BEECHEY:   That is C.418, sir.

             Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE;

Can you open the black folder in front of you and find
277?   I just want to see if we can fix, from your
evidence, the time at which these various things
happened.   At point 1 on your plan, which is on the
screen behind you, that is the position which you took up
to watch the game? - A. That is correct.

If nothing else had happened that is where you were
expecting... - A. We would have stayed there.   We were
comfortable.

At that time the players were on the field? -A. Yes.

Just look down at the timing under "Internal Column", you
will see about two-thirds down "14:54:08 Liverpool team
on to the pitch".   Can you see that? - A. Yes.

Then the next one "14:55:22 Nottingham Forest team on to
the pitch"? - A. Yes.

If that is correct then you are at position 1 at some
time after 14.54 or 14.55.  Were both teams out? - A. I
don't know about the Nots. Forest team because the
Liverpool team were down by the Leppings Lane end.
                                                 C. JONES


So it is just that team you saw? - A. Yes.

So you are there sometime after 14.54, that is six
minutes to three? -A. Yes.

Comfortable? - A. Pretty Comfortable anyway.

Nothing out of the ordinary for abig match? -A. It was
just like a normal Derby match at Anfield.

The next thing we definitely know from your evidence is
that you saw some time later that the gate was in fact
open? - A. That's correct.

In between that time, "Liverpool team on to the pitch"
and gate 4 opened, you had been pushed down from position
1 to position 2? - A. That's correct.

You can see where gate 4 is.   Look down "Internal
Column" until you get to 14:59:04. - A. Yes.

That is one minute to three.    So it looks as though you
were pushed down then at some time between six minutes to
and one minute to three? - A. That's correct.

            Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

Christopher, you have told us when you went in through
the big gate, that is Gate C as we have been told, you
went in with the rest of the crowd and got carried in? -
A. That is correct.

But you were able to get out of that crowd in order to gÂ°
to the toilet and your friends to go to the toilet and
get a programme? - A. Yes.

             Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

What was it about pen 3, as you looked to pen 3 when you
entered the terrace, that you said you didn't want to go
into that pen? - A. You could see it was a bit more
crowded towards the back as well.

You say when you got on to pen 4 and position 1 it was
pretty comfortable, "like a Derby match at Anfield".
Tell us, what is it like at a Derby match at Anfield in
terms of the amount of space you have between you and the
person next to you? - A. We always stand towards the
middle of the Kop and it can be expected that you are
going to be pushed and that is how it was.

In other words, in position 1, I just want to know
factually because you are a football supporter and you
know what it is like.   What is it like, even though you
                                                  C. JONES


regard it as normal, in that position 1, in terms of how
close you are to the people around you?   Do you have a
large space between you and the man in front? - A. No,
you are very close to everybody there.

Are you touching each other? - A. Yes.

Shoulder to shoulder? - A. Yes.

Front to back? - A. In most cases, yes.  It depends if
there is a push, say, from higher up, because of the
level of the steps.

That was the position you found yourself in when you
entered on the terrace? - A. Yes.

Tell me this - I want to go ahead if I may - when you
spoke about that lady Police Officer and people were
shouting for the gate to be opened and you heard the
answer she gave, whatever her words were, obviously from
the answer you think she gave she obviously understood
from what you could tell what had been said to her? - A.
Yes.

Whether she had a key or not, she clearly was saying
something about the gate and that she wasn't going to
open the gate? -A. That's correct.

At the time that people were shouting for the gate to be
opened, what was the state of the people around you?
What was the condition of the people? - A. A lot of them
were getting close.   There were little children.    They
were standing at the front against the fence and they
were the worse because their faces were starting to go
into the fence, the perimeter fence.

Their faces were actually touching... - A. Against the
fence, yes.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   I haven't any questions but again I
am wondering if the photographs would help to get the
times absolutely spot on.

     THE CORONER:   I don't think we need it in this case
because he has told us where he was when the players were
on the pitch and he has told us where he was when he was
pushed.   He also said he saw the gate open and we know
more or less when certainly one opening was.   I don't
see what else we can get from him on that.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   He did identify himself on some
photographs.   I showed him some photographs actually.
                                                    C. JONES


     THE CORONER:   What is it you are trying to
established, Mrs. McBrien?   What is it you want him to
tell us that he hasn't told us already?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   I just thought it would be helpful,
but if you don't think it will be.

     THE CORONER:    I am asking you to explain it to me
because I may not have understood the point you are
trying to establish.

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   I just wondered if you needed this
extra information.

     THE CORONER:   What time have you got on the
photograph where he has identified himself?

     MRS. MCBRIEN:   Well, I am not sure, but he has
looked at these photographs and he did...

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Catchpole, could you just look at
that photograph and tell me the time?   Is that the one -
which one are you looking at?




            MRS. MCBRIEN:   Well, they were the
                                                         59

                                                   C. JONES


        MRS. McBRIEN:   They were the earlier ones and
   they are all timed at 15.02, I think.

        MR. CATCHPOLE:   I think they are all the series
   PR1/10A, they are all around 15.02, 15.03.

        THE CORONER:    Is he within our without the pen at
   that time?

        MR. CATCHPOLE:   The positions indicated would
   seem to suggest he is towards the front of the pen.

        THE CORONER:   I don't think that there is any
   dispute because he has told us that he was at the front
   of the pen, presumably before 14.59, so the fact that
   he is there later does not surprise me and it does not
   help us.  If you could have shown a picture of him, if
   there was a picture of him, at say 14.55 in that
   position then that would be a different matter, but to
   show pictures which are after the time when he says
   this does not help us.  Do you see what I am saying?

        MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes.

        THE CORONER:   Because it is just confirming that
   he is right.  I don't see any advantage in it, but we
   are going to break for lunch in a minute and if you
   want to think about it and tell me again after lunch, I
   don't want to stop you unnecessarily but nor do I want
   us to do things which don't help us.

        MRS. McBRIEN:   Thank you.

        THE CORONER:    I want to just ask him two things.

                  Further by THE CORONER

0. I just want to go back to this Policewoman.   The reason
   why I ask is because we do know there was a Policewoman
   there.  We have seen her, she assisted with opening the
   gate, but as far as I know there was no other
   Policewoman.  What makes you say there was a
   Policewoman there? - A. We can remember it, because we
   have talked about it and we can remember shouting to a
   Policewoman.  There was a woman shouting back to us.

Q. You are absolutely sure in your memory? - A. Yes.

0. You are clear about that? - A. Yes.

        THE CORONER:    Miss Addleman, go ahead.
                                                            60

                                                       C. JONES


                 Cross-Examined by MISS ADDLEMAN

       When you were shouting to this lady Police Officer,
       other people around you were also shouting?  Noise was
B      emanating from the pen, is that correct? - A. Yes,
       people shouting for the gate to be opened.

    Q. Yes, people around you? - A. Yes.

    Q. Was there further noise from further back and
       generally? - A. We could not really make it out at all.

    Q. You couldn't make it out? - A. You couldn't say if they
       were shouting for the gate to be opened.

    Q. So I take it right, do I, that you were shouting for
       the gate to be opened against the general noise in the
       stadium? - A. Yes.

    0. How far away was the lady Police Officer from you? - A.
       I wouldn't know the exact distance.  It wasn't very
       far, shouting distance.  You could shout to her.
D
       Was she directly in front - whatever the distance was
       that you were back, but was she directly in front, or
       to the right or left? - A. To the right of us.

    Q. To the right.   Do you know how far to the right? - A.
       No.

    0 . So, so far as distances are concerned you really cannot
        give us a good idea? - A. From where I was, where I
        have marked on the diagram, position 2, from there to
        the gate really.

    Q. Was she to the right of that? - A. She was sort of in
       line with the gate, yes.

    Q. Do you know how far back on the track she was, on the
       perimeter track? - A. No.

    Q. You have mentioned that you, or friends, were remarking
       to each other about the fact that there was no key? -
       A. Yes.

       I just want to explore this a little.   Clearly you feel
       that the word key was mentioned in some context or
       another? - A. We did mention it.  The reply we could
       have got was just that she didn't have a key, or you
       didn't need a key to open the gate.   That was the reply
       we got.

    0. Sorry, could you repeat that for me?  It is a little
       difficult to hear. - A. The reply we may have got from




H
                                                                 61

                                                          C. JONES


         the Policewoman when she said she didn't have a key was
         maybe that she didn't need a key to open the gate, she
         didn't actually have a key.

B   Q. I see.  Do you mean that it could have been that the
       Police lady was saying, "I don't need a key"? - A.
       Well, she was saying, "I haven't got a key", yes.

    Q.   I am sorry,  can I just go back a bit? You have just
         said something about a key not being needed? - A. Yes.

    0. Could that have come from the lady Police Officer? - A.
       She did say that, yes.

    0.   She did say   that? - A. Yes.

    Q.   Then others  around you were talking about that? - A.   My
         friends, we were just frustrated really.

    0. Clearly the predominant thought in your mind at that
       time was to get out? - A. Yes, and to help all the
       children in front of us.
D
                         Further by T H E COPvONER

    0. One final question from me.  You could see the children
       in front, you say, but you were behind them, is that
       right? - A. We were behind them, yes.

    Q. So could you just see the backs of their heads? - A.
       You could see from side on that their faces were
       actually touching the fence.

              THE CORONER:   Anybody else? What I suggest we
         do, because I am very reluctant not to let Mrs. McBrien
         have her photographs if they are going to be helpful,
         is if you could pick the one that you want this young
         man to look at, and first of all let's see whether he
         can find -- we can do this over the lunch hour, or he
         can do it. Then immediately after lunch we will take a
         decision.  Perhaps you could convey to my Officer
         whether he has found anything which might be of any use
         or relevance to us, and if need be we will just get him
         to tell us that.  Is that fair?

              MRS. McBRIEN:    Yes.

              THE CORONER:     I understand that, in fact, Colin
         has not found himself   and he has not found John on any
         of the photos, but I don't mind, because it is very
         difficult to hunt round, if he has another go over the
         lunch hour as well, to see whether he can do it.    If he
         can then again wewill do    it the same, but if he can't
         then we must take   it, but I will call him back because




H
                                                C. JONES


there may be one or two other things you do want to ask
Colin, I don't know.  Is that fair?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   Yes, thank you   very   much.

     THE CORONER:    We will stop for lunch then.  Come
back at 2 o'clock, and although I don't normally like
witnesses talking about the evidence I think in this
particular instance I don't object to either of you
seeing Mrs. McBrien and looking at the photographs with
her to see whether she can help you, because she may be
able to recognise John better than you can.   In the
end, can I just say this, that is supposed to be an
aid.  You must decide for yourselves whether you can
see yourself.   If you don't recognise him or yourself
you must   say so, because it is what you are telling us
not what   she is.   All right? We do want    to   notbe
unhelpful.

     MISS ADDLEMAN:   Sir, it just occurs to me whether
there would be any real objection from anybody in Mrs.
McBrien pointing out to the witness where she thinks
John is on the photographs?

      THE CORONER:   This is what, in fact, I have in
mind.   That is what she should do.  She should say,
"This, I think, is John", and then he can look because
then he knows where to look and he can either say he
agrees or disagrees, but what I am really interested in
is whether he can find himself, as opposed to John,
because that is, I think, the point, isn't it.   I take
it nobody is objecting to that? No. Thank you very
much indeed.

               (Luncheon Adjournment)
                                               C. E. GRIFFITHS
                                                      C. JONES


                COLIN EDWARD GRIFFITHS Recalled

                    Further bv THE CORONER:

Q. Mr. Griffiths, I think you have had a look at the
   photographs.  Did you find yourself in the end? - A.
   I didn't, no.

Q. You could not find yourself? - A. No.

Q. As a matter of interest did you find Jonathan? - A.
   No, I never.

     THE CORONER:   We cannot take the matter further but
is there anything else you wanted to ask this young man?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   No, thank you.  I would just say thank
you for coming today to give your evidence, Colin.

Q.        THE CORONER:   I know that you have got a sore
     mouth today? - A. Yes.

Q. So it is double thank you? - A. All right, thank you.

                  CHRISTOPHER JONES Recalled

                    Further bv THE CORONER:

Q. With you we have had slightly better good fortune,
   have we not, with regard to a photograph? - A. Yes.

Q. C.367.   Would you open that book? This is Exhibit
   367.   Is that the one you looked at? - A. Yes.

Q. Can you actually see yourself on that one? - A. I am
   not sure if it is the back of me but Carl, one of the
   boys that was with us, he is standing on the fence.

Q. Come over and show us on the big screen? - A. There
   is Carl ( indicating\.

Q. So he is already on the outside? - A. Yes, and I am
   not sure if that is me next to him.  I wouldn't like
   to say if it was me.

Q. I could not hear that? - A. I was always by the side
   of him.

Q. That means you were already outside, does it not? -
   A. Yes.

Q. We know what time this photograph, 14.59.  Come over
   here.  It is timed 14.59 and, in fact, there is a
                                                C. E. GRIFFITHS
                                                       C. JONES


   mistake on the clock because it is three o'clock,
   15.00.  Did you and your friend come out together? -
   A. He was a couple of people in front of me.

Q. The time interval, even if that is not you, you are
   certain about your friend? - A. Yes, that is Carl,
   yes.  There was another photo, I am not sure what
   number, which does show Carl and the side of me.

Q. Outside or inside? - A. Outside.

Q. Who showed it to you?     Mrs. McBrien? - A. Yes.

        THE CORONER:   What number was it, Mrs. McBrien?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   I do not know, I am afraid, but it
will be one of that series of photographs.

        THE CORONER:   I just want to know the time of it.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:     I think that photograph is the first
in the series.

        THE CORONER:   So all the others would be after.

Q. We are only interested in the first one because if
   you were out at 14.59 you must have been out at
   15.05? - A. Yes.

Q. Because you did not go back in, did you? - A. No.

     THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, is there anything else
you wanted to ask him?

     MRS. McBRIEN:   No, thank you.  I am sorry you both
had to be delayed just because of the photographs.  I hope
you do not mind but thank you very much for coming today.

     THE CORONER:   Does anybody else want to ask any
questions arising out of the timing? Just for the record,
he identified his friend Carl adjacent to the gate on the
right hand side and himself possibly just a little bit
beyond it.

                   ANTHONY FRANCIS OWEN Sworn

                         Bv THE CORONER:

Q. You are Anthony Francis Owen? - A. Yes.

Q. Of                             Liverpool? - A. Yes.

Q. You were a student at the time.    Are you still one? -
   A. Yes, I am still a student.
Q. You had a friend called Gary Church, that is right,
   is it not? - A. Yes.

Q. You no doubt had other friends but he was one of
   them? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:    Is Mr. Church somewhere in the room?
Yes.  Mr. Church, I know you are not represented by Mr.
King and so when I am finished with this young man I will
give you the opportunity to ask any relevant or proper
questions as may be appropriate.   If you do want to ask any
questions I will have to ask you to come to the front so
that we can hear you.

Q. You were intending to come to the football match on
   the 15th April 1989, is that right? - A. Yes.

Q. You were coming with Gary and I think another friend,
   Andrew, I believe.  Is that right? - A. Yes, there
   was about twelve of us in a minibus.

Q. Was it a private hire minibus that you were
   travelling in? - A. Yes.

Q. It was not an official party.  It was a party which
   you had arranged amongst yourselves, that is right,
   is it not? - A. Yes.

Q. Do you recollect what time you left about? - A. Half
   eleven to quarter to twelve.

Q. Which way did you come, via the motorway or did you
   come across the passes? - A. The motorway.

Q. Were you, in fact, stopped by the Police en route to
   Sheffield? - A. Yes.

Q. How many times? - A. Twice.

Q. What did they do on each occasion? - A. Checking if
   we all had tickets and if we had any drink on the
   van.

Q. They checked for those two things? - A. Yes.

Q. As a matter of interest did you all have tickets? -
   A. Yes.

Q. So there were no problems? - A. No.

Q. Did you have any drink on the van either? - A. No,
   not when we saw the Police.

Q. It had all gone. What time did you arrive in
   Sheffield about? - A. Can't recall the exact time.     I
   think we parked up about quarter past two.
A
                                                                66
                                                        A. F. OWEN


    Q. You said in your statement about ten past two and so
       that is pretty close.  I think you parked near a pub
       called the Railway? - A. Yes.

B   Q. That was just because it was convenient to park
       there.  Did you go into it as a matter of interest? -
       A. No, it was shut.

    Q. Then you went to the ground and it took you about ten
       minutes or so to walk, is that right? - A. Probably,
       yes.

    Q. You and Gary Church had standing tickets, is that
       right? - A. Yes.

    Q. Another friend you met up with, James Thomas I think,
       he also had a standing ticket but the rest of them
       went to different parts? - A. No, I can't recall how
       many exactly but there was quite a few of us standing
       up.

    Q. So there was still a group of you? - A. Yes.
D
    Q. What time did you arrive at Leppings Lane? - A. About
       twenty five past two.

    Q. What was it like? - A. It was busy.

    Q. Did you enter through a turnstile or through a
       gate? - A. Turnstile.

    Q. How long did it take you to get from when you got to
       the outer part of the ground to getting through the
       turnstile, would you say? - A. A few minutes.  There
       was a crowd outside. There was no queu es . It was
       just pushing.

    Q. When there was this crowd outside, are you saying
       that you, in fact, pushed your way through it? - A.
       No, we just went with the flow of the crowd.

    Q. So you did not push your way through? - A. No.

    Q. How many minutes did it take you to get through? - A.
       Four, maybe five.

    Q. You say all the crowd were ahead of you.  Where was
       the crowd then when you joined it? - A. How do you
       mean?

    Q. How far out was it? Was it beyond the outer
       perimeter gates? - A. No.

    Q. Was it within the perimeter gates? - A. Yes.




H
A
                                                               67
                                                       A. F. OWEN

    Q. Do you know what I mean by the perimeter gates? - A.
       Yes.

    Q. Within the perimeter gates? - A. Yes.

B   Q. Are you telling me that you got in within four or
       five minutes of joining the back of the crowd and
       that you did not push through it? - A. No.

    Q. Pardon? - A. I didn't push anyone out of the way or
       anything like that.

    Q. Does that mean that all the crowd ahead of you had
       also got through in that period of time? - A. Not
       necessarily, no.  I wasn't paying any attention to
       anyone else in the crowd.

    Q. I am not trying to catch you out in any way? - A. I
       know, y e s .

    Q. It is a point which we need to sort out.  Here was a
       group of young men.  You tell me you joined a crowd
       which had no queues.  You did no pushing.  You stayed
D      at the back and you managed to get through in four or
       five minutes, right? - A. Yes.

    Q. It must follow, as night follows day, that the people
       ahead of you if you did not push through them had
       also got through the turnstile, is that right? - A.
       Yes, they must have done.

    Q. But you do not actually know? - A. Some of the
       turnstiles were moving quicker than others, weren't
       they?

    Q. A section of the crowd which was immediately ahead of
       you, that group of people, are you saying that that
       section got through ahead of you? - A. Yes.

    Q. In that period of time.  Do you know which turnstile
       you went through? - A. No, I can't recall that.

    Q. Was it at the extremes of the bank or was it more in
       the middle? - A. I can't recall.

    Q. Whilst you were making your way through, were you
       being crushed in that area, squashed, or
       uncomfortable in any way? - A. There was pushing,
       yes, but it wasn't uncomfortable.

    Q. It was not uncomfortable,   You could put up with
       it? - A. I am used to it.




H
                                              A. F. OWEN


Did you   see anybody in distress in thatarea? - A. No.

Did you   see a Land Rover by any chance? - A. No.

And you did not hear any Tannoys either? - A. No.

Did you see at any point a big gate open? - A. None
whatsoever.

You did not? - A. No.

I know you went through the turnstile, so you did not
go through it yourself, but I am trying to find out
whether you saw it open? - A. No, I didn't.

Actually just have a look at the model.  Can you just
walk to it and just see whether you can pick out the
bank of turnstiles that you went through.    I am not
asking you to pick out the actual turnstile.    Can you
work it out? - A. C-C I think it was.

Pardon? - A. No, B-B.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:     A to G, sir.

     THE CORONER: I just wanted to be sure we were in
the right area.
In your statement you actually refer to a specific
turnstile, but can you remember that now? - A. No, I
can't.

If I show it to you, just have a little peep and see
whether it brings it back. If it does not, just say,
"I don't remember".  Do you see where my thumb is,
just underneath that yellow mark?  (Handed to witness)
Does it bring it back at all or not? - A. Yes.

So what would you tell me now? - A. It was the far one
on the right as you go in. As you are looking towards
the turnstiles, it would be the one on your right.

In fact, the statement says C, but that would be G.
It may be a typographical error.  So right at the
right-hand margin? - A. Yes.

As far as you can remember? - A. Yes.

It does not really matter very much.    You went down
the tunnel, is that right? - A. Yes.

Had you been to the ground before? - A. Yes, the year
before.
                                               A. F. OWEN


Did you go down the tunnel the last year as well? - A.
Yes.

You like standing behind the goal, I take it. - A. It
is the way, the main route into the ground, isn't it,
as you come through the turnstile?
I am not arguing about that.  I am just asking you
whether you like to stand behind the goal? - A. Yes.

You do? - A. Yes.

Why not?  If I was your ageI probably would as well.
So you went down the tunnel.  Was it clear, you could
get through quite easily? - A. Yes.

Do you remember which way you went, left or right? -
A. Right.

How many of you were still together at that point? -
A. I can't recall.  It was over five.  There were more
than five of us.

You have told me that it was fairly easy to go through
the tunnel, but was it empty or were there people
going down? - A. There were people going down.

But you had no difficulty? - A. No.

You were not being pushed or   had tosqueeze past them
or anything like that? - A. No.

Having got into the right-hand pen, did you know that
it was penned off at that point? You had been there
last year. Could you remember from last year? - A. How
do you mean?

That they had those radial fences? - A. Yes.

You knew that? - A. Yes.

Was it the same pen that you went into last year? - A.
Yes.

So having got in on this occasion what did you decide
to do? - A. We initially went and we stood towards the
back, as you are coming through the tunnel just a bit
to the right, and it was a bit crowded round there so
we moved further to the right and then we ended up at
the front by the gate - well, I did anyway.

You ended up where? - A. At the front by Gate 3.

So what you are saying is you came in and turned
right? - A. Yes.
                                               A. F. OWEN


Wanting to stand near the back? - A. Yes.

That became a bit crowded for you? - A. Yes.

So you then moved further to the right, did you? - A.
Yes, down and to the right.

You did not go further back? - A. No.

You then finished up near the gate at the front? - A.
Yes, I did anyway.

Did you lose Gary then at some point? - A. Yes.

When did you lose him? - A. When we first went in we
stood at the back and the second point where we stood,
I lost him there.

Did you stop at the back in two positions then? - A.
No.  When we went in we stood at the back, when we
first went in, and then we moved down a bit to the
right behind Gate 3, and as we were stood there, then
I ended up at the front of Gate 3.

I see.  So first of all at the back, then forward but
still within the pen? - A. Yes.

Then at some point you finished up right at Gate 3? -
A. Yes.

It was the second position that you lost Gary? - A.
Yes.

I want you to tell me when you first came in then and
you were up near the back, as you put it, what was
happening on the pitch? - A. I can't recall.  I think
the players might have been out.

But would I be right in thinking that they were not
out pre-match, they were out just kicking the ball
around, or were they already out ready for kick-off?
Do you understand the difference in what I am asking
you?
A. Yes, I know what you mean.  I can't recall.

At that point how was it in that pen when you were up
at the back there before you moved further down? - A.
It was crowded.  When you go to a semi you expect it
to be tighter than most matches, but it was tighter
than you would expect it to be.

Did you see a beach ball being knocked about? - A.
Yes, we were messing about with it.
                                            A. F. OWEN


Where were you when that beach ball was being messed
around with? - A. In the second position I have
explained to you.

So at that point are you then saying that you were
uncomfortable before the beach ball was being played
about with? - A. Yes, it was uncomfortable.

More uncomfortable than you had been before or not?
When I say "before", I mean another big match.  I take
it you go to big matches? - A. You are uncomfortable
at most big matches anyway.

It is just a price you pay in addition to the cost of
the ticket for going? - A. Yes.

How did you feel when you were in the second position
playing around with the beach ball? - A. When I said
they were playing around with it, I didn't mean to say


I don't mean playing - when the beach ball was being
knocked about? - A. It was still uncomfortable.

Were you concerned for yourself at that stage? - A.
The thought hadn't crossed my mind.  It wasn't much
longer after that when I turned round to a couple of
the others and said, "Move down towards the front a
bit".

So you were trying to move even further forward? - A.
Yes.

Was that because you could see space in front of you
or what? - A. No.  Before when we have been to the
match, because you have got the big fences in front of
you there's not that many people that stand directly
behind them anyway because the view is not too good,
so there is normally a bit of space there.

So you were anticipating a bit more space, in fact, at
the front? - A. Yes.

Were you able to make your own way, then, to the third
position that you took up? - A. How do you mean by
making my own way?

You said it was shortly after that that you said to
your brother, "Let's move forward even further towards
the fence"? - A. Yes, we moved forward but you had to
push people out of the way.

But you could do that? - A. Yes.
                                            A. F. OWEN


In other words, you were making your way forward, you
were not being propelled forward, that is what I am
trying to find out? - A. Not that I can recall, no.




                         /Q.   Can you remember
                                                     A. F. OWEN


Q# Can you remember any surges? - A. Only when I was right
   at the front by the gate.

Q.    Were you right hard against the fence or were there
     people between you and the fence, or the gate,if you
     wish? - A, I was right next to the gate.    Right up
     against the fence.

Q. There is a little platform there.     Were you on that
   platform? - A. No.

Q. So you were below it? - A. Yes.

Q. You had got to that position.   What was happening on the
   pitch at that point, if anything? - A. I can t remember.

Q. Did you see the game kick-off at all? - A. No, that was
   the last thing on my mind at the time.

Q.    Describe the surges to me? - A. You were just stood at
     the fence.    You couldn't move hardly.   You were lucky
     to move.

Q. You don't know when they occurred? -A. I don't know the
   exact time, no.

Q. Did you see any part of the game? - A. Only when I got
   out on to the pitch.

Q. I am going to show you another page.   Look at the first
   few lines on this page.   Read it to yourself.  Does that
   help you in any way? - A. Yes.

Q. You    refer to a surge there? - A. Yes.

Q. Which you have already told    me about?    -    A. Yes.

Q. You    are relating it to... - A. Before    the kick-off.

Q. Can   you help me about that? Does that bring it back in
   any way or do you still feel you can't remember anything
   about the match? - A. No, not at all.

Q. Did you hear people shouting and screaming? - A. Yes.

Q. You were near the gate? - A. Yes.

Q. Did you see it being opened? - A. I remember it got
   opened.   A few people spilled out and then it got shut
   again.

Q. What happened then? - A. I wasn't looking closely at the
   gate at the time but then a minute or so later it opened
   again.
                                                A. F. OWEN


Did you see it shut after that? - A. No, because the
second time it opened I got out on to the pitch.

You got out? - A. Yes.

You didn't manage to get out the first time? - A. No, the
second time.

Fortunately you survived but unfortunately Gary didn't.
Can you show us on a plan where you were? - A. At what
point in time?

I want you to show me when you first came in and when you
were at the back...   In fact the three positions you
have mentioned.   Mark them 1, 2 and 3.   (The witness
marked the plan)

     MRS. PERKINS.-    C.419.

             Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:

I have only one question.  Did you    say when you got out
of the gate the game was then still   in play? - A. Yes, it
was still in play.

              Cross-Examined by MR. KING?

Mr. Owen, you are obviously used to being uncomfortable
at big matches, you have told us that? - A. Yes.

You said that at a semi-final you expect it to be tight
but the point you were in at the back in position 1 you
said it was tighter than what you expected it to be? - A.
Yes.

If you are used to being uncomfortable then, I wonder if
you could put more detail on that.    I must have been
very tight because obviously you are the sort of person
who can put up with quite alot. - A. It was tight, but I
didn't expect it to be that tight.     That is why we
moved.    We thought it was because we were directly
behind the goal in that position.    We thought it would
be a bit easier on ourselves if we moved to a different
position.

     MR. PAYNE:   Were you going to give Mr. Church the
opportunity to ask questions?

    THE CORONER:      Yes.

             Cross-Examined by MR. CHURCH:

I take it you got into the ground at half past two in pen
3? - A. Yes, about that time.
                                                 A. F. OWEN


What time were you in position 2, when you moved down to
position 2? - A. Ten to three - between quarter to and
ten to three.

Did you have a surge down, because that is when you
missed Gary?

     THE CORONER:     I am sorry, I couldn't hear you.

Was that when Gary strayed away from you, or was pushed
away from you in the first surge? - A. Everyone was stood
together in position 2.

You were stood together in position 2? - A. Yes, and then
I moved to position 3 and that is when I lost Gary.

Have you any idea of the time.   We have got the time,
roughly, you were in at half past.   You went to the pen
at roughly 2.25.   You were in position 1 at 2.30.   You
moved down to position 2. Would that be ten minutes,
quarter of an hour? - A. I can remember being in position
3 around five to three.   That is the time...

     THE CORONER:   Would you give the answer again?     I
just didn't hear what you said.

     MR. CHURCH:   To put it as clearly as I can.   In
position 2 you have no idea of the time when Gary strayed
from you? - A. It would have been between ten to three
and five to three and that is the time I moved down to
position 3.

When you were in position 2 did you see anything of what
you imagined a barrier going? - A. No, none whatsoever.

As far as you were concerned the barrier was still
intact? - A. Yes, it was still intact.

So Gary just strayed from you with the pushing of the
crowd? - A. Yes.

     THE CORONER:      Mr. Church, just stay there.  I will
just see whether we   can get the timings.   You say you
moved from position   2 to position 3 at ten to or five to
three.   What makes   you so confident that that was the
time? - A. That was   just the time I can recall on the
day.

Did you look at your watch? - A. No.   Well, I knew I got
out on to the pitch just after the kick-off and I knew I
was in position 3 for about five minutes.
e

                                                                     76

                                                           A.   F . OWEN


        Q. I see.    So you are working it backwards? - A. Yes.

                  THE CORONER:   Does that help you in any way, Mr.
             Church?
    B
                  MR. CHURCH:   It doesn't really help me because,
             as I say, I would like to know that time he strayed
             from Gary in position 2, because Gary, on the plan, is
             behind the barrier that gave way.

                  THE CORONER:   I will ask him another couple of
             questions:

        Q. Do you remember the beach ball? - A. Yes.

        Q. You were in position 2 when that was being played about
           with? - A. Yes.

        Q. Can you remember the teams being announced? - A. No, I
           c a n 't .

        Q. You can't remember that.  I don't mean coming onto the
    D      pitch but being announced over the tannoy? - A. No.   I
           think the Liverpool team was on the pitch when I left
           position 2.

        0. We know exactly what time that is - I will tell you
           what it is in a moment, Mr. Church.  How confident are
           you that that is when you left position 2? - A. Fairly
           confident.

                  THE CORONER:   The time, Mr. Church, is actually
             14.54 and a few seconds, when the Liverpool team came
             out onto the pitch:

        Q. But you don't recollect them coming out, do you? - A. I
           can't, no.

                  THE CORONER:   If that is right, of course, that
             does give you a time when he was ....

        Q.        MR. CHURCH:   So Gary strayed away from you? You
             didn't see Gary after that, did you? - A. No, not at
             all.

                  THE CORONER:   It is very difficult, Mr. Church,
             for the witnesses because, of course, as he rightly
             said, in that situation you don't spend your time
             looking at the watch.

                  MR. CHURCH:   All   right.  It was just relating to
             the barriers, when the barrier gave way Gary went
             under.




    H
                                               A. F. OWEN


     THE CORONER:   Yes.   Anybody else?   Mr. Payne, was
there anything?

            Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE

Is this your evidence, that you made your way from
position 2 to position 3 because you wanted to do that?
- A. Well, I didn't want to move from position 2 to
position 3, because when I was stood in position 2 I
had a better view of the pitch, but I had to because
position 2 was too crowded for me.

But you wanted to get a better position so you decided
that you would go down to position 3 to get a better
view?

     THE CORONER:   No, he didn't say a better view, he
said that the view is worse but he thought it would be
less crowded.

     MR. PAYNE:    Quite.  You didn't want in the first
place to go down to position 3, because in the first
place it does not give you a very good view, is that
right? - A. At the time I was getting pushed, I was
getting hurt.   I didn't want to get hurt.  I would
rather have a worse view of the match and stood in a
fair bit of comfort than stood back in position 2.

Quite, I understand that, so it was for that reason
that you decided yourself - I am not criticising you at
all, it was a sensible thing to do - you decided
yourself to move down from position 2 to the worse
position of 3, for viewing I mean, is that right? - A.
Could you repeat that again?

Yes.  You did not want to go down to position 3 in the
first place? - A. I wanted to go down to position 3 for
the reasons I have just explained to you.

To avoid the crush? - A. Yes.

Then when you decided to do that to avoid the crush you
were able to make your way down from position 2 to
position 3? - A. Obviously, otherwise I would not have
been there.

Quite, but this is important from our point of view, to
find out how bad the crush was at that time, and the
time that you .... - A. It was obviously pretty bad at
position 2 otherwise I wouldn't have moved from
position 2.

Certainly, quite.  That is why you decided to go down
to position 3 and this was at a time when the Liverpool
                                                 J.   L.   KENWORTHY


team had come out onto the pitch? - A. As I can recall,
yes.

                   Cross-Examined by MR. KING

Q.   At position 2 things were so bad in terms of your own
     comfort, pushing and crushing, that you wanted to
     leave, is that the position? - A. Yes.

          THE CORONER:   That was my understanding anyway.
     Thank you very much indeed.

              JASON LEE KENWORTHY Called (Sworn)

                         By THE CORONER

Q.   Good afternoon.   Now, you are Jason Lee Kenworthy,       is
     that right? - A. That is right.

0. Is it still                       - A. Yes.

Q. In            - A. Yes, that's right.

Q. Merseyside, and you worked, and perhaps still are a
   plumber's mate, would that be right? - A. That is
   right.

0. You are also a Liverpool supporter, I assume? - A. That
   is right.

Q. You decided to come to this match on 15th April 1989,
   is that right? - A. That is right.

Q.   How did you travel, by car? - A. That    is right, yes.

Q.   You went actually with Mr. Devonside and his son,
     Christopher, is that right? - A. That  is right.

Q.    And there were a couple of other lads   as well? - A.
     That is right.

Q. It is right that all of you had tickets? - A. That is
   correct.

Q. You left about 10.30, I think, in the morning, is that
   right? - A. As far as I recall, yes.

Q. You arrived in Sheffield relatively early, about what
   time? - A. I would say about half-past-1.

Q. Mr. Devonside having parked his car you all got out,
   and did you then start walking slowly towards the
   ground? - A. That is correct, yes.
                                                                        79

                                                   J.   L.    KENWORTHY


    Q. You and Christopher I think met a load of other
       friends? - A. That is right.

    0. That would be right, wouldn't it? - A. Yes.
B
    Q. A good number of these were also going to the
       terracing? - A. Yes.

    Q. So you were pleased? - A. Yes.

    Q. Because     it was a nice group ofyou? - A. That is right.

    Q. Mr. Devonside himself had a     ticket for the         stands,
       didn't he? - A. Yes.

    Q.    So he and the Edwards, the other two boys in       the car,
         left you at that stage? - A. That is right.

    Q.    Because they were going somewhere else, a different
         part of the ground? - A. Yes.

    0. Did you continue to make your way to the ground? - A.
D      No, we stopped on a bank outside, I think it was
       Halford's, on - I forget the name of the road now.

    Q. Halifax Road, it is, or Kilner Way actually.  Halifax
       Road is the main road. - A. Yes, that is correct.

    Q. You stopped there on the bank, yes, and what happened
       there? What did you do or what did you see? - A. Then
       we decided to go for a drink to the supermarket over
       the road, when I went in to buy four cans of lager, and
       then we came out and drank them on the bank.

    Q. How many of you were there for these four cans? - A.
       These were for just two of us.

    Q. For two   of you.  Would that be Christopher and you?        -
       A. Yes, that is correct.

    Q. So you each had a couple, in effect? - A. Yes.

    Q. The other people, were they still with you, the other
       friends, or had they left you at that stage? - A. Other
       friends in the car?

    Q.   No, they had gone.  The ones you had met ....    - A. No,
         the friends who were in the car with us were still    with
         us.

    Q.   Including Mr. Devonside? - A. Yes.

    Q.    At what point did Mr. Devonside leave you? - A. On the
         way down to the ground.




H
                                          J.   L.   KENWORTHY


After you had stopped on the grassy bank? - A. Yes,
that is right.

Was it after you had stopped on the grassy bank that
you met up with all these other friends or did you meet
them there?  It is not too important, I just want to
get the sequence right. - A. I think we met a couple of
them on the grassy bank, and then met the rest of them
later.

So you then proceeded down    towards the ground, is that
right? - A. That is right.

Were you stopped at all by    anybody en route? - A. No,
not at all.

You obviously must have seen loads of other fans
because there were quite a lot about? - A. That is
right.

Did you see anything about them that concerned or
worried you? - A. No, not at all.

Did you   see any of them carrying cans of alcohol? - A.
I can't   say I took notice.

It was not very important to you at the time. - A. That
is right.

You then approached the Leppings Lane end, right? - A.
That is right, yes.

Do you know what time you got to Leppings Lane? - A. I
think it was round about 25-past-2.

At that time Christopher was still with you, some of
the other fans, Mr. Devonside had definitely already
left, is that right, or was he still with you? - A. No,
I think he was still with us -- no, he wasn't, he had
left.

What met your eye when you got to the Leppings Lane
end? - A. It was not what I expected.  It wasn't queues
of fans, it was just a lot of fans converging on the
turnstiles.

At the time when you got there were they already beyond
the perimeter gates?  Do you know what I mean by the
perimeter gates? - A. Yes.  No, they were just inside,
only just.

Did you at that time see any Officers around there? -
A. I think I saw round about three mounted Policemen
but no Policemen on foot.
                                        J.   L.   KENWORTHY


You didn't see foot Officers? - A. No, not at all.

Did you see any as you were walking along the Leppings
Lane? You know as you approach the ground you have to
walk along the road, don't you? - A. Yes.

Did you know it was called Leppings Lane, that road? -
A. Yes.

Did you see any Officers along there? - A. Not that I
can recall.

You joined the crowd, I would imagine, with Christopher
and everybody else? - A. That is right.

Just briefly describe to me what happened and how you
got in? - A. Well, we just joined the band of
supporters and slowly made our way to the turnstiles,
which was either moving past people who weren't moving
or just moving along with the flow.

Were you yourself uncomfortable during this period? -
A. I wasn't uncomfortable because I have felt like that
before inside grounds.

So it was an experience you had had but not outside the
turnstiles, is what you are saying? - A. Not outside
the turnstiles, no.

You, in fact, managed to get through a turnstile? You
didn't go through any big gates or anything? - A. No, I
went through a turnstile.

Did Christopher go through a turnstile as well as far
as you remember? - A. He did.

Did you hear any public address announcements outside
the ground in the turnstile area? - A. No, nothing at
all.

And you did not see any Land Rover either? - A. No, not
at all.

When you first approached were those big perimeter
gates open or shut, can you remember? - A. They were
definitely open.

They were open.  You came through the turnstiles and
you entered into a big concourse area?- A. That is
correct.

Were you searched outside the turnstiles at all, can
you remember? - A. No, definitely not outside the
turnstiles.
                                        J.   L.   KENWORTHY


Were you searched on the inside? - A. Not as I can
recall, no.

Having got into the concourse area - had you been to
Hillsborough before, I can't remember what you said? -
A. Yes, I had been the year before.

The year before, and where did you decide togo once
you got into the concourse area? - A.   '89 or 88?

'89. - A. Made our way over to the toilets, and there
is like a wall across the toilets and we stood there
for, I would say,about five minutes,   and then we made
our way down the tunnel.




             /Q. While you were
                                           J. L. KENWORTHY


While you were standing near that wall did you see
any big gates open and people come in? - A. No, not
at all.

You, Christopher and some of the others went down the
tunnel.  What was the tunnel like? - A. There was
other people down it.

It was fine? - A. It was fine, yes.

Could you see the pitch as you entered the tunnel? -
A. Not as I entered the tunnel, no, it is impossible.

When you got to the other end of it were you able to
get on the pen or was there a crowd there already? -
A. Oh yes, there was a big crowd there already.

Which one did you go into, I forgot to ask you? - A.
Could I see the diagram please?

To the right or to the left? - A. Went to the right.
Well, I stood at the top with Anthony Owen and
Christopher Devonside.

I did not hear you? - A. I stood at the top with
Anthony Owen and Christopher Devonside and a lot of
others of us. After about five or ten minutes later
then we moved down to the second place.

So when you first came out of the tunnel   you stayed
up near the tunnel? - A. Yes.

Did you stay right by the exit of the tunnel or did
you move right to the back against the wall? Can you
understand what I am saying? - A. Yes.   I can't
recall exactly where I was stood, no.

You were stood up near the back of the terracing
initially? - A. Yes.

You said for about five or ten minutes as you
remember? - A. More like about five.

Was anything happening on the pitch during that
period? - A. I don't recall.

Do you recollect a beach ball being knocked about? -
A. Yes, I do.

Were you in that position when that beach ball was
being knocked about? - A. Yes, I was.
                                           J. L. KENWORTHY


So the beach ball was being knocked about when you
were up in this position? - A. Sorry, no.  I was in
position 2.

After a few minutes you have told me that you went to
position 2. Where was this position? - A. I was with
Anthony Owen.

Had you lost Christopher at that point? When I say
lost, I mean was he still with you? - A. Yes. Most
of us were all still together at that point, at point
2.
That was where the beach ball was being played
with? - A. That is right, yes.

Did you see any people climbing on to barriers and
jumping? - A. Yes, I climbed on to a barrier.

You did yourself? - A. Yes.

Was that at position 2? - A. Yes, that is correct.

You have reminded me, Christopher was holding your
legs because it is difficult to balance, is it not? -
A. No, that is not correct.  I was holding
Christopher's shoulder.  I was crouched down holding
Christopher's shoulder.

But you were on the barrier? - A. Yes, that is
correct.

What were you doing up there apart from cheering and
so on?  Is that what you had gone up for? - A. Yes,
that is correct.

At that point was anything happening on the pitch? -
A. I don't recall.  I don't think so.

Could you hear the teams being announced? - A. No, I
never heard that.

You did not hear that? - A. No.

Did you see the players come out on to the pitch? -
A. No, I did not see them come out.

Did you see them on the pitch? - A. Yes.

You did.  When you saw them on the pitch were you
still in position 2 that you have mentioned? - A.
Yes.
                                            J. L. KENWORTHY


Were you still up on the barrier or had you already
come down? - A. I think I had come down.

Then in your own words tell me what happened from
there onwards? - A. From then ....

Do you want a little drink of water? - A. I am okay,
thanks.

Do you want a little rest? - A. No, I am okay.  From
then I would say at least me, Chris and Anthony Owen
moved down in like a small surge down to the bottom
by the gate and that was the point I lost Chris
there and there was just me and Anthony Owen left
there at the bottom.

At that point there was a surge you said and
Christopher was moved forward? - A. Yes.

You were moved forward as well? - A. Yes.

You and Anthony stayed together but Christopher
disappeared from your view? - A. That is correct.

In one of your statements, because I think you have
made more than one statement, you mentioned that when
you were in position 2 the game had already started.
Is that right so far as you recollect now? - A. Yes,
I think that is right.

At that point were you still with Christopher as far
as you remember because it sounds as if you did not
lose him until after you were moved from that
position? - A. I think I lost him on the way from
point 2 to point 3.

In fact you might still have been with him - you were
with him at point 2 so far as you remember? - A. So
far as I can remember.

We know, of course, that Christopher lost his life
and Gary Church was another friend of yours.  Was he
with you? - A. No, he wasn't with - he was stood with
us.  I thought you meant did he travel, no.

In fact, there were several others.  There was quite
a number of people who lost their lives amongst your
friends.  You had quite a hard time.  You yourself in
position 2, how did you feel? - A. It got very
uncomfortable.

Compared with other experiences, big crowds at
Anfield say, or even 1988, how did it compare?  Stop
before you answer this question because I want you to
                                          J. L. KENWORTHY


think and answer it correctly.  You must not answer
it with hindsight because we all know it was
different.  Lots of people lost their lives. Nobody
is arguing about that. All I am trying to find out
is how it was for you at the time.  Do you
understand? - A. I understand, yes.

It does not alter the facts but I am trying to find
out how you perceived it at the time.  Do you
understand what I am saying? - A. Yes.

Try and answer the question as it was then? - A. It
just felt very tight.

Do you remember Beardsley hitting the crossbar? - A.
Not on the day.  I was told about it later.

You refer to it in your statement and that is why I
am asking you. Are you saying that that was put in
because you discovered that at a later time? - A.
That is true.

You did not know it at the time.  You have
reconstructed it, have you? - A. All I know at the
time was the reaction of the rest of the crowd.

What happened? Tell me? - A. It was just applause
and I just remember that one.

Was there a big surge as well or not? - A. Yes, there
was.

Can you recollect whether Christopher was still with
you when that happened? - A. No, I can't remember.

Was it at that point you actually moved to position 3
which we have not yet established or had you moved
before so far as you remember? - A. No, that was the
point I moved to position 3.

That was the point you moved? - A. Yes.

I think position 3 was quite close to the gate, was
it not? - A. Yes.

Can you recollect so far as you remember whether that
gate was open or shut? - A. That gate was shut.

When was it opened so far as you recollect? Did you
see it opened for a start? - A. Yes, I did see it
open.  I saw it open twice.

Tell me about what you saw with regard to the gate? -
A. There were other people shouting for the Policeman
                                             J. L. KENWORTHY


to open the gate and he opened it once and he must
have le t, I c a n 't remember, about ten people out and
he shut it again.      Then what I think was two or three
minutes later he opened it again and as far as I know
left it open.

Did you see it burst open at any point? - A. No, I
did not.

Did you see anybody being pushed back into the
gate? - A. I saw people trying to push the gate back
open as they were trying to push it closed for the
first time.

Are you saying that this happened after the big surge
which you now think was when Beardsley hit the crossÂ­
bar? - A. Definitely.

You did not see any youngsters run out on to the
pitch and being put back in then? - A. No.

How close to that gate were you at that time? - A.
Within about three people.

Let us get this right; you have said that the big
surge which made you go from position 2 to position 3
which was near the gate happened you think may be
when Beardsley was shooting at the crossbar but you
did not actually see that? - A. No.

You have reconstructed that, is that right? - A. That
is right.

The gate you say at that point was shut? - A. Yes,
that is correct.

You then said it was open and a few people came out.
Are you saying a Police Officer actually opened the
gate? - A. I think he did.




                                  /Q. Then you say.
                                         J. L. KENWORTIT


Then you say it was shut again? - A. That is right.

Then you say there were 2 or 3 minutes before it was
re-opened? - A. Yes, that is correct.

Was the match still in play when it was re-opened the
second time, as far asyou remember? - A. It must have
been because when Igot out  it was still in play.

One of the problems is that we know what time the
match finished, that was 5 minutes past.  We know what,
time Beardsley hit the cross-bar, that was also, in
fact, 5 minutes past.  It is only a matter of seconds,
30 or 40 seconds, between the hitting of the cross-bar
and the finishing of the match.  If you were out while
the match was still in play it is impossible that that
surge which you have now described was the one when
Beardsley hit the cross-bar, can you see that? - A.
Yes, I can.

That is why I was trying to find out from you whether,
in fact, your recollection of Beardsley hitting the
cross-bar was what you actually saw, or whether you
have put it together from what you learned afterwards.
- A. Yes.

That might be the case, might it not? - A. Yes.

Can we try again then and just briefly see what you
actually saw on the day on the field. - A. I didn't
see anything on the day.

All right, we will leave it at that.  Can you on a
plan just show me the three positions that you were
in.

     MRS. PERKINS:    C420.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:    He was stood with Anthony Owen
for a while, sir.

      THE CORONER: Just take your time and do the best
you can, which is very hard.   (Witness marks plan )
Can you show us where you finished up near the gate as
well.   Thank you.

          Cross-Examined by MR. MANNING:

I am going to try as hard as I can, Jason, to bring
your evidence and Anthony's evidence together, and I
appreciate that you have had an awful loss in this
time and obviously you feel very sad, and we are all
very sad as well. We have got you on the terrace.   Let
us forget for a moment everything that has gone on
                                       J. L. KENWORTH


outside.  There is a beach ball which somebody has
brought in.  Forget how they have brought it in or
where it is blown up, but we have seen and I do not
know whether you have seen, perhaps you can tell us,
it on a video film.  Did you actually see that? - A.
Yes, I did.

We do not know as a fact what was the very first time
that someone took it out of their pocket, bag, or
whatever, but we do know as a fact that at 2.40 the
camera picks it up in the crowd, 20-to 3.  So we can
assume from that, tell me if you agree, that by that
time you are in position No.2? - A. That is correct.

You take a part in what has been variously called the
pinging, or the patting, or the batting of the beach
ball around the terrace? - A. That is correct.

My visual approach to what I have seen is that when
the beach ball is coming down towards a group of
people, that group has tried to jump up to be the hand
that pings it somewhere else.  Are you with me so far?
- A. Yes.

When you said that you were doing this, would that be
consistent with what you actually did, what you
remember you did? Have you been part of a group
trying to reach up to that beach ball? - A. Yes.

In relation to before or after that, when do you climb
on the barrier, or is the beach ball still whizzing
around at that same time? - A. It is still around.

Do you actually manage to make any physical contact
with the beach ball while it is in the air around the
terrace, while you are on the barrier? - A. No, I
don't think I actually get to touch it.

In impression, because you did not put a stop-watch on
it and nor did anybody else, for how long do you think
you were on the barrier? - A. About 30 to 45 seconds.

Christopher, when you describe as having your hand on
his shoulders, he is standing where in relation to
you? - A. Right behind the barrier.

He is right behind the barrier? - A. That is right.

How have you managed to get up onto the barrier? - A.
I was helped up.

Assuming you did not dive-bomb down onto everybody,
how did you get down again? - A. I was helped down.
                                             J. L. KENWORTE


After that you stood where in relation to the barrier
- A. Behind the barrier.

You remained there then until you saw players on the
pitch? - A. That is right.

You have told the Coroner you did not hear the teams
being announced? - A. That is right.

You did not actually see them run out onto the pitch?
- A. That is right.

But you saw them on the pitch? - A. Once.

You then, with Christopher and Anthony, were part of a
small surge which took you and Anthony together down
to the front, but which separated you from
Christopher? - A. Yes, but before that I had gone
underneath the barrier to get in front of it because I
thought that the pushing would be less in front of it.

You were feeling a bit uncomfortable behind the
barrier so you had - I was almost going to do it but I
do not think my bad back would be up to it - but you
bent you knees and slipped underneath the barrier? -
A. Yes.

The only perhaps difference between that little bit,
as you have told us to it now, and what Anthony told
us was that Anthony seems to have suggested that he
had decided that although the view would not be as
good down at the front, there would probably, because
the view was not as good, be more room there because
people would not prefer to stand there and, therefore,
he had decided to do that and wasn't surged down, he
had actually made his way down.  Now is that
compatible with what you are telling us, or do you
think it was just coincidence that there was a surge
at that time, or would Anthony be right? How do you
see things? - A. I think Anthony would be right.

     MR. MANNING:  The rest of it I do not trouble you
with at all.  I am just dreadfully sorry that you are
going to be left with these awful memories of good
friends.

           Cross-Examined by MR. K I N G :

Jason, did you go to the 1988 semi-final? - A. Yes, I
did.

Can you help at all on whether you saw anything which
looked like the tunnel to the terraces being closed
off? - A. Yes, I can, it was.
                                         J. L. KENWORTH


Let me go back then.  First of all, did you have    a
ticket for the 1988 semi-final? - A. Yes, I did.

For which part of the ground? - A. For the Leppings
Lane terrace.

You entered through the turnstiles? - A. Yes, I did.

You entered onto the concourse? - A. Yes.

Was   that the concourse which we see on the model which
has   the tunnel in it? - A. Yes, that is right.

What do you recall seeing? - A. I recall seeing a big
wall with what looked like to be a gate in it but
closed, and having to look for another way which
wasn't very obvious of getting to the terraces.

I wonder if you could go to the model with Mr.
Griffiths so that you can help us with what you are
saying. - A. We came in through these turnstiles.

So you are indicating turnstiles A to G? - A. That is
right.  Then we came into the concourse.  That gate
was shut.

You are pointing at the entrance to the tunnel, are
you? - A. That is correct.

You are pointing to the gate at the tunnel, are you? -
A. That is correct.

Your evidence is that it was shut? - A. That is
correct.

Did you see any Police about at that stage? - A. I
don't recall.

So what did you do then in 1988? - A. We then waited
round about here.

I am sorry, I cannot see where you indicated.     Perhaps
Mr. Griffiths can help.

     MR. GRIFFITHS:  Halfway between the tunnel and
the entrance to the West Stand.

     THE WITNESS:  Some of us bought a programme and
then we walked round here.

     MR. KING:    So you are indicating walking round
the side of the   West Stand on the right-hand side as
you are looking   at the stand with your back to the
turnstile? - A.   That is correct.
A
                                                            9;
                                                J. L. KENWORTH


    Q.   And you made your way to the terracing that way? - A.
         That is correct.
B




C




D




E




F


                                  /Q.   Can you help ....



G
                                           J. L. KENWORTI


Can you help at all as to what time that was in 1988? *
A. No, I don't know.

Can I return to the 1989 semi-final?   Mr, Manning put
you whether you thought Anthony was right in his evident
as to how you got from what he described as position 2 t
near the front of the gate and I think you said you
thought Anthony was right? - A. That's correct.

Was Anthony also right that at that position 2 before you
moved from it, in his description that it was such that
trying to escape the pushing and crushing and being
uncomfortable? - A. Could you repeat the question please?

I won't put words in your mouth.   What was it like in
that position, what I call position 2, immediately before
you moved, as you say Anthony is right in saying, down to
the front?   What were the conditions like? - A. It was
very uncomfortable.

Can I ask you the following questions now which are just
personal to Mr. Devonside?

     MR. KING:   Sir, in asking them they may breach your
guidelines, I don't know, but they aren't designed so to
do, but they are personal to Mr. Devonside, sir.   If you
will bear with me, I...

     THE CORONER:    I will do my best.

     MR. KING:   I am obliged, sir:

Jason, I understand that you in fact assisted in taking
Christopher from the pitch to the gym? - A. What do you
mean when you say "assisted"?

Well, Mr. Devonside understands that you helped in some
way taking Christopher, who obviously by that time was in
a dreadful state, to the gym, is that right? - A. Yes.

Was that on a stretcher in some way? - A. No, I carried
him myself.

Mr. Devonside is very, very grateful to you and he wants
me to pass on his thanks to you for what you did.   Did
you find Christopher on the pitch yourself? - A. Yes.

Was anybody trying to revive him when you found him? - A.
No.   I saw him at the moment he was being put down on to
the pitch.   When I got there, as far as I can recall
there were stewards.    I didn t ask them anything.    They
just moved away.   I stayed there.    I don't know how
long.   There was just nobody coming to help so Ithen
picked him up and took him to the gym.
                                             J. L. KENWORTr


Jason, can I say again on behalf of Mr. Devonside, his
heartfelt thanks to you for that.

               Further by THE CORONER:

I must just ask you a question about 1988 because I want
to be absolutely clear about this.   Are you saying that
when you approached the tunnel in 1988 the gates to the
tunnel itself were shut? - A. That's correct.

Both completely shut or partially shut? - A. Completely
shut.

Right across? - A. That's correct.

Are you saying that your recollection is there was no
Policeman, or anybody else - stewards - at those gates? -
A. As far as I can recall there wasn't.

How long did you observe the gates in that condition?
Put the tunnel acetate up and I will just make sure we
are talking about the right gates. ^ You can just see
them, can you see those blue-ish things there? - A. Yes.

You are saying they were properly shut? - A. Yes, they
were.

And nobody there as far as you could see? - A. Not as far
as I remember, no.

            Cross-Examined by MR. ISAACS:

Jason, could you help us again as to what time it was
when this happened,when you approached the gates and they
were shut in 1988? - A. I think it was round about twenty
to to quarter to three.

Were other people with you then? - A. Yes.

Who was that? - A. Barry Devonside and Chris as well and
another man.   I can't remember his name.

Were there many people with you in the concourse?     Other
people you didn't know? - A. Oh, yes, definitely.

Many?   Few?   Could you describe what the state of the
concourse was at that time? - A. It wasn't full.

When you saw the gates were closed what did you do? - A.
We walked over to the wall which the gates are on and as
I recall there are some toilets there.   A couple of us
went to the toilet and bought some programmes and after a
couple of minutes moved on to the right.
                                              J. L. KENWORTHY


The picture is still up there*   You moved to the right,
after going to the toilets, the gents, that are on the
left? - A. That's correct.

After you had been to the toilets the gates were still
shut? - A. That is correct.

We have all seen how the Corner has statements he keeps
referring to and he has got a statement of yours, because
you made a statement to the Police about this matter? -
A. That's correct.

Do you remember the Police asking you whether you went in
1988? - A. As far as I recall.

They did ask you about that? - A. I think so.

You never mentioned at that time anything about these
gates being shut when you went in 1988?    It is not in
the statement the Coroner has? - A. I don't think so.

         Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING:

Were you asked about the gates by the Police when making
your statement? - A. No.   I wasn't asked very much about
1988.   I had to volunteer the information.

     THE CORONER:    Thank you.   Mr. Devonside.

              BARRY WILLIAM DEVONSIDE Sworn

                     By THE CORONER:

It is Barry William Devonside? - A. That's right.

Is it still                            in Liverpool? - A.
Yes.

I think you are a financial consultant? - A. That is
correct.

As I have said to various other fathers, as I know you
have heard, I am very sorry, and indeed I am sure I say
it for everybody that you have lost your boy and I am
very sad that we are here and I am sad that I am asking
you questions, but on the other hand it is an opportunity
for you to say what you have to say because you were at
the match.    That is why we are doing it.   Is it right
that you did go to the match on the 15th April, 1989? -
A. That is right.

You went with your son Christopher? - A. That is right.
                                                B. W. DEVONSIDE


And Jason? - A, I went with Jason Kenworthy, Steven
Edwards and Paul Edwards, who drove the car.

We have already heard from Jason that you got to
Sheffield - would you agree with the time he gave us of
about 1.30? - A. I think in my statement I said
approximately 1.30.   My recollection is about 1.15
towards 1.30.

He said that in fact after you had p a r k e d a n d so on the
lads probably more than yourself met up with a load of
friends.    Do you remember that? - A. Yes. We met
outside Halfords in Halifax Road, which is situated
alongside the Gateway supermarket.   We had parked the
car, I think, behind a public house within a council
estate.    I think the public house is called the White
Horse    I think I said the White Hart in my statement,
but it is the White Horse.

All I am trying to find out is at what point you left
Christopher? - A. If I can briefly say, we made our way
down to the ground, that was the five of us.           I'm sorry,
made our way down to the point where Christopher wished
to meet up with a number of friends, as did Jason.           We
met on a grass embankment where there were two mounted
Policeman with their horses.      They weren't mounted at
the time.   They were just h o l d i n g t h e reigns.
Christopher and Jason intermixed with their friends.            I
wanted an alcoholic drink.    I then proceeded over to the
Gateway supermarket which had something in the region of
about 25 to 30 people outside as a group.           There was an
official, that is, a manager, an assistant manager, in a
suit standing at the front door, not allowing people in
other than at two at a time.

I stood there for about ten minutes.   I remember a wag
in the crowd shouting, "Come on, lad, let us in, my mam
wants some teabags!"   There was a bit of a laugh.    I
entered the supermarket and I purchased eight cans of
beer.   I gave one to Christopher, one to Jason, one to
Paul Edwards and I had one.   I had a Gateway supermarket
bag.   My intention, and I completed that, was to put the
four cans under a bush adjacent to Halfords so on the way
home we could have a drink.

We stayed there for a while.   We had had a drink.  I fed
one horse some of my crisps.   A good luck thing that I
always did was to pat a Police horse on the back at every
match I went to.   I remember patting the horse three
times.

We proceeded down Halifax Road to the roundabout where
you turn right into Leppings Lane where the garage is
situated.   There were two Policemen on foot.   I went up
                                          B. W. DEVONSIDE


to one Policeman.   I said, "Hey, lad, do you know where
there is an eating place on the way home going over the
Woodhead Pass?â€   He said, 'â€™Behave yourself, son", and at
that point I knew he was a Liverpool Policeman, just by
the language he used.   I mean that with respect to him.

At that point I left Chris.   I proceeded down Leppings
Lane with Paul Edwards and his son.   They had tickets
for the West Stand.   I had a ticket for the North Stand.
There is a couple of shops on the way on the left hand
side as you are going from the roundabout to the
turnstile area.   Within those shops was a butchers
called Bryan's.   I went in there.   I was hungry.  I
purchased two corned beef and onion sandwiches which the
lady made fresh for me.   I had a laugh and joke with
her.   I came out of there and at that point I left Paul
and his son and I proceeded to the turnstile area.

The turnstile area was crowded but I had no trouble in
the entrance to the turnstile for the area where I was
going which was the North Stand.




        Q. Do you know what time
                                        D. W. DEVONSIDE


Do you know what time that was, Mr. Devonside? - A. I
believe, and I said in my statement and have no reason
to doubt my timings, I would say 2.20, 2.25
approximately.

So you, in fact, managed to get into the ground
relatively straightforwardly? - A. Apart from the area
being crowded, I suffered no discomfort in my objective
to gain entrance to the ground.

Having then got in you presumably made your way towards
your seat in the North Stand, would that be right? - A.
I went through the turnstile.  I handed in, or the
turnstile operator took the stub of my ticket.   I kept
my ticket because I needed to know the number and the
part of the ground where I was to be seated.   I was
searched going in.  I made my way into the stands where
I purchased a cup of tea, a meat pie - without being
derogatory towards Sheffield Wednesday, which was not
very pleasant - I then made my way into the stands.

I enjoyed getting into the ground early for the simple
reason I love the atmosphere of any ground.   I like to
see the people.   I also am possibly slightly nosy,
inquisitive.   I remember seeing Chris Lawler in the
North Stand - he was a few yards away from me - I went
down to him - Chris Lawler being a former full-back of
Liverpool.   I was made up to see him and I basically
just wandered a few feet in and around the stands, that
is, the cafeteria area and in the stand itself.

When did you, in fact, take your seat? - A. I can't
remember the exact time I took my seat but I was
actually in the stand viewing the area from probably
just before 20-to-3.

What did you see? - A. I looked all around the ground
trying to take in the atmosphere and savour the
atmosphere.  I wanted to see what part of the ground -
I knew where Chris would be, in and around behind the
goal area - I wanted to see whether I could see him.   I
first saw sight, and I think I relayed this via Mr.
Fraser at the mini-inquest - I think this was confirmed
by Inspector Layton - I saw Jason in the ground because
he had like a denim shirt on.  There is no ifs and
buts, it was Jason all right, and that was confirmed on
the photographs within the mini-inquest.  I knew that
Christopher would be in and around there.

As time drew on, and I am talking about maybe five
minutes, six or seven minutes at the very, very most,
it was blatantly obvious to me that we had one part of
the ground within Leppings Lane that had a lot more
people in it than you did on the outer areas.  It did
                                        D. W. DEVONSIDE


not unduly concern me at 20-to-3.  It probably did not
concern me at 10-to-3, but by this time I remember,
probably 10-to-3, I don't know, a few minutes after
that, time was of no relevance to me because I was
savouring the atmosphere.  There was a beach ball, or I
thought it was a heavy type balloon, I didn't know it
was a beach ball, but I knew something of a round
orange coloured object was being, if you like, punched
around there, or bounced around the pen.

I then started to become concerned, but not unduly, by
the fact that that pen was becoming full.  As I said a
moment ago, I have no real recollection of the
particular time, but round about, I would assume, 5-to-
3, I noticed one or two people, and they were only few
in numbers, who were clambering up into the stand, the
West Stand above the Leppings Lane terraces.   My first
thought was, "What are they doing that for?", and my
first thought was, "Why are the Police allowing it?",
for the obvious reason that people have tickets for
seats and they have got to go somewhere.

The players came out and things escalated very, very
quickly.  It appeared, once the game had kicked off, as
though something had erupted within the area around the
goal.  I had half eyes on the game and half eyes on the
terraces.  I don't recall Beardsley hitting the post,
though when the roar went up, or a roar went up, I
asked the fella next to me,  What was that?", and he
said, "Beardsley hit the bar".  At this moment in time,
or within a very, very close period, people were
clambering over the fence.  I could see people
clambering up the back.  I could see one or two over
the radial fences, but people climbing up the front of
the perimeter fence.

I don't know, Mr. Devonside, whether you noticed - I
don't need to ask you any questions because you have
told me the story - did you notice any of the perimeter
gates opening? - A. I noticed, and I can say this
without fear of any comment whatsoever because I have
attended every single day of this Inquest so far, I
actually saw the gates open.  I can't truthfully say
whether it was (4) or (3), but I physically saw a
Police Officer push somebody off the top of the fence,
one person, and I saw people being pushed back in.   I
saw the gates open on a number of occasions.  That was
over a very, very short period of time.

My next recollection was of a Police Officer giving
somebody what I perceived to be the kiss of life, on
the pitch.  There was a man in front of me with a
transistor radio and everybody in and around the area I
was at had their eyes fixed permanently on the Leppings
                                                            100

                                             D. W. DEVONSIDE


     Lane, because people were staggering around, some
     people were collapsing.   I remember saying - I was
     literally frozen for Chris - I remember saying to a
     fella next to me, "What the fucking hell's going on
     down there?"  It wasn't that I couldn't see, it was the
     enormity of what was happening in front of me, to
     actually believe what you were seeing.   I said to the
     fella with the transistor radio, because at that point,
     and I again have no recollection of time because of the
     state I was, I was frightened for one person, I said to
     this man, "Is there any fatalities?", because I had
     seen people being carried off.   A few seconds later he
     said, "There are two dead", and a few moments later he
     said, "There are nine dead".   I asked him a third time
     and he said there were seventeen.   How long that period
     of time was I can't honestly recall.

Q. No.  Mr. Devonside, I would like you to mark a plan of
   the ground so that we know where you were when you were
   observing the scenes.  (The Witness marked Exhibit
   C421) I just want to go back to the gates for a
   moment, just to make sure we have got this right.  I
   think you said you saw them open and shut several
   times, but you were not sure whether it was gate 3 or
   4.  Are you saying .... - A. I was referring
   specifically there - if I have not made myself clear, I
   apologise - I was referring to the gate when an Officer
   pushed somebody back in.  I can't recall which gate it
   was.

Q.   I see. - A. What I am saying is I saw the gates opening
     and closing on a number of occasions.

Q. We have heard evidence that gate 3 was opened and
   closed from quite a lot of witnesses - the Jury can
   make up their mind about that - but are you saying that
   gate 4 was also opened and closed, in your vision? - A.
   In my vision I saw both gates opening and closing over
   a period of time, how many I could not be specific.

Q.    May I ask you this, do you recollect whether the
     closing, particularly of gate 4, occurred after the
     match had kicked off, but obviously before it had
     finished, in that period of time? - A. I would be
     fooling myself if I gave an answer to that question.     I
     cannot recall.

0. I presume the same answer, if I asked you in relation
   to gate 3, you would not be able to time it? - A. I
   don t think so.

Q. The reason why I ask you, Mr. Devonside, is because in
   one of your statements - because I know you have made
   several - you seem to indicate that you saw the gate
                                           D. W. DEVONSIDE


closed whilst the match was still in progress.  Now, we
have, of course, had a lot of evidence about that and,
as you very rightly say, you have been here every day
so you have heard it all.  Are you saying that you are
now not sure that the match was in progress when the
gates were being closed? - A. What I am saying is I
can't truthfully recall whether the match was still in
progress.  If you wanted me to hazard a guess, I can do
tâ€™
 na t.

I don't want you to hazard a guess. - A. I am trying to
be as truthful as I can.

Mr. Devonside, I am just trying to make sure that in
your effort to be truthful - which I quite recognise -
you don't overlook something which you may have said
and which you might later regret that I had not
reminded you of, that's all.

     MR. KING:    Before Mr. Payne asks his questions
could I invite you to ask Mr. Devonside about his
recollection of 1988, because I would do so and ....

     THE CORONER:   Yes,   thank you.   I am glad you have
reminded me:

You went to the match in 1988 as well, I think that is
right, isn't it? - A. I went to the match in a car that
I drove, with Jason Kenworthy, Giles Ilutt, a personal
friend who I picked up at Bolton on the way, named
Bobby Lane.  We arrived in Sheffield approximately
about 25-past, half-past-12.  We stayed in a public
house until approximately 20-to-3.  Bobby and I and my
brother used to play in a football team for many years,
I hadn't seen him for a number of years and we were
just enjoying each other's company at seeing each other
once again, as well as the day out at the semi-final.

When we came out all of those people, including
Christopher, were with me. We ran down to the ground.
We got into the ground. I, having had-a few drinks -
when I say a few drinks, I don't mean anything to
discredit myself, I had a couple of drinks, mainly
shandies, I think in total about five - I wanted to go
to the toilet.   In fact, I was desperate to go tothe
toilet.  I went to the toilet.    The boys, that is
Giles, Jason and Christopher, wanted to meet up with
all of their friends that have been referred to
previously, behind the goal area.

As I recall, the tunnel gates were closed.  I had no
intention of going behind the goal.  I had been to
Sheffield Wednesday before and I had an idea of that
end of the ground.  It was I who said, "Let's go this
                                             D. W. DEVONSIDE


way", and all the boys and Bobby followed.  We went
round to the south and came in from the terraces
t h e re.

Can you tell me this;  are you saying that the blue
gates to the tunnel were shut? - A. I couldn't
honestly tell you the colour of those gates.

Forget the colour.   Were they shut? - A. Those gates
were shut.

Did you see any Officers at them? - A. I cannot
recall seeing any stewards or any Police Officers.
Whether they were there or not I do not know but I
cannot recall seeing them.

You are saying that both leaves of the gate were
shut? - A. As I recall the gates were closed and the
boys who wanted to go down the tunnel to enter behind
the goal were prevented from doing so.

             Cross-Examined bv MR. PAYNE i

Mr. Devonside, one matter of fact please about the
1988 event;  you have just told the Coroner that you
did not want to go behind the goal because you had
been to the ground before and had an idea of that end
of the ground? - A. I didn't exactly say that.  I
said I didn't want to go behind the goal and I said
that I had been to that ground before but I didn't
want to go behind the goal because I had been there
before.  What I was saying is, slightly different,
that I had been to the ground before and I didn't
want to go behind the goal.  I wanted to be situated
somewhere else.  It wasn't that I specifically did
not want to go behind the goal because I had been
behind the goal before, that wouldn't be true.

No, quite.  I do not want to get involved in a
discussion about words but the idea I thought you
were conveying is that because you had been to the
ground before you had an idea of what it was like
behind the goal.  Is that what you were trying to
say? - A. Basically speaking, yes.

Can you amplify that? - A. There is nothing to
amplify.  I didn't want to go behind the goal.     I
wanted to go by the corner flags.

What do you mean by having an idea of what it was
like behind the goal, that is all I sun asking? - A.
When I had been there previously before I had been on
the wings on the opposite corner, on the north
corner, and I am going back a long time and so my
                                           D. W. DEVONSIDE


memory could be a little bit jaded.   I was 42 then
and I prefer a little bit more comfort than being, if
you like, jammed together with a lot of young people
who like to enjoy themselves and dance and, if you
like, play their part within the game.   I wanted to
go to the corner flag where I perceived there would
possibly be a little bit more comfort.

Mr. Devonside, that is the only question I sun going
to ask you about matters of fact.  I would like to
just take this opportunity to do something else.   I
think you and Mr. Hicks together have taken a leading
part in organising the relatives of the people who
died at the match, is that right? - A. Yes, that is
correct.

What has your position been? - A. I have just
recently resigned my position as secretary of the
Group for personal reasons but I was secretary and I
was the elected spokesman of the G r o u p . I shared
that position of spokesman along with Trevor.

Mr. Devonside, I would like to take this opportunity
to say that for all of us who have sat through this
Inquest the common factor which has been obvious to
us all in the relatives and friends who have given
evidence, and also the people who have attended the
Inquest, for all of whom it must have been a very
painful and continuing very painful experience, the
words that come to mind are courage and dignity.   I
would like to say that to you in your capacity which
you have just described. - A. Thank you.

And also to say that the grief which you have
suffered is shared by all who have sat through this
Inquest. - A. Thank you.

     THE CORONER:   Mr. Devonside, I sun most grateful
to you.  I think Mr. Payne expressed it very much
better than I could have done.  I think that was very
nicely put, if I may say so, Mr. Payne, and I sun sure
I would like to have thought I could have done it as
well. - A. May I just have the opportunity of just
saying one thing please?  I do not say this with any
criticism in any quarter in any way.   I would like to
think that people within Sheffield, specifically
yourself, sir, once the Inquests are over, will try
and put a report together of some kind and
investigate the incidents that happened in and around
the gymnasium and the effect that it had on people in
the way that they were treated on that evening.   If
society is to learn from such a disaster we need to
get together on this and I would like to think that
you and other people would grasp that opportunity.
                                                   D. W. DEVONSIDE



Q. Thank you.  I do not want to let you go on any
   further because we get into trouble as you know but I
   have heard what you have said. - A. Thank you.

     THE CORONER:    Ladies and gentlemen, it has been quite
a hard day today and we have had some sad people obviously.
You had plenty of experience of that in April and May. We
will rise now and we start at 9.30 tomorrow, Friday.    You
may or may not be pleased to hear that come what may we are
certainly finishing at quarter past one because I have a
train to catch tomorrow.   There is a compelling reason
which requires me to finish.   My plan is that we stop at
that time.  It will be half past nine tomorrow, if you
would leave us then.

                (The Jury retired from Cou r t !

     THE CORONER:    Mr. King, when I was reviewing my
transcript, particularly of Mr. Hicks, and when I was
watching the video, whenever it was, I noticed that I did
the very thing that I will not allow Mrs. McBrien to do
which is that I put to the witness something which, in
fact, was incorrect.   You may not have noticed it but we
were talking about the players warming up, not coming out
pre-match, but kicking the ball around.   I said something
like, "That was quite early on, twenty past two or so" but
looking at the video it looks to me as if they were out at
maybe twenty to or even quarter to.

     If you would like to have a look at the transcripts I
am quite happy to have Mr. Hicks back. I cannot remember
that bit on the transcript because it was almost a throw
away line so far as I am concerned but if you feel that
perhaps it may have misled him please say so and I am quite
happy to have him back and deal with that section of his
evidence again in order to correct any error.  It may not
be but I wanted to give you the opportunity to have a look.
He was here earlier.  He is outside and so someone can tell
him what I have said.  I do not like to do something myself
which I will not allow others to do so far as I am able to
avoid it.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I am grateful for that.  What I will
now do is review the transcript in the light of what you
have said and I can report back to you, sir.

     THE CORONER:   That is all I am asking.

     MR. ISAACS:   Certainly from one's experience, sir,
maybe not yours, but Mr. King's and myself, that quite
often you may be right and indeed it may be 2.40 as well
because the players may be out at 2.40, 2.15, to kick up
and other players still be there at 2.40.
     THE CORONER:   I think that is what I had in mind but
when I watched the video I suddenly realised that whatever
it was it had not impinged on my consciousness that they
were also out later on and I did not want, because I have
made such a lot of play about the time players come out,
any mistake to be made as the result of an error of mine,
if indeed it is an error.

     MR. ISAACS:   Could you tell us tomorrow, sir, what
witnesses we have?

     THE CORONER:    Tomorrow we are hoping to have, not
necessarily in this order, Mr. Horrocks, Mr. Stewart, Mr.
Moore, Mr. Thomas and Mr. Bellard.   We are not quite sure
about one of the witnesses and whether that witness will
turn up.  If the witness does not turn up then I do not, in
fact, intend to subpoena that particular witness.   If he
does I will be glad.   If he does not then I will forego
what he has to say.   I do not think it is that vital that
we must have him at any price.   That is what we have for
tomorrow.  Anything else?

     MR. ISAACS:   Only this, sir, that it would be helpful
to me and perhaps to others who sit on this row if we could
have some idea of who is going to be called in the
following week, not necessarily on a day by day basis but
there was a time when they were posted up, details of who
was going to be called.

     THE CORONER:   I am glad you have mentioned it
actually.  I cannot give you the names because I have not
got them in front of me but I anticipate we will have
concluded with virtually all the supporters by the end of
next week, possibly a little bit earlier.   I am almost
certain it is Monday - actually it is tomorrow in that Mr.
Thomas has got some relationship to the barrier and one of
the others has also got a relationship to the barrier but
on Monday we will start getting a group of witnesses who
say something in their statements about the barrier.    That
will be Monday, spilling into Tuesday.   Then we have got a
number of witnesses who, so far as I recollect, are not
directly related to deceased, although there are a few, but
who say something sufficiently different in some respects
to make it worth our while to listen to them.

     Either on the days of next week    we   will mop up,   ifI
can use that expression, a few additional witnesses like
the linesman and one or two more Police Officers who were
either on the perimeter or were hoping to get the Officer,
or ex-Officer, who was on the tunnel    in   1988 and who   might
be able to give us his recollection of what happened or did
not happen.  I think that is all I can say at the moment.

     MR. ISAACS:   That is very helpful, if I may say so,
     THE CORONER:   It looks to me, subject to any
hiccoughs, that by the end of next week we will be
approaching the position where I will be able to say to you
that we have only got - almost literally true - a handful
of witnesses to hear.  Some of them may take a little time
but the numbers will have reduced dramatically as to who we
still have to hear.




                          /MR. PAYNE:   Sir, do you have.
     MR. PAYNE:  Sir, do you have it in mind at this
stage to call Mr. Phillips, the author of the report?

     THE CORONER: As you know, at one stage I did have
that in mind.  I have almost definitely gone off it.
It is difficult because you can argue it both ways, as
indeed everything in this Inquest can be argued both
ways, but my inclination at the moment is to think
that we have heard quite a lot and we have got, I
think, a reasonable understanding of what has
happened, and probably not, but I have not taken an
absolute and final decision.  I find it quite
difficult to decide on Mr. Phillips.

     MR. PAYNE:  Do you have it in mind to call an
expert engineer apart from Dr. Eastwood?

     THE CORONER: Yes, perhaps I can help you on that.
Actually I am glad you have raised that.  I am not
quite sure what the man's qualification is actually,
but he is from the HSE.  I cannot remember it offhand.

     MR. PAYNE:   Is it Mr. Nicholson?

     THE CORONER: Yes, Dr. Nicholson it is actually.
That is the man I intend to call as the expert and, in
fact, I had a long meeting with him last night, and
some of his colleagues, because I wanted to understand
what it was (a) he was saying and (b) what it was that
we needed to hear from him because he has written
reports this thick.

     I have come to the conclusion that I want Dr.
Nicholson to come and I am going to ask him if he will
deal with basically three issues, and if I could just
give them as headings but obviously there may be a
little more to them.   (1) is the number of people who
came through the turnstiles and Gate C, because they
have done some work on that.   (2) the number of people
in Pens 3 and 4 at specific points in time with a
degree of elaboration on certain aspects.   They have
got what they call a leaning crowd model about
pressure effects, and so on, which I want him to deal
with, and some of the implications of that.   (3) the
breaking of the barrier, and again basically in two
sections, the forces needed and the testing
procedures.

     But - and this is a very important "butâ€ - I have
asked him to deal with the matter in as near as
possible lay terms because it is, I think, beyond our
ability to try and understand the technical,
mathematical engineering, or what-have-you, data.   We
will spend hours.  I will spend hours trying to get
some idea of it;  they have spent hours.  It is an
exceedingly complex and difficult matter, and if we go
into the detail all that will happen is at the end of
the day the Jury will say, "Well, this is all rubbish,
I can't understand a word of it".  This is not
denigrating the Jury in any way.  If I were sitting in
their shoes I would say exactly the same because if
you are not an engineer you cannot understand the
mathematics, but you can understand the principles if
they are properly put.

     We had toyed with calling some of his supporting
cast, if I can put it like that, the people who had
actually done the calculations and so on, but I have
decided it would be far better off hearing from him in
broad outline.  When he tells us how many people were
in the pen, that we can understand because he can tell
us how he did it, but some of the other things are
exceedingly difficult to understand, very complex and,
to a certain extent, controversial.

     I know that, of course, he is not the font of all
knowledge on these subjects and that there may be
other views and opinions on, for example, the stresses
or the forces required to achieve certain bending, or
breaking, or what-have-you, of barriers.  What I have
asked him to do, in the interests of fairness, is when
we question him I want him to tell us what he believes
to be true from his work, and then I have asked him to
indicate the variants and other views in order that
the Jury may understand that this is not a straight-
down-the-line, absolutely non-controversial matter.
So in that sense I am trying to get him to tell us, in
my usual practise, as rounded a picture as possible,
putting, as near as he can, both sides.  I think it is
only right that he should tell us what he believes to
be true and what he thinks is the answer, but he can
also point out variants.  Does that answer your
question?

     MR. PAYNE:   Thank you.

     THE CORONER: Is there anybody else who wants to
come back to me on that point?  I think it is the only
sensible way of doing it because if we are going to
get into a detailed argument as to it, I will
guarantee that it will not advance the Inquest in any
way.  It would be very, very interesting to the
engineers, but not to the Inquest.  Also I am very
conscious of the fact that we are not trying to settle
civil proceedings.  If this were a civil trial then I
think I would have to take a different view because
the fine detail might well be essential in that
instance, but it is not, I think, in an Inquest.
     Can I just say one other thing while I think of
it.  I want something back from you now.  When I have
finished, and before I do my summing up, is it likely
that any or all of you are wanting to address me on
points of law?  I know you cannot address me on facts.
In some ways I wish you could, but I am tied by that
rule just as much as you are.  But is it likely that
you will want to address me on the law?

     MR. PAYNE:  This is something which we have had
very much in mind, and the answer from our point of
view is "Yes, please".

     THE CORONER: Again I am not going to hold you to
times because it is exceedingly difficult to estimate,
and I do not want you to answer now, but if you could
give me an indication at some point of how long your
address is likely to be.  I know that it is very
difficult because you might say something, Mr.
Catchpole might make a point and you may then wish to
clarify it and then one loses control - not control
but one loses the estimations.  But it would be
helpful to know whether we are talking about a 5-
minute address or a 2-hour one.

     MR. PAYNE:   Yes.   Perhaps we can report back
about that.

     THE CORONER:  Yes.  There is no hurry.   The last
thing, so that you can think about it in case you wish
to address me on a point of law on this, is when we
first began I think the Jury asked me whether I was
going to let them have a look at the video when they
come to do their deliberations.  I think at that point
my response was "Probably not", I think I said.   But
my attention has, in fact, been drawn to a recent case
which I have not actually brought in with me and,
indeed, you probably are aware of it and other
judicial authorities, that it is perfectly proper for
the Jury to have exhibits in with them in their room.
So I am changing my mind on this matter and I will
probably let them take the exhibits.  I will not let
them take the transcripts because they are far too
long and I think it happened in the Saunders case.
The Jury wanted a transcript of one of the witnesses
and the Judge said, "No way, it will simply confuse
you", and I am going to rely upon that comment of his,
but as far as the exhibits are concerned, I intend to
let them have them unless you can persuade me
otherwise in law.



                                        /MR. KING:
     MR. KING:   I must say I am surprised that there is
any debate as to whether or not they could have them.
It is my understanding) certainly of ordinary civil and
criminal litigation, that the jury is entitled to see
exhibits.   Certainly for my part and on behalf of those
whom I represent I would have no objection at all.

     MR. PAYNE:   I am not quite sure what debate
Mr. King is referring to.

     THE CORONER:   It is the debate within my mind I
think he is referring to.   The only reason why I mention
is because I had initially said no to them.   It sounds
as if you didn't even hear that but I didn't want to â€˜
spring it on you at the last minute and somebody say, "My
goodness you did say no and now you have done the
opposite.    That is the only reason why I mention it.
I am pleased that it is not a point at issue, so to
speak.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I know this is terribly difficult,
but is it possible to give any indication as to the week,
starting from now, we might be arriving at what I can
call the contentious Police witnesses?

     THE CORONER:     Definitely not next week.

     MR. KING:      If I call next week the first week in
February.

     THE CORONER:   Yes.    I think the second week in
February we will probably be dealing with the scientific
evidence and Dr. Eastwood and the club representatives.
I suspect it will be in what -you would call the third
week in February.   Either the tailend of the second week
or the beginning of the third.

     MR. KING:   Sir, to help everybody,  the week we now
call the third week in February would be the week
beginning Monday the 18th of February.

     THE CORONER:   Is it as long as that?        I was hoping
it would be sooner!

       MR. KING: Next week is Monday the 4th.    That is
the first week in February.   You have indicated the
evidence that is likely to be called then.   The 11th of
February is week 2, the scientific evidence and
D r . Eas twood.

     THE CORONER:   I intend to try and stick to this
point about the scientific evidence, which means that it
may not take as long as it would otherwise would.   As
soon as we have finished that we are moving into, in your
terms, the contentious Police evidence.

     MR. KING:      I don't mean that...

     THE CORONER:      I know what you mean.   We will use it
as shorthand.

     MR. KING:   Sir, thinking aloud, it looks as if we
are unlikely to finish the Inquests before the end of
February.

     THE CORONER:   I think that is what I said when I
gave my last estimate.    I think that is probably right.

      MR. MANNING:  The 15th of February, sir, all hotel
rooms are being vacated it has got to be finished by
then!

     MR. ISAACS:   I think to use the shorthand, sir, the
contentious Police witnesses will be coming just at the
time Mr. King has booked his holiday away!   That is my
understanding of how you are going to arrange it, sir.

     THE CORONER:     Yes, indeed!

     MR. KING:   I am flattered that Mr. Isaacs obviously
puts that forward more in hope than expectation!

     THE CORONER:   Perhaps I could just say this last
final point.   Right at the end after we have taken all
this Police evidence, it is at that point, Mr. King, that
we will do a sweeping up operation, perhaps just for a
day or half a day where we will deal, as far as it is^
possible, with some of these issues which worry families
and we might call a few witnesses to deal with those
specific points, as in fact on the whole I think we have
successfully done up to now where it has been possible.

     MR. KING:   I am glad you reminded me of that, sir,
because that is important and I intend to do a review
when we have finished the bulk of the evidence to see
whether there are any Is to dot and Ts to cross on those
matters, which I can draw to our attention if we haven't
already done so.

     THE CORONER:   I am anxious that having spent so
much time - I knew it would be long but I didn t know it
would be this wrong, but having spent so much time it
would be a shame not to try and do that if it is at all
possible to do so without too much difficulty.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   Sir, before you rise, I am sure you
are already aware of this from your Officers, but
Mr, Lock will not be available to give evidence from the
24th February through to about the 3rd of March*

     THE CORONER:     I didn't know that, but...

     MR. CATCHPOLE:   If I can urge you to stick to the
second week in February as far as he is concerned.

     THE CORONER:   I form a plan as to what I want to do
and then I discover I can't get the witnesses and I have
to review it, but my intention is to take the evidence
almost certainly in this order:   HSE, Dr. Eastwood,
Mr. Lock or Mr. Mackrell.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:    I would urge you to take Mr. Lock
first.

     THE CORONER:   Well, we will certainly bear the date
in mind and if need be we will have him first or change
the order, whichever is appropriate.

     I am very grateful to you all.

     One final thing, to do with Mrs. McBrien because her
family is here today.   Mrs. McBrien, whilst your family
is here I think you have done incredibly well, if I may
say so;  (a) to sustain it which in itself is quite an
achievement, (b) to ask questions and (c) not to be
intimidated by what is after all a substantial number of
trained people around you.

     You know as well as I do - it is no use my hiding it
- that from time to time I have had to say you can't ask
certain questions.   That is not a criticism of you.
Infact it is only fair to say that you,have actually
asked quite a lot of questions which nobody else had
thought of despite all our alleged expertise and on
occasion you have put your finger on points which have
escaped everybody else.   You are a credit both to
yourself and to your family and not least to your son.
I thought I would say that while your family is here.

     MRS. McBRIEN:    Thank you very much for saying those
kind words.

       (The Inquests were adjourned until 9.30
               the following morning)
