                                                         PI V
                            t     I              i4 -J




                ,.if^ -7    ■ ./ S ''-
                                         j ) £ u W rrs
      i




OjVtleJLVo < 30^4^ >»y                                   v
C X C X O u v X . C ^ W S O ^ v i^ G * V ^ V S m ^UL ^   'V
\M
W^o .
\J\ N ’ ' ’ »    1
  \             <E>^S i
Christopher Allan Sewell             Police Sergeant 467       Hammerton Road

                                                                   __     *




 On Saturday 15th April 1989 I performed duty at the Sheffield Wednesday
 Football Ground on logistics supervised by Inspector Bennett and with
 P S Pidler and P C's Shelton     and Campbell.   I commenced duty at 6am
 on various different tasks which were routine and unremarkable until
 about 2.45 pm when I overheard a radio message that difficulties were
 being experienced with crowds entering the stadium at the Leppings Lane
 end.     At this time I was in the gymnasium supervising    mealing
 arrangements,half of the gymnasium had been set out with tables and
 chairs and the other half was being used by the Sheffield Wednesday
 Stewards.
 I obtained a radio and commenced to monitor events,Chief Inspector Beal
 came to the gymnasium and complained about his radio,it was realised at
 this time that there was a fault on all radios and reception was poor,
 voices taking on a 'warbling* note     and they were almost impossible to
 understand.     A civillian wireless engineer was present in the gymnasium
 and I directed him to the police control box.


 Police Officers from D Division were arriving at the ground and attending
 in the gymnasium for a meal,due to the worsening situation I held them for
I deployment.    Inspector Sewell was in the gymnasium- and instructed me to
 record the deployments which I did on a sheet of A3 paper,recording the
 officers concerned,the time     and where they had been deployed.       I saved
 this record and can produce it if required to do so.       At about 3.20 pm
 I stopped recording deployments when a senior officer came to the gymnasium
 and instructed that it be cleared of tables and chairs to become a casualty
 receiving station.


 Entrance to the gymnasium by the door nearest to the pitch is difficult,
 the door being only just wide enough to admit a strecher ,this area became
 congested,with P C Larkin I took charge of the door and directed casualties.
 The dead were seperated from the living and as support services arrived they
 were directed to     the live casualties.   Whilst engaged on this duty I
 received numerous requests from Liverpool people to be admitted to the
 gymnasium to look for relatives;apart from the obvious difficulties that
 this would have caused to officers,the scene inside the gymnasium of eighty
 two bodies of mainly young people,many only partly clothed was a harrowing
 sight unfit for relatives to see.      In turning people away I expressed my
 sympathy to them     and no real difficulties were experienced.        P C Larkin
 complained to me of feeling ill     whilst on this duty but he continued to
 assist
Christopher Allan Sewell        Police Sergeant 467       Hammerton Road.




I continued on this duty until about 4 pm when I was relieved by P C
Buckley.                 *


I then joined P C Campbell and together     we and other teams recorded
details of the dead and the police officer involved in recording the
death     in the major incident books provided.


I later performed duties detailed to me by Inspector Childs ,the officer
in charge of the mortuary,these consisted mainly of casualty enquiries
at hospitals and enquiries with a GP who had certified a number of
deaths.     I finished duty at 11.15 pm this same date.
