              12-06-1989      10:38          KINGSBURY 7 AREA HQ                         +44 1 204         61f.



                                                                            ■Ir>, fife

                                                                                                      V.

                                                                           y                 *•<
     Ftepor* for the
     info* «i 4ion of:-

                                                                           METROPOLITAN                           POLICE
       The Chief Constable,
                                                                                ' Q'.., D iv is io n .Wenibley,...... station
       South Yorkshire Police,
       Police Headquarters,                                                     603. Harrow, Road,.. Wembley.,.. Middlesex,
       Snig Hill,                                                               HAQ 2ffli
       Sheffield S3 SLY,
       South Yorkshire.                                                         5 June,                              19 89.
                                                                           Rof. No..
       Through Deputy Assistant Commissioner                           Yo u r      Ref
       R B Wells OEM MA (OXON)
                                                                           Dased




                          Subjcct          F.A. CUP FINAL   -   20 M M ,       1989,               .........



1.   I an a Chief Inspector in the Metropolitan Police, attached to Wembley Division,
      My duties .include the policing of events at. Wembley Stadium and 1 have been doing
     this in my present rank since January, 1987,

2.   The Hillsborough tragedy, after the initial stock, gave me top® for the future*
     This hope was that the behaviour of fans in Lappings Lane, which I recognise as
     a not unknown tactic at Wembley, would now cease - the danger being acknowledged
     by those who indulge in such acts.

     On the 20 May 1 was in charge of the concourse at Wembley Stadium from the Royal
     Tunnel round westwards to Turnstile 'K', This area has two groups of turnstiles,
     *f * and 'G', which are approached by flights of steps and are relatively sale fron
     crushing.   It also has three groups of turnstiles, 'H\ 'J ‘ and ’K ’, approached
     by level ground and which are liable to crushing problans.     The stadium offices
     are close to *11', 'J' and 'K1 and likewise on level ground,

     I saw the first Liverpol supporters on my way into Wembley at Stanmore Broadway,
     some six miles from the stadium, where a number were sitting on the pavement dr-ui^-ntc;
     cans of beer or lager, at about 9*30 a.m.

5.   The closer to Wenribley, the more fans I saw who were drinking in the street, often
     carrying more cans with them.

6.   1 arrived at Wembley Stadium at about 10.30 a.m. and satrf that a ^large number of
     fans were already on the complex, perhaps as many as 10,OX). Again, many or than
     had cans of drink, i.e. beer or lager with them. 1 was dismayed to find that many
     of those present did not have tickets for the game. My advice to them to leave
     the area went for the most part, unheeded.
                                    /~ S

                                                 | ’                 >. 1 ' k            ,         ; >-■' i.'1 - '
12-06-1989   10=39   KINGSBURY 7 AREA HQ         +44 1 204 S1S0   P.03

                                       Page 2


  On inspecting the area I found that at Turnstile 'H' a small section of
  fencing, secured by scaffold clips, had been slackened so that a signifi­
  cant breach of the fence could be made, giving access to the circulating
  corridor.   From the enquiries I made it appeared that this had been done
  by fans during the night, to doubt intending to apply pressure at the
  right moment to gaii sntry to the Stadium,

  Infonretion was passed to officers under my ccnmand by an unidentified
  Liverpool police officer, that lie had heard fans planning to rush the
  ’H', 'J1 and 'K* turnstiles. This confirmed my own view that these were
  the most vulnerable areas and therefore the most likely to be attacked.

  As time progressed, I noticed that there were more people in that area
  suffering the ill effects of alcohol and tension was beginning to increase,
  ttiis culminated in a number of fights at the 'pinch point1, the narrowest
  point of the concourse, outside the Stadium Offices.       The fights were
  caused apparently by the sale of tickets by 'touts'. Although we31 known
  touts were not evident, there seemed to be a number of people selling
  one or two tickets.     The fans were keen to attack such people and yet
  also to buy the tickets at inflated priccs.

  By 12*30pm’
            , the crowd was building up generally, but especially so outside
  turnstiles 'H', 'J' and 'K'. Decause this area is confined, I had to
  put in a cordon of police horses and foot police between the T,V. compound
  and turnstile 'H' to prevent the danger of crushing.

  Outside of the cordon, there were more outbreaks of disorder among fans
  who had been drinking and I personally received a blow to the head whilst
  assisting one of my officers in making an arrest.

   The turnstiles were late in opening because a lorry was still carryin9
   out some work in the circulating corridor.    This lorry could only make
   an exit through a gate at the side of turnstile 'K'. It did ttiis just
   before 1.15pm but caused quite severe probleiiis with crowds waiting for
   the turnstiles to open.   The gate stuck when it was only half open and
   a lot of effort was required to prevent a large number of illegal entries
   to the Stadium.
   Once the turnstiles opened, 1 expected the crowd to ease considerably
   and to reduce the complaints of crushing I was getting from people in
   the crowd.   That people were obviously pressing forward and causing a
   crush in these circumstances, in the wake of Hillsborough, amazed me,
   I was more amazed, however, to find that the crush was not diminishing
   as I expected it to at turnstile 'H1. This was because of tickeLxess
   fans forcing their way through the turnstiles with ticket“holders and
   having to be removed through exit gates, slowing down the whole or the
   operation.
   Whilst a lot of i3legal entrants were removed, I believe an appreciable
   nunber were not. The most intense crush was at turnstile ’H , which had
   had a fence weakened during the night, and in my mind must have been pre
   planned by a large number of fans hoping to breach the security of
   fence, if they were unable to get in through the turnstiles*

   By 2.30pn, the number of people going in through turnstiles *H\ 'J' and
   'K' had reduced greatly.   This had been achieved by having tickets for
   turnstile 'H' accepted' at *J’ and ‘K 1 turnstiles and filtering people
12-06-1989   10:40   KINGSBURY 7 GREG HQ            +44 1 204 6160   P.04

                                    Page 3


- at the cxxrdon and allowing only t±ose with tickets through. Many people
  were reluctant to produce tickets, fearing that they micfrt be snatched
  from them.    They took the trouble to secrete than in shoes, socks and
  other places, which made it difficult when production was demanded. The
  nurtoer of street robberies for this event are imich hicfter than for similar
  events.

 There were now some 300 people on the outside of the cordon who did not
 have tickets but were still anxious to find a way into the.Stadium. Rather
 than leaving the cordon as a fixed target, I decided to commence a sweep
 of the concourse, pushing these fans towards the Royal Tunnel and away
 from the vulnerable area.

 When the sweep f a n the other side, turnstiles JA' to 'E', reached the
 Royal Tunnel, the crowd which nmbered about’ 500 began throwing bottles
 and cans at police. A nurrber of arrests were made during the coupletion
 of the sweep.

 Despite the sweep, small pockets of ticketless fans returned to the concourse
 during the progress of the game* At about half time, there was a determined
 attenpt by about 200 to gain entry through gates and windows at the stadium
 Offices and turnstile 'H*. This was successfully repelled.

  Just before the end of the game, all gates to the Stadium were opened
  in preparation for the exodus* At this stage, Liverpool were in the lead
  and fans were starting to leave. However, the equalising goal was then
  scored by Everton. This resulted in an influx of fans who had been leaving
  ard also those still around the ground without tickets. All managed to
  get into bays around the Stadium to watch extra time.

  The nurrber of arrests, 76 on the outside of the Stadium, does not fully
  reflect the magnitude of misbehaviour by drunken fans.



  on this occasion, there was a rapport between the Liverpool and Everton
  supporters. Had this not been the case, 1 believe much greater disorder
  would have emanated from the section of fans determined to gain entrance
  to the Stadiun, regardless of the cost in any terms, to others.

  Having described a lot of bad behaviour on the part of sane fans, I should
  sav that the majority were well behaved and concerned for the safety of
  themselves and others.




                                  V J ,    MILLER
                                Chief Inspector (Operations)
