        r Document Form                 Date and time raised   ’ V' ft'   ... .   D   y   i


-m?
Title
                                                                                                Number

                                                                                                                           ZJ
(Include source end any document number if re/event)


Receivers instructions urgent action Yes/No               hcc                                                              Receiver




Document registered/indexed as indicated                                                                                    Indexer

No(s) of actions raised

Statement readers instructions                                                                                             Statement
                                                                                                                           Reader



Indexed as indicated                                                                                                        Indexer


No(s) of actions raised

Exemined - further action to be taken                                                                              0 /M               SIO



                                                                                                         ir   'A   I   ’


                                                                                                                            Indexer
 Further action no(s)


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form

 MIR 15
                  PART V




THE EVENTS AT HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM

       ON SATURDAY 15th APRIL, 1989
                                      PART V



                    EVERTS AT HILLSBOROPGH FOOTBALL STADIUH -

                              SATURDAY 15 APRIL 1989




5. 1    (a)   Weather

5.1.1         The weather on Saturday 15 April 1989 was extremely

              good.     Indeed, it was probably one of the first

1             'Spring days' of 1989, with a total of 11 hours sun­

              shine out of a maximum of 13-14 hours available.        The

              air was dry, humidity was low and the maximum temper­

              ature recorded at the Leeds Weather Centre was 13°C

              (55°F).




5.2     (b)   Stadioa

5.2.1         (i)     Ground - External

                      Geographically, spectators arriving from Mersey-

                      side arrive in Sheffield via the A616 from the

                      North, which is the primary reason for the spec­

                      tators being located in the Northern and Western

                      areas of the ground, these areas being accessible

                      through the Leppings Lane entrance, which is

                      adjacent to this main arterial road.




5.2.2                 The North Stand is normally accessed by turn-
•
        stiles numbers 77-88 on Penistone Road and turn­

        stiles 1-8 on Leppings Lane but, on this

        occasion, to ensure segregation of opposing fans,

        the turnstiles on Penistone Road were closed and

        the turnstiles on Leppings Lane were increased by

        two, turnstiles 1-10 now accommodated all Liver­

        pool spectators entering the North Stand.




5.2.3   The West Stand is accessed via the same bank, of

        turnstiles in Leppings Lane at turnstiles 9-16,

        but the actions of the club in increasing the

        North Stand allocation by two, effectively re­

        duced the West Stand number to 6, with only turn­

        stiles 11-16 admitting fans into the West Stand

        seating area.   The 7 turnstiles giving admittance

        to spectators for the Vest St 2nd, Leppings Lane

        terraces are also situated in Leppings Lane, they

        are lettered A-G and this is the normal turnstile

        allocation for the terrace area.   (Photographs

         and a plan of the turnstile arrangements are

         appended).                                          APPENDIX

                                                             61


5.2.A   A further aspect in relation to the turnstiles

        was the club's decision to use a colour code to

        coincide with the colour of ticket, to enable        APPENDIX

                                                             50
        fans to see which turnstile gave admittance to

        the three Liverpool designated areas.   These

        were as follows:-
Brown     - Turnstiles 1-10     - North Stand

Red       - Turnstiles 11-16    - West Stand

Purple    - Turnstiles A-G      - West Stand

                                 Terracing




The Leppings Lane turnstiles are situated to the

rear of the West Stand.    They form part of the

grbund perimeter.   When looking from Leppings

Lane towards the turnstile, on the extreme left

is a large, metal, concertina type gate, this is

referred to as Gate A.    There then follows an

arced row of turnstiles numbering 1-16, there is

a second metal concertina type gate (Gate B),

this is set at an angle and is positioned between

turnstiles 1 and 16, and a second row of turn­

stiles lettered A-G.     A third metal, concertina

type gate (GateC) runs from turnstiles A-G to the

high brick, wall which forms part of the service

road.    The service road leads to other areas of

the ground, and this follows the line of the

River Don.




There is an outer perimeter fence which consists

of a row of six double wrought iron gates, abutt­

 ing on to Leppings Lane. These are normally

 locked to prevent entry on to the concourse area

 in front of the turnstiles, but on match days

 they are opened inwards to allow unrestricted
    entry to the turnstiles.



    There are two barriers running back from the

    turnstile towards Leppings Lane. The first is a

    seven foot high, solid metal, fence which extends

    from turnstile 16 all the way back to the outer

    perimeter wrought iron gates.     The other barrier

    is a single, low bar structure, which runs from

    turnstile G back towards Leppings Lane.




(ii) Ground -Internal

    Preceding sections of this report (Part 2) have

     detailed at some length the design and configur­

     ation of the stadium.    It is appropriate in this

     part of the report, however, that the basic lay­

     out of the ground be reiterated.     The stadium is

     divided into 4 specific areas, i.e. the North,

     South and West Stands and the Spion Kop.     The

     North and South stands are 'all seating', whilst

     the Spion Kop consists solely of terracing for

     standing spectators.     The West Stand has a raised

     seating enclosure and terraces where spectators

     stand.   The respective crowd capacities of each

     stand are as follows:-

          North Stand - 9,705

          South Stand - 8,834

          Spion Kop (East) - 21,000

          West Stand - seating 4,465; teraces 10,100
                 The West Stand terraces (which will be the main

                 focus of attention as far as this section of the

                 report is concerned), is further divided into 4

                  'pens', which are commonly identified as North,

                 Centre North, Centre South and South.     Addition­

                  ally, there is an area of terracing, (known as

                  North West Terrace), which is located between the

                  North and West Stands.




                  These areas have standing crowd capacities as

                  follows:-

                       North          - 1,600

                       Centre North   - 1,000

                       Centre South   - 1,200

                       South          - 2,600

                       North West

                       Terrace        - 3,700




5.3     (c)   Policy of Segregation

5.3.1         Arising from numerous previous incidents nationally,

              and acting upon the recommendations of a number of

              formal reports arising from various Committees of

              Enquiry (which have been documented under Section 3),

              the policy adopted by the South Yorkshire Police on

              the occasion of semi-finals at Hillsborough Football

              Stadium has been one of total segregation, in the

              interests of public order and tranquility.    On the 15
April 1989, Liverpool supporters were located pri­

marily in the North and West Stands.   A very small

number were 'housed' on the North West corner of the

Spion Kop to cater for those who had obtained tickets

through Nottingham sources.   This was a recognised

possibility, (which has been catered for in previous

matches), with the result that there was a policing

provision to ensure that the opposing spectators re­

mained apart.




Terraces

The 'pens', into which the terraces in front of the      APPENDIX
                                                         3
West Stand are divided, are each served by connecting    (photographs)
                                                          27-29
 gates, which are located at the rear of the dividing

barriers, in order that spectator fiov may be directed

 between 'pens'.




 Before the semi-final commenced Inspector H. White

 (the officer in charge of Serials 1* and 15), was       STATEMENT

                                                         13
 aware that a capacity crowd was expected ana, as a

 conseauence, ana as part of his overall duties, he

 ensured that 5 terrace 'pen' gates were padlocked in

 the 'open' position.   One of the means of access to

 the terraces from the Leppings Lane entrance is via a

 central tunnel, which is located beneath the West

 Stand, and which has 2 doors (which open inwards)

 situated at the Leppings Lane 'mouth' of the tunnel.

 These gates remain in the open position, as to close
           them would present an impenetrable barrier in the

           event of ground evacuation becoming necessary.




5.A.3      jhg area between the West Stand terraces of the

           playing area is delineated by a small concrete wall,

           reinforced by high wired fencing - a development which

           has occurred elsewhere in the country, in view of

           ground public order disturbances, and as a conse­

           quence of subsequent recommendations by the various

           bodies who were charged with the task of investigating

           and reporting upon previous events, the most recent

           being the Popplewell Enquiry.   As the area of terra­

           cing reaches the perimeter wall, the last step is

           deeper than the remainder, with the effect that there

           exists a 'well' on the spectator side of the perimeter    APPENDIX
                                                                     11
           wall.                                                     (photographs)




5 . A. A   Emergency access to the playing area from the West

           Stand terraces is facilitated by the provision of 7

           perimeter gates, the mechanisms of which are spring

            loaded to allow police or ground officials to open

            the gates (from the playing area) in the event of any    APPENDIX
                                                                     11
            emergency.                                               (phot ographs'




5. A.5      It should be noted, however, that 2 factors which were

            to have a subsequent bearing on the manner in which

            the evacuation proceeded were:-
                  (a)   The relatively narrow width of the gates

                        (lm).

                  (b)   The differential in levels between the

                        gate opening and the 'floor' of the

                        terracing; for whilst the dimensions

                        differ between respective gates the

                        presence of one or two concrete steps,

                        'leading up to' the gates from within,

                        was to subsequently prove a serious

                        hurdle in the rescue of trapped persons,

                        whose body weight rested beneath the

                        level of the perimeter gate, with the

                        result that they had to be 'hauled' out

                        of what was effectively a 'well' in

                        which they were trapped.




5.5     (e)   The Provision of Turnstile Monitoring Facilities

5.5.1         The statement of PC 1421 Guest explains in some detail    STATEMENT
                                                                        14
              the location of the Video Room, which is situated near

              to the players' entrance on the South Stand of the

              ground, and in which 20 closed circuit television

              monitors are situated, which are strategically placed

              to enable continuous visual monitoriag of all 97 turn­

              stiles.   Additionally, a television monitor is able

              to show the situation in any part of the ground.     PC

              Guest, when performing this duty, acts as a liaison

              officer, and as such has a responsibility to monitor

              movement and possible congestion through turnstiles.
A computer facility is also installed which enables

continuous monitoring of the number of persons passing

through each turnstile.    The computer is equipped with

a warning device which indicates when a particular

part of the stadium is within 15S of full crowd capac­

ity.   Under normal circumstances, therefore (and sub­

ject to access being gained by the normal manner

through turnstiles), there should be sufficient indi­

cation to police and ground officials to monitor the

admission of spectators.




Police Beployment

The overall policing operation was commanded by Chief

Superintendent D. Puckenfield, from the Police Control

Room adjacent to the South stand, in the South West

corner of the ground.     An officer with 26 years ser­

vice, Mr. Duckenfield has a wide experience in both

Uniform and the Criminal Investigation Department, and

previously served at 'F' Division in the rank of Chief

Inspector, between September 1978 and June 1980.

Since this time, he has served primarily at the

adjacent   ’D' Division (Sheffield Central), where he

has had extensive experience of policing at Bramall

Lane Football Ground, the home of Sheffield United

Football Club.
Assisting Chief Superintendent Duckenfield in Ground

Sector Control was Superintendent B. D. Murray, an

officer with 23 years service, who has regularly

carried out football policing duties, including the

previous semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham

Forest in 1988.




(i)   External

      In overall charge of the Leppings Lane sector of

      the ground was Superintendent Marshall.   Mr.

      Marshall is 45 years of age and he has 26 years

      service in the Police Force.   He was promoted to

      the rank of Superintendent in 1983, and during

      a secondment at Her Majesty’s Inspector of

      Constabulary’s Office, was Temporary Chief Super­

      intendent ,   He vas posted to D1 Sub-Division

      (Sheffield Central), and he gained substantial

      knowledge of the policing of football matches at

      the Sheffield United Football Club, Bramall Lane.

      In October 1987 he was posted to the Rammerton

      Road Division as Deputy Divisional Commander, and

      he has obtained considerable experience in the

      policing of football matches at the Hillsborough

      Football Stadium.




      The officers deployed to work the Leppings Lane

       turnstiles were:-
        Chief Inspector Creaser

        Inspector Sykes

        Inspector Purdy

        Serial 1 6 - 1   Sergeant, 10 Constables -

                     Turnstiles A-G

        Serial 1 7 - 1   Sergeant, 10 Constables -

                     Turnstiles 1-8

        Serial 1 8 - 1   Sergeant, 10 Constables -

                     Turnstiles 9-16

        Serial 1 9 - 1   Sergeant, 10 Constables -

                     Leppings Lane area crowd control

        5 Mounted officers




5.6.5   The Football Order at Part A1 shows Sector 1 at        APPENDIX

                                                               39
        Ground Control to be the responsibility of Super­

        intendent Green.     The above serials would there­

        fore be his responsibility.     However, it is a

        working practice that the Outer Sector Commander

        has assumed responsibility for the outer turn­

        stile areas at Leppings Lane.




5.6.6   They were instructed to ensure that persons

        entering the ground did not possess any items

        prohibited by the rules (banners, weapons,

        missiles or alcohol).     This is in accordance with

        the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol, etc.)

        Act 1985.   They were to maintain orderly queues

        of fans forming at the turnstiles.
 A number of serials were deployed in the areas

 adjacent to Leppings Lane and at the coach,

 transit and car parks.   A detail of officers

 under the command of Inspector Ellis, Serials 36

 and 37, were deployed to Wadsley Bridge Railway

 Station to await the arrival of the Liverpool

 supporters' train.   A deployment of six mounted

 officers were also attached to this detail, this

 was later increased by 2 Mounted officers.

 Serials 36 and 37 were to escort the Liverpool

 fans to the Leppings Lane entrance where they

 were to remain and assist in general crowd

 control.




 The F Divisional Operational Order provides full

 details of the above deployments and nurbers of

 officers engaged in those duties.   This Order was

 strictly adhered to with no deviations or amend­

 ments made.




) Internal

 In overall command of policing arrangements

 within the ground was Superintendent R. L.

 Greenwood, an officer with 25 years service, who

 also has extensive experience at policing foot­

 ball matches, including semi-finals.
     •
     5.6.10             Superintendent Greenwood, assisted by 2 Chief

                        Inspectors, had under his command a total of 21

                        Serials, divided into 9 sub-sectors, each of

                        which were supervised by an Inspector.        The

                        following table should be read in conjunction

                        with the F. A. Cup Semi-Final Police Operational       APPENDIX
                                                                                39
                        Order, which provides details of precise

                        locations of individual serials and officers:-


                        Sub-Sector      Inspector       Sergeant   Constable
l•
                               1        1           5                 40

                               2                1          3          30

                               3                1          2          20

                               4                1          2          20

                               5                1          2          21

                               6                1          1          12

                               7                1          2          20

                               8                2          4          40

                         Reserves
                         Sub-Sec. 9             2          2          20

                         TOTALS                U          23         223


     5.7      (g)   Ancillary/Support       Services

     5.7.1          Stewards

                    On the 8 June 1988, a memorandum was forwarded from        APPENDIX
                                                                               60
                    the Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, to the South

                    Yorkshire Police, which enclosed instructions for

                    match day staff (gatemen, turnstile operators and

                    Stewards) for the forthcoming season.
On the 15 April 1989, a total of 376 stewards were on

duty at the ground in connection with the semi-final,

and these were briefed by Inspectors having responsi­

bility for various parts of the ground before the

commencement of the match.




In the case of the West Stand, at 11.25am, Inspector      STATEMENT

White called all the relevant stewards to the stand       13

and they were briefed in respect of the entry of spec­

tators, evacuation procedures and general conduct.




Stewards were identified by yellow tabards worn over

their outer clothing.   Generally, the duties of

stewards are concerned with the ingress and egress of

spectators and their deployment within the ground.

These duties are clearly stated in the 'Green Guide.’     APPENDIX
                                                          29


Ambulance/Fire Service Personnel

On the 9 August 1988, a meeting was held at Hanmerton     APPENDIX
                                                          44
Road Police station between representatives of the

police, ambulance and fire services, in order to

reinforce liaison guidelines for emergency evacuation

procedures in the event of a major disaster at the

Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground.   It was agreed at

this meeting that an ambulance officer would be in

attendance to provide a liaison facility, and that the

Fire Service would not attend as a matter of course,

but would provide immediate assistance by the quickest
        possible routes should their assistance be required.

        Enquiries with the Ambulance Service reveal that prior

        to the commencement of the match, on the 15 April

        1989, the following ambulance personnel were

        identified to the police controllers and were

        available for immediate deployment:-

             (a)   2 Ambulance Service personnel - to perform

                   the duties of liaison officers within the

                   ground.

             (b)   1 ambulance and crew at the stadium on

                   stand-by.

             (c)   1 ambulance and crew at the Middlewood

                   Ambulance Station (a distance of approxi­

                   mately half a mile), who would remain on

                   stand-by for the duration of the event.




5.7.6   St. John's Ambulance Personnel

        The St. John's Ambulance Service provided a total of

        36 personnel for first aid duties at the ground.      It

        is believed that, in accordance with normal practice,

        the St. John's Ambulance Service had in attendance at

        the ground one of their own ambulances, located

        adjacent to the First Aid Room in the Northern area of

        the ground.
5.7.8   Police First Aid Training

        It should also be borne in mind that all police

        officers, following their initial training, are

        required to qualify for the St. John’s Ambulance First

        Aid Police Certificate, and that officers with less

        than 15 years service are required to re-qualify at 3

        yearly intervals.




5.8     Events to 2.30p«

5.8.1   At 10.00am on 15 April 198S police officers attended

        at the Hillsborough Ground, where the pre-match

        briefing was conducted by Chief Superintendent           STATEMENT
                                                                 3
        Duckenfield, this was concluded at 10.18am.   Further

        briefings were then conducted, firstly by Superinten­    STATEMENT
                                                                  5
        dent Murray, who spoke to the assembled officers on

        matters appertaining to communications 2 nd eaersrencv

        evacuation procedures.   The Divisional Intelligence

        Officer, Sergeant Charlesworth, informed officers of     STATEMENT
                                                                 12
        the latest intelligence regarding Liverpool and

        Nottingham Forest Supporters, Inspector Sewell went on   STATEMENT
                                                                 10
        to give details relating to the issue of radios,

        meals, transport arrangements and other logistical

        ma 1 1e r s .




        The three Sector Superintendents (Greenwood, Marshall    STATEMENT
                                                                 6, 4, 15
        and Chapman) went to separate parts of the ground with

        officers under their command, in order to brief them

        on matters appertaining to their particular serials.
At 11.00am officers engaged in the Leppings Lane

detail were briefed by Inspectors Sykes and Purdy, and      STATEMENTS
                                                            16, 17
they took up duties on the concourse area outside the

turnstiles.   At around 12 mid-day the Sheffield

Wednesday Football Ground turnstiles were opened by

the stewards, and Liverpool supporters were allowed to

enter the ground.     By 12.30pm queues were forming out­

side the ground.    They were orderly and well behaved.




Initially there was only a steady trickle of fans

entering the ground, the majority of whom had already

been searched prior to entry.     Second searches took

place as spectators went through the turnstiles, but

there is no evidence of any antipathy or antagonism at

this stage.   Indeed, one of the officers on duty, PC       STATEMENT
                                                            18
1675 Rich, considers that the second search built up a

rapport with many of the spectators.    He comments:

     "It was noticeable that all the people

     entering the ground at this time were

     honest, decent people, well dressed and

     well behaved."




Other officers confirm that there were no problems in­

side the ground during the early stages and, indeed,

Superintendent Greenwood refers in his statement to a       STATEMENT

"carnival atmosphere in the Central pens" and speaks        6

of "a lightweight beach ball being flicked about in
        the crowd."




5.8.6   However, it is apparent that, even at this

        early stage, there is evidence that a large number

        of fans, particularly in their teens and early

        twenties, had attended at the ground without tickets.

        Liverpool spectators were constantly asking police

        officers for spare or returned tickets.   One officer,
                                                                     STATEMENT
        PC Burnless, states that there were hundreds of fans         19

        who did not have tickets.   Officers engaged on the

        serials deployed outside of the turnstiles on Leppings

        Lane were constantly being asked the same question,

        "Are there any tickets available?"




5.8.7   There were many reports from officers deployed at

        the turnstiles who witnessed fans without tickets

        making determined attempts to gain unlawful entry

        into the ground.   Many were ejected from the ground by

        the police.




5.8.8   PC Titterton was deployed at turnstiles 1-16,               STATEMENT

                                                                    20
        stationed near turnstile 3 when, shortly after 1.00pm,

        he overheard a conversation between the operators at

        turnstile 3 and the operator at the adjoining turn­

        stile. Conversation was to the effect that only 74

        fans had entered his turnstile in the first hour.     The

        man had worked out the rate that fans could enter that

        turnstile and he considered there would have to be a
continuous movement over the next 2 hours to reach his

 turnstile quota.        This must be the first clear indi­

cation of the likely late arrival of the crowd.




He further states that during the course of the after­

noon he arrested a ticket tout with over £700 in his

possession and also a number of what appeared to be

forged tickets.         This was a further problem associated

with the tnrough flow of spectators at the turnstiles.

PC B u r m e e s   saw a number of ticket touts outside

in Leppings Lane and supporters, having purchased what

appeared to be surplus tickets, had been queueing from

Leppings Lane right up to the turnstiles, only to be

turned away when they presented forged tickets.           This

was not o m y      time wasting but was a further contri­

butory ractor which orevented the smooth flow of spec­

tators through the turnstiles.




It has been suggested that there was an element within

the crowd who were attempting to gain entry through

trie turnstiles by offering money in the way of bribes

to the operators.        Police Sergeant Crawford paid

particular attention to this problem while engaged in

duties inside the turnstiles A-G.        It must be con­

sidered tnat the majority, if not all, of those per­

sons attempting to bribe the turnstile operators were

turned away but their actions would, of course, once

again cause delays at the turnstiles.
5.8.11   Apart from the problems with ticket touts, forged

         tickets and non-ticket holding Liverpool supporters,

         there began to emerge a realisation that alcohol was

         becoming a problem.        Even as early at 11.00am that

         day, officers on duty in the car parks and coach parks

         near to the Hillsborough Football Ground were being

         asked directions to licensed premises and off-licence

         premises.




5.8.12   Officers on duty on perimeter patrols around the

         ground, including PC Prince, were aware that Liverpool      STATEMEHT
                                                                     23
         supporters were entering licensed premises, and as he

         patrolled the area he became more and more concerned

         at the number of persons drinking.       Seme of the fans

         were sitting and lying about in the roadway onenly

         drinking alcohol.




5.8.13   PC Marsh was aware that the licensee of the local Fox       STATE3EHT

         Public House had placed an advertisement in the Liver­

         pool tabloid press, informing the Liverpool suppor­

         ters:

                 "We ran out of beer last year, I've got

                 more this year."

         Supporters were monitored entering and leaving these

         premises in large numbers.




5.8.14   Officers on duty on the Leppings Lane concourse recall
    •
             that fans from 11.30am onwards were seen walking to­

             wards the turnstiles, no doubt in order to familiarise

             themselves vlth the area, then after making enquiries

             regarding licensed premises, walking away.     It was

             impossible to estimate the numbers of supporters but

             these were considerable.




    5.8.15   Superintendent Marshall states:                          STATEMENT
                                                                      4
                  "There were a substantial number of fans

                  wandering around the streets and I was

#                 saddened to see that most were openly

                  drinking alcohol from cans and litre

                  bottles, many were carrying four-packs and

                  I was asked by groups of fans where they

                  could find pubs that were open.     All the

                  fans I encountered were Liverpool suppor­

                  ters, I spoke to one man who was drinking

                  from a can of strong lager, and had another

                  three cans in his possession.     I expressed

                  the view that were he to drink all the

                  lager he had in his possession he might

                  later have difficulty getting into the

                  ma tc h ."




5.8.16       The Superintendent also said that the Gateway Super­

             market was doing a roaring trade at its off licence

             section, with queues of fans buying drinks from the

             door, particularly four-pack cans of beer and lager.
Officers report that the nearest off-licence premises

to the Hillsborough Football Ground, situated on Vere

Road, closed down prior to the commencement of the

game, due to the stocks of alcohol having run out.

This is evidenced in the statement of PC Wilkes.          STATEMENT

                                                          25

There were visual signs all around the general area

leading towards the Leppings Lane turnstiles, of fans

congregating, sitting or generally hanging about, con­

suming intoxicants from cans, which were discarded in

large numbers in the general area around Leppings

Lane.    A Mounted officer, PC Scott, states,             STATEMENT

                                                          26
        "The situation on Leppings Lane was such

        that the bridge which crosses the River

        Don adjacent to the ground was thronging

                p^cpl^ who vsrs si.tti.ng snd s13nd.in£

        about, just drinking cans of lager, beer

        and other alcoholic contents, which when

        emptied were discarded at the side of the

        road.     Many of these people appeared to be

        in drunken states, but the situation being

        as it was, with two to three thousand
    people in the area it was both practi­

    cally and physically impossible to do any­

    thing about this matter.     On one occasion

    I took it upon myself, whilst riding the

     full length of the bridge, to knock off

     the bridge wall and into the river,

     numerous empty, partially full and un­

     opened cans and bottles of mainly lager."




The general mood of the crowd from the opening of the

gates at about 12 mid-day, until just before 2.00pm,

was described as friendly, good humoured, with a

carnival like atmosphere.    This section of the Liver­

pool supporters being mainly families and elderly

persons but, as the time increased towards the 3.00pm

kick-off, tte atscspher? changed dramatically.       Sec­

tions of the crowd were seen to be the worse for

drink and unruly, as evidenced in the statement of

Police Sergeant Morgan.     There is evidence from

officers' statements that, as the

large crowd of supporters prepared to converge on the

turnstile areas, they were in possession of packs of

alcohol and this is considered to be a contributory

factor as to the reason for their late arrival en

masse at the turnstiles.




(Point of Information - The question of alcohol sales

at football grounds is well documented in Part 4
   (74).                It can be argued that the absence of intoxi­

  cants at the stadium contributed to the delayed

  arrival of the fans).




 In the Police Control Room, Superintendent Murray was

 joined by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield at                    1 .5 0 pm,


 after which, the two Commanders visited the refereee

 and his linesmen in the Referee's Room, where they

 outlined the general demarcation of responsibility of

 the referee, with the police having the right to go on

 to the field if they felt the circumstances merited

 this course of action.                 The referee was informed of

 the emergency evacuation procedure, and of the coded

message which would be broadcast in the event of the

need for evacuation, and was informed that the p r o ­

cedure for stopping the match would be rhroueh the

South Stand linesman.




Ll i t   V   1 C   i.
                          returned to the Control Room, where they

were joined by the Assistant Chief constable

(Operations).                Mr. K. Jackson.




At 1.5?pm, Inspector H a n d - D a v i s , together with a

Counted detail of / other officers,                 and Serial    36,


Ui.der the command of inspector Exli s, were at trie

taadsley Bridge Railway Station when the train carrying

Liverpool supporters arrived.                  The Mounted and Foot

officers formed a loose cordon around the                 450    fans and
         escorted them from the railway station onto the con­

         course of the Leppings Lane turnstiles.   They were

         orderly, good humoured, and as they approached the

         turnstiles it was noted that there were no crowd prob­

         lems, although small queues had formed.   Timed photo­

         graphs indicate the arrival of this contingent at bet­

         ween 2.08pm and 2.16pm.                                  APPENDIX
                                                                  65
                                                                  (photographs)

5.8.23   All officers employed on this detail remained to

         supplement the officers already deployed at those

         turnstiles, and a concerted effort was made towards

         shepherding the persons loitering in the general area

         towards the turnstiles.




5.8.24   Proa his vantage point in the Video Room, PC Guest was   STATEMENT
                                                                  14
         sc-nitoriTig spectator arrivals, and noticed that the

         crowd appeared to be slow in arriving, and that by

         2.15pm he estimated that between 25 thousand and 30

         thousand spectators had arrived, which was approxi­

         mately half of the anticipated attendance.




5.8.25   PC Rich noted that'-                                     STATEMENT
                                                                  18
              "From the opening of the turnstiles at

              12 noon until some time after 2.00pm,

              entry flow to the ground gradually

              increased without problem, like any other

              football match."
It then became evident, however, that after 2.00pa

the pace had quickened and, In addition, problems

began to develop which led to an increase in tension,

particularly (but not solely) outside the ground.




From this point in time, attention is focused on the

Leppings Lane and West Stand Enclosure end of the

stadium, this being the area of the ground where the

incident occurred.   There was a steady build up of

spectators and queues were beginning to extend back

towards Leppings Lane.   There were no problems at that •

location, with nothing untoward.




PC 2887 Grant, on duty at turnstiles F & G at the

Leppings Lane end, recalls that at approximately 2pm

he was inforaed by a turnstile operator that a fan was

trying to gain admission without a ticket.   PC Grant

detained this person and took him to Gate C, where he

was ejected.




In the process, however, both this officer and his

colleague found themselves surrounded by a number of

the man's friends, who were generally abusive and

claimed that he did in fact have a ticket.   This was

a scene, which according to PC Grant, was repeated

approximately a dozen times over the next 20 minutes,

during which time many fans were also offering money

to the turnstile operators in an unsuccessful attempt
         to gain entry.




5.8.30   PC 298 Scholey, who was on duty in the West Stand,       STATEMENT
                                                                  30
         considered that the early behaviour of the spectators

         on the terraces was generally good but, at some time

         after 2.00pm, he saw a youth (who he describes as 6'

         tall, 20 years, heavy build) standing on a barrier,

         gesticulating to the crowd in an attemept to encourage

         them to sing.




5.8.31   Around the same time, his supervisory officer, PS 2001   STATEMENT
                                                                  31
         Burman, who was nearby, had occasion to speak to a

         youth who was trying to gain entrance to the West

         Stand by climbing up fro® the terraces.   Realising

         that the Sergeant could not reach him, the youth

         gesticulated with a 'V' sign, and shouted, "Fuck off"

         on several occasions.   Although this man was just out

         of reach, tlie Sergeant could smell drink on his

         breath.




5.8.32   Sergeant Buraan also witnessed the youth (mentioned by

         PC 298 Scholey) who was standing on the crush barrier,

         and saw that this individual fell off the barrier

         several times before being assisted back by his

         associates to take up his position as before.




5.8.33   In addition, the Sergeant saw a second youth (des­

         cribed as 20 years with long, blond hair) climbing on
         to the right hand side of the barrier and, once up­

         right, the youth launched himself bodily with arms and

         hands outstretched, as though he was diving into a

         pool of water.    The Sergeant states:-

                "The crowd was so compressed in front of

                him that he had no likelihood of falling

                and hurting himself seriously, but kept

                landing on top of the heads and shoulders

                in front of him.”

         Sergeant Buraan estimates that the youth climbed back

         on to the barrier and repeated this performance on a

         further 10-20 occasions before becoming involved in an

         altercation with another youth directly in front of

         him.   The officer tried to attract the attention of

         both youths who he had seen on the barrier, but could

         not get close enough to attract their attention.




5.8.34   It should be mentioned that both officers believed

         that the barrier concerned was the one which later

         collapsed, with Sergeant Burman being quite definitive

         ''This youth was stood on top of the barrier that was

         later to collapse...", and PC Scholey being rather

         less so, "In hindsight I believe this barrier was the

         one that collapsed."




5.8.35   PC 2167 Frost, who was also on duty in the West Stand,   STATEMENT
                                                                  32
         was, during the same period, approached by a Liverpool

         supporter, who told the officer that on two separate
occasions there has been a build up of spectators out­

side the Leppings Lane entrance, and that turnstile

operators were accepting £10 "in the hand" from spec­

tators who had arrived without tickets.     This officer

had occasion to eject a spectator from the West Stand

who had gained entrance by scaling a barrier wall, and

whilst this individual was not drunk, the officer con­

sidered that he had been drinking.




At 2.17pm the Control Room received a message from         STATEMENT
                                                           5
Superintendent Marshall, requesting that Leppings Lane

be closed to traffic.    Although the closed circuit

television monitors did not identify any apparent

problem, appropriate action was taken for officers to

attend and to effect the closure.




At 2.22pm, a further message was received from Super­      STATEMENT

intendent Marshall, advising Control that Leppings         5

Lane was still open to traffic and, as a consequence,

a further message was communicated ,to the appropriate

officers for action to be taken.     Superintendent

Marshall then asked for a message to be passed to

South Yorkshire Transport, advising them of the

closure, in order that bus routes could be deviated,

and this was arranged.




As 2.30pm approached, Superintendent Murray noticed        STATEMENT
                        that the North Stand appeared to be about half full,

                        and that whilst the West Stand was filling, there

                        still remained a number of large, clear sections in

                        certain 'pens'.   By this time a large crowd was

                        gathering outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles, which

                        was not considered to pose any real problem, as there

                        was still 30 minutes before kick-off.




         5*8.39         At around this time Chief Superintendent Duckenfield        STATEMENTS
/ . TS

                                                                                    3 & 5
                        and Superintendent Murray had a short discussion about

                        the criteria for delaying the kick-off, and Superin­

                        tendent Murray informed the Chief Superintendent that

                        it had been agreed that, in the event of any identi­

                        fiable problem which prevented people from arriving on

                        time (e.g. motorway accidents or bad weather con­

                        ditions), then kick-cff would be delayed.   However, if

                        it was simply a case that spectators arrived "at the

                        last minute", having previously decided to go "else­

                        where", then this would not normally be a reason for

                        delaying the kick-off.




         5.9      (i)   The Developing Situation

         5.9.1          By 2.30pm the situation outside the turnstiles at

                        Leppings Lane end was becoming much more congested.     A
typical observation is that provided by PC 2887 Grant,    STATEMENT
                                                          29
who said that large numbers of Liverpool supporters

had arrived by this time and were pressed up to the

turnstiles.   The view through the turnstiles was

totally obstructed and it quickly became apparent that

the searching of fans was no longer practicable or

even possible.   The priority was to permit a quick

entry to as many ticket holding fans as quickly and

safely as possible, whilst at the same time ejecting

those without tickets.




It was during one such ejection via, Gate C, that the

steward on duty refused to open it as he feared that

spectators would rush in.   He was, however, instructed

to open the gate, and the individual was ejected with­

out significant problems.




Pressure continued to increase outside the turnstiles

and fans were becoming trapped within them, which

caused further problems.    It was noted that a large

number of fans who were entering at this stage were

under the influence of alcohol, (some quite heavily),

but by this time it was not possible to eject them

due to crowd pressure behind the turnstiles and at

Gate C.




There is video evidence to show that there were           VEBO REFEECE
                                                          FILM 14
greater numbers of fans at the turnstiles, extended       14.35.20
        back into Leppings Lane.     This figure was increasing,

        despite the continuing entry of fans into the ground

        via the turnstiles.     At this time fans were attemp­

        ting to climb the fencing and a densely packed crowd

        of at least 5,000 were seen forming back from the

        turnstile area into the main road.      There was an over­

        spill of 500 or more away from turnstiles A-G into the

        service road, down at the side of Gate C.




5.9.5   At about 2.30pm Inspector Purdy was on the concourse          STATEMENT
                                                                      17
        outside the turnstiles, supervising and assisting

        serials 16, 17, 18 and 19.     The spectators had been

        queueing orderly, when suddenly the turnstiles seemed

        to fill and he could saell beer in the atmosphere.       He

        stated, "It just smelled like the tap room of a pub"

        snd there were a considerable nuaber of drunken per­

        sons all around him.




        The crowd became a mass of pushing, shoving persons,

        and he says:

             "People were crushed up against the wall,

             the turnstiles, the far wall and barrier.

             I saw people in pain, suffering.      There

            was a child passed from well in the middle

             of the crowd to ae on the rail.      He was

             limp.     I thought he was dead.   He was limp

            in my arms.      (The child recovered almost

            immediately and was passed to the edge of
     the crowd).     The pressure was so great,

     people were screaming and crying, they

     could not move."

At 2.35 pm the static camera mounted at the South West      VHEO REFERENCE
                                                            FILM 14
corner of the West Stand, viewing the Leppings Lane
                                                            14.35.20

turnstile area, showed a continuous build up of fans,

which increased significantly as time progressed.




When Ground Control became aware of the situation, at       STATEMENT

2.40pm, two serials were instructed to attend Leppings      33


Lane. Sergeant Higgins, under the command of Inspector

Delaney, was ordered to attend the turnstiles, the

full serial 20 being required.     On arrival at the

rear of the North Stand, they were deployed to Gate A,

where they remained.




Inspector Hand-Davis and his detail of 13 Mounted           STATEMENT
                                                            8
officers (later increased by 4 to a total of 17) was

heavily engaged in crowd control duties on the outside

of the turnstiles.     The fans had changed from a quiet,

good humoured crowd to a mass of people intent on

getting into the ground.     He was fully aware of the

serious situation developing, and states:

     "I shouted continuously to the crowd to

     stop pushing, as did the other officers.

    We waved our arms to convey our meaning.

    The crowd simply ignored us and kept

     increasing in volume.    Things eventually
    became so overcrowded that my horse,

     'Hussar', who is seventeen and a half hands

     high, and weighs well over half a ton, was

     surrounded by fans who were wrapped around

     his whole body like cellophane or cling­

     film.   The horse could not move a muscle.

    He began to lose his footing as he was

     lifted by the crowd."




Inspector Hand-Davis used various tactics in an

endeavour to control the crowd, but he states:

     "Realising the hopelessness of the situa­

     tion, I formed a line of horses across the

     Leppings Lane access area outside of the

     blue wrought iron gate, in a further

     attempt to stop fans joining the 'melee.'

     I would think around 11/12 horses lined

     up and formed a quite effective barrier

     sideways onto the crowd, who were still

     pouring along Leppings Lane towards the

     ground. I could see the tactics working

     to some reasonable effect - the crowd began

     to thin slightly at the turnstile -

     suddenly they started throwing themselves

     under the horses legs and bellies.     They

     forced themselves between each horse with

     a complete disregard for their own safety."
The detail of Mounted officers, with the assistance of

constables, attempted to close the outer perimeter

wrought iron gates, in an attempt to alleviate the

crush at the turnstiles, the gates held for some time.
                          \

PS Proctor physically held the double wrought iron        STATEMENT
                                                          34
gate in position, while a 1 inch metal bolt was

secured in the ground.   Mounted officers and Foot

officers made a determined effort to keep that gate

closed, but the crowd, by sheer pressure, bent the        APPENDIX
                                                          61
securing bold and forced the gate open, rushing           (photographs
                                                          9-12)
through.




In the Control Room, difficulties were being experien­    APPENDIX
                                                          62
ced of a different nature for, at 2.42pm, radio trans­

missions on UHF began to break up so badly that it

quickly becaae apparent that there was a malfunction

with the equipaent.   It was evident that officers were

able to hear each other on the 'talk through' facility

and that the fault appeared to be located in some part

of the equipment within the Control Room.




At this time the ground control personnel at Hills­

borough requested Force Control to provide a traffic

mobile equipped with a public address system, to go

immediately to Leppings Lane and assist, due to the

crowd pushing at Gates A and B.   PC                      STATEMENT
                                                          35
Buxton in a traffic mobile attended and made use of

the public address system in an attempt to restrain
the crowd as they surged forward.




Inspector Ellis was on duty outside on Leppings Lane,     STATEMENT
                                                              28
when the Landrover driven by PC Buxton arrived.     The

vehicle was carrying a roof mounted public address

system, which was used in an attempt to control the

crowd.     Inspector Ellis climbed onto the roof of the

Landrover and took control of the public address

system and personally instructed the crowd to stop

pushing.




At 2.44pm, Superintendent Marshall requested the          STATEMENT
                                                          4
Police Ground Control Room to make use of the Hills­

borough ground tannoy system to instruct people out­

side the Leppings Lane turnstiles not to push.     This

was complied with and PC Ryan, stationed within Ground    STATEMENT
                                                          36
Control, used the ground tannoy system to warn the

Leppings Lane crowd of the dangerous situation and

requested that they refrain from pushing.




Superintendent Marshall was monitoring the worsening      STATEMENT
                                                          4
situation, he observed mounted officers in the thick

of the crowd who were clearly having a most difficult

time, their horses were struggling and anxiety was

written on the faces of more than one officer.     Over

the next few minutes scenes outside the turnstiles

deteriorated very rapidly, supporters were under the

influence of drink, people were fighting each other,
the best efforts of Foot and Mounted officers failed

to deter the relentless pressure at the turnstiles.




By 2.45pm it was also becoming obvious to officers on

duty inside the turnstile entrance to Leppings Lane

that serious problems were developing.      PC Grant    STATEMENT
                                                        29
states that at this stage:

     "Fans entering the ground were near to

     collapse. Many did fall down through

     exhaustion on gaining entry.   Some fans

     were crying, nearly all were extremely

     angry, abusing us and shouting at me to

     do something.   I was grabbed by one

     hysterical man in his late 20's, who shook

     me violently and screamed at my face,

     'Listen, you fucking bastard, they’re

     dying out there - kids.   Where's your

     fucking radio, do something, do some­

     thing.’"




PC 1675 Rich is one of the many officers who provides   STATEMENT

                                                        18
a similar account:

     "As the crowd built up, I became con­

     scious of people having difficulty in

     entering through the turnstiles.    The

     crush outside was such that the turn­

     stiles, on occasions, were unable to

     function properly, and people were being
     injured in the turnstile passage.    More

     than one man emerged from the turnstile

     bent double, and I saw one man physically

     sick."




Spectators then began to scale the walls, some bran­

dishing valid entry tickets and other complaining of a

crush outside.   Inspector J. J. Bennett, who was the      STATEMENT
                                                           21
Logistics Officer for the semi-final, witnessed what

was taking place, saw that all the officers on

duty were fully engaged, and concluded that further

assistance was required at this location.    His

request, which was made with his personal radio, was

acknowledged, after which he then approached the turn­

stiles to find   thatwhilst many spectators who    were

being admitted   were abusive and offensive, his   over­

riding impression was one of panic and fear amongst

the spectators   that serious injuries or death were

about to occur   in the crush outside.




Inspector Bennett informed Control, with a view to

additional action being taken outside the ground, and

was then joined by Inspector Delaney and members of        STATEMENT

the 'F* Division Crime and Vandal Squad, who had res­      37

ponded to his initial call for further police assis­

tance.   Inspector Bennett noted that those who were

attempting to gain entry over the boundary walls

appeared to be in considerable danger from electric
cables, and he therefore climbed onto the roof of a

turnstile in order to deter further incursions.

Instead, however, he found himself confronted with a

huge crowd which extended beyond the outer barrier

gates and into Leppings Lane in both directions.

Under normal circumstances he would have estimated the

size of the crowd as being approximately 2 thousand,

but such was the concentrated crush that he considers

 the true number was probably twice this figure.

Realising the immediate and obvious danger which

existed, Inspector Bennett decided that, rather than

preventing persons from climbing over the wall, he

would allow them to do so, and indicated a safe route

back to ground level, via the route which he himself

had taken to reach his current point of vantage.     He

noted chat, whilst ncne cf the sen vere disorderly at

this stage, a number had difficulty in standing and

had obviously been drinking.    A number, having gained

entry, passed their tickets back to waiting spectators

and this was a further problem with which the officers

found themselves so suddenly and unexpectedly con­

fronted.




Many fans who jumped from the turnstile

roof, injured themselves in the process, and, in

addition, guttering was dislodged, which fell to the

ground.    One spectator almost landed "on top" of WPC

3107 Pearson, who asked him if he could produce a
ticket.   At this, he became very abusive and

struggled violently with the female officer, who had

to be assisted by one of her male colleagues to eject

the offender from the ground.




A further complication which had occurred is mentioned

in the statement of PC 1543 Aitken, who found that        STATEMENT

spectators had been queueing at the wrong turnstiles,    39

and were being returned to other queues.    As the

pressure increased, a stone pillar had become loose

and had to be removed for the protection of the

spectators.




The pushing on the outside gates continued, and one

spectator said to PC 1423 Newbould, who was also at      STATEMENT
                                                         40
this location, "It's fucking hell out there     you'll

have to do something, people are getting crushed."

Similarly, according to PC 1780 Craighill, "People       STATEMENT

were screaming and shouting for help".                   41




Officers outside, including Mounted officers, were

having increasing difficulties in maintaining control

of the crowd.   There was immense pressure observed at

Gate A, officers stationed within the turnstile

concourse were concerned that the gate would be forced

away from the wall supports.    There was continuous

pressure at this gate for the next 15 ainutes.
5.9.26   PC Kirby was on duty outside turnstiles 1-8 when he         STATEMENT

         felt the sudden surge towards the turnstiles and was        42

         pushed forcibly to the walls, several adults passed

         him, clutching their children, many were crying, and

         one child had a bright red colour to his   face.   People

         were shouting, "I'ts going to be another Heysel and

         people are going to get fucking killed."




5.9.27   The Constable recalls that he now feared   for his life

         and the life of those near, as the surge of the

         turnstiles reached unbearable pressure -

              "I was aware thre was an old man on the

         floor, but could do nothing about it.

         There was a look of sheer panic on the

         faces of those around."

         He himself began tc feel extremely frightened and

         faint.   People were shouting, "Someone's going to die

         here".




5.9.28   Officers deployed on the outside of the turnstiles and

         on the inside ground area of turnstiles have similar

         accounts of the fear, anxiety and distress as the

         crowd relentlessly crushed towards the turnstiles and

         regardless of the attempts that were being made by all

         officers, along those lines of turnstiles, an

         impossible situation was developing where positive

         action was necessary to relieve the pressure.
As fans came through all sections of the turnstiles,

some were saying words to the effect that "if

something isn't done then people will be crushed and

killed outside."    These fans were white faced, shaking

and crying.

During this time, senior officers in the Control Room

had been monitoring the situation, and Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield now wondered whether,           STATEMENT
                                                               3
because of the deteriorating situation, he should

delay the kick-off, to ease the difficulties.

However, the first team then ran out onto the pitch

and he therefore considered that this was an option

which was no longer available.




At 2.47 pm Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, whilst in .   STATEMENT

Ground Control, received a request, from                   3


Superintendent Marshall, for the exit gates to be

opened to release the pressure arounjd the turnstile

entrances.    Whilst considering this request, assessing

the space in the ground and looking at the CCTV

monitor, Mr. Duckenfield saw Gate C open and

supporters enter at the rear of the Leppings Lane

St and.




Sergeant Crawford was on duty at the rear of               STATEMENT

turnstiles A - G, which are adjacent to Gate C.     The    22

Sergeant was present when Gate C opened, the time

would be 2.48 pa.    After a few moments he, together
with a steward, was able to close the gate, only a few

fans having entered by that gate.




Fans were climbing the walls of the turnstiles, and

turnstile G collapsed and was inoperable.   After a

period of what can only be described as chaos Gate C

was opened.




Mounted police officers, including PC Lindsay,            STATEMENT
                                                          43
attempted to control the influx of fans as Gate C

opened, and force the crowd back aw 2 y from the gate

towards the turnstiles.   There was seen to be a          APPENDIX
                                                          65
                                                          (photographs)
relaxation of pressure in the service road and Gate C
                                                          MWL 15/6A
was closed, the time being 2.49 pa.   Evidence from the
                                                          VTEEO REFSSO;
video shows no more than 200 supporters having entered    TAPE 14
                                                          14.48.12
through Gats C.




A large number of spectators continued to converge on

Leppings Lane from both directions, the people were

amassed outside the turnstiles and, again, a fairly

large section of the crowd were spilling down the

service road and being forced up against Gate C.




There is evidence from officers’ reports to show that

the extreme pressure in front of the turnstile had

slowed the movement of fans through into the ground.

Sergeant Crawford states that turnstile G was             STATEMENT
                                                          22
distorted through physical pressure and it was
inoperable and fans were becoming stuck in the

turnstiles.   This is supported by evidence in the form

of a computer print-out, which has come into our

possession, which shows that Gate G admitted only 583

during the whole of the afternoon, as compared with an

average of 1076 spectators through the other gates in      APPENDIX
                                                           62
that bank of turnstiles.




Detective Superintendent McKay was present when            STATEXEST
                                                               11
Superintendent Marshall deployed both Mounted and Foot

patrol officers in an attempt to stem the movement of

fans towards the turnstiles.




Conditions deteriorated, missiles were thrown and he

witnessed a beer can with drink flowing from it strike

a Mounted Officer, who was almost unseated.    The crowd

became progressively    unruly and aggressive and he

began to have grave fears that the situation could

only end in disaster.




At this stage a second message was received from

Superintendent Marshall to open the gates, stating         STATEMENT
                                                               4
that if this was not done then someone "was going to

be killed".




The tone of the Superintendent's voice conveyed to

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield that the police were      STATEMENT

now faced with a serious situation and that Mr.            3
Marshall was making a demand rather than a request.

Nevertheless, the Chief Superintendent realised the

serious Implications of what was involved, and saw

from his television monitors that the scene outside

the gates was one where spectators were being crushed

and officers were under severe pressure.     On the

inside of the ground, however, there were spaces on

the inside of the terrace and on the concourse, and

room to ease the situation.




Chief Superintendent Duckenfield reasoned as follows:

     If the gates were opened there MAY be crushing

     and injuries inside.     If the gates remained

     closed, there WOULD be serious injury or death on

     the outside.

Faced with this predicament, Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield says that he was left with no reasonable

or practical alternative.     He therefore issued the

instruction, "If there's likely to be serious injury

or death, I have no option but to open the gates -

open the gates."

Sergeant Crawford was standing at the rear of the

turnstiles A - G, very near Gate C:

     "The mood of the fans entering through the

     turnstiles was getting worse and many were under

     the influence of drink, the noise outside was

     tremendous.    Suddenly, Gate C burst open for a

     second time and fans in increasing numbers
     entered the ground."

At 2.52 pm the video recording shows that Gate C was        VIDEO REFERENCE
                                                            TAPE 14
opened and fans, encouraged by Mounted officers, were
                                                            14.52/30

moving away from the front of turnstiles A - G, and

entering through the open gate.     There was no rush as

the fans were seen to just walk into the ground.




The video shows that the situation still remained           VIDEO REFERENCE
                                                            TAPE 14
critical within the turnstile areas 1 - 16, and
                                                            14.53 .’43

considerable pressure was being exerted on Gate A,

which was closed.   Officers all along this section of

the turnstiles continued to struggle in their attempts

to get fans through the turnstiles as quickly as

possible.   Officers' reports give graphic accounts of

the worsening situation.    Sergeant 1757 Bums was in       STATEMENT
                                                            44
charge of Serial 15, consisting of 10 officers.      They

were reserved for the area of the Leppings Lane

turnstiles 11-16.   The accounts of some of this serial

have been quoted earlier.     Sergeant Bums describes

some of the fans as behaving like animals, others were

shouting for assistance, Gate B was under immense

pressure.   There were references to "people going to

be killed out there."   The smell of alcohol is said to

have pervaded the atmosphere.     The general opinion of

the serial was that many people were in great

difficulty outside the turnstiles.     There was concern

that Gate B would collapse.     Officers relate to

two other policemen not from their serial, and a
         steward, opening Gate B.    Estimates differ, but it is

         said that between 200 and 1000 fans gained access at

         this point.




5.9.46   The perimeter gates were still held by the Mounted

         Section, although there is evidence of increased crowd

         pressure on the ranks of Mounted officers.




5.9.47   The video shows that the    crowd within Leppings Lane         VIDEO KEFEFQCE

         was swaying and exerting considerable pressure on the          TAPE 14
                                                                        14.54.20
         police.




5.9.48   Gate C remained open and    as the crowd immediately in

         front of the turnstiles began to diminish, the mass on

         Leppitigs Lane broke through the rank of horses and

         surges in through Gate C.




5.9.49   At 2.45 pm the turnstiles 1 - 1 6   and the front of Gate

         A were still severely congested.     Fans were climbing

         the walls and turnstiles, and a large number were

          attemtpting to force Gate A open.    Officers on duty

         behind Gate A (Sergeant Higgins) state that the                 STATEMENT
                                                                        33
          pressure on the gate was so great that it was in

          danger of being forced from the wall.    The gate

          steward was having to physically hold the bolts in

          place to prevent them springing open.




5.9.50    (Point of information - The steward at this gate was

          Jack Stone, who is known to Sergeant 840 Wright.     He was   STATEMENT
                                                                         45
requested to open Gate A for reserve officers being

deployed at the Leppings Lane turnstiles.   Mr. Stone

refused and, as a result, these officers had to

negotiate a nuaber of internal gates from the North

Stand to Gate C on the West Stand, which by this time

had been opened. When Gate A was eventually opened, at

the behest of the police, the incoming fans only

gained access to the North Stand and could not

transfer to the West Stand.   Mr. Stone has since

received much publicity.




Gate C was still open, the Mounted officers were

attempting to hold the crowd back at the perimeter

gate, but the line was breached, and the fans simply

surged forward, defying all attempts by the Mounted

officers, and began to enter through the open Gate C.

During this tiae, Gate   B was opened.




At this tiae, Inspector Delaney, Sergeant Higgins and

F Crime and Vandal (Serial 20) were deployed to Gate A

having been instructed by Ground Control to attend as

a reserve unit.   The unit were gathered on the inside

of Gate A as it was impossible for them to go out onto

the concourse due to the pressure on that gate.     Gate

A had to be held by two stewards, and they were

pushing up the top bolts as continuing pressure and

shaking was loosening them,and the bottom bolts.

Sergeant Higgins radioed Ground Control and requested

that Gate A be opened to save life and
limb stating that if not, someone would be killed.        A

reply came back over the air to open Gate A.




Serial 20 were gathered together and made a single

file on the wall side, the Sergeant nearest the gate.

Another unit did likewise on the turnstile side of the

gate.   The Sergeant ordered that gate to be opened,

the steward at first refused, suggesting that were he

to conform to the police request, then many aore

deaths would occur.     The Sergeant explained his

reasons for wanting the gate opened, the steward then

shouted through the glass panel, telling the crowd he

was opening the gates.     The steward then showed them

the key through a small glass spy panel,

demonstrating he was going to use it to open up.

Toe lock part was opened, followed cy the top and

bottom bolts.     The two serials prepared to stop any

stampede when the gate was opened as the pressure

was relieved.




Due to the fact that all three gates were now open,

the crowd began to diminish in size as they entered

the ground.     At this moment, a cheer went up from

within the ground and the urgency of spectators to
 •^•55   Once action was taken to open the gates,

         police officers within the concourse found themselves

         a target of abuse as the spectators entered the

         ground.




5.9.56   According to the statement of VPC 3131 Lewis:            STATEMENT
                                                                  46
              "There was continued abuse froa the fans.

              A short time later I recall the blue gates

              being opened.    The following scene was

              terrible.    Fans were pushing, running,

              fighting their way through the gates like

              a stampede, people were being carried

              through.    Again, anger and abuse were

              directed towards police officers.     One

              fan was pulled from the crowd with two

              cans of beer, others asked if they could

              stand with us as they were frightened...

              I saw one of the stewards stood flat

              against a wall to avoid being injured."




5.9.57   Another officer, PC 2654 Richardson, describes the      STATEMEKT

          :ene as ioiiovs:-




              "Such were the numbers of people entering

              that I feared for my own safety, and I

              released my hold on the youth I was escor­

              ting and took refuge in a turnstile until

              the flood had subsided.    As these people
               had entered the ground, there was obvious

               panic and they were literally climbing

               over each other in an attempt to get to

               the terraces.    After they had passed, I

               gave what assistance I could to those

               injured and trampled, and when the situa­

               tion appeared calm, I returned to my

               position."




5.9.58   At 3.00pm Gate C was closed and, once more, spectators

         were seen entering the ground via the normal turn­

         stile procedures.     Very shortly after this, according

         to officers' statements, Gate A, under the control of

         Inspector Sykes, and Gate B, were also closed, thereby     STATEKENT
                                                                    16
         effectively restoring normality and allowing the

         correct entry procedures to be adopted.




5*5.59   The number of police officers engaged in duties out­

         side the Leppings Lane turnstiles at the height of the

  . "    problems, just prior to the opening of Gate C at

         2.48pm were as follows - Sector Commander, Superinten­

         dent Marshall,   Detective Superintendent   McKay, Chief

         Inspectors Varing and Creaser, Inspectors Purdy,

         Sykes, Bennett, White, Ellis and Delaney, Sergeants -

         9, Constables - 78, Detectives - 6 , Dog Handlers - i,

         Traffic Officer with Land Rover - 1.




5.9.60   Mounted Officers - Inspector Hand-Davis (SYP),

         Inspector Wilkinson (Merseyside), Sergeant - I (SYP),

         Sergeant 1925 Smith (Merseyside), Constables - 4 (SYP)

         Constables - 8 (Merseyside), Constables - 1 (Notting-
5.10         (J )   Leppings Lane T e rra c in g

5,10.1              Inspector David Bullas, the     officer in charge of Serial    STATEMENT
                                                                                   48
                    13, was positioned in the West Stand shortly before the

                    3.00pm kick-off, and noticed that the crowd build-up on

                    the terracing appeared to be normal, with no evidence of

                    overcrowding or crushing.      He could see that the gates

                    which allowed people to move from 'pen* to ’pen', at the

                    rear of the goal, were open all the time, and that mem­

                    bers of the crowd were, in fact, using these constantly.




^5-10.2             After the 2 teams had been     on the pitch for what he des­

                     cribes as "several minutes    before the kick-off", Inspec­

                     tor Bullas looked down on the crowd from a position in

                     the centre of the stand, and saw what he describes as a

                     "river of people” suddenly enter the terracing from the

                     central tunnel.     The rwedge of people   sessec to push

                     forward down the terracing - pushing the people that

                     were already standing there, forward.      Inspector Bullas

                     attempted to contact the Police Control Post by personal

^                    radio, but was unable to do so, due to the amount of

                     "traffic" on the radio, and the crowd noise around hiss.

                     He attempted to beckon the attention of the officers who

                     were standing at the rear of the Leppings Lane goai., ana

                     saw, shortly afterwards, that these officers were

                     obviously aware that something was wrong within the

                     crowd.




                     Police Constable 1285 Smith was one of those officers         STATEMENT
    5-10.3
                                                                                    uo✓
and, on the 15 April 1989, was carrying out a duty which

he has performed almost continually since 1983-   He has

policed a number of semi-finals at this location, and

was present in 1988 when the same teams met at Hills­

borough.




On that occasion, the terraces were filled well prior to

kick-off and during the course of the match, PC Smith

and his colleagues had to suffer a great deal of verbal

abuse and spitting from the spectators in the terraces,

many of whom had been obviously drinking.




At the conclusion of the game two of the perimeter

gates, leading from the terraces to the playing area,

were opened by spectators reaching through the fencing

and releasing the lock mechanism.   Part of the perimeter

fencing was ripped away and, by this method, a number of

spectators were able to gain access onto the perimeter

track.



As a result of ths prcb'^ms exr^r icrvc^d during th& 19S8

semi-final, modifications were carried out to the gate

mechanisms to prevent fans from reaching through and

releasing the mechanism.   Metal sheets were welded into

place, and the fencing which was replaced had a smaller

mesh.




Prior to kick-off on the 15 April, 1989'PC Smith was
           relieved, to take refreshments, and returned to his post

           at 2 .50 pm, to                          find that whilst there was no                gapwithin

           the crowds inthe centre ’pens', "they were                                      not full."

           This is corroborated by PC 700 Helliwell, who relieved                                            STATEMENT
                                                                                                             50 .
           PC Smith for refreshments, and confirms that there were

           empty spaces in the 'pens’.                           It is relevant to note that

           the crowd in the centre 'pen' were seen to push and

           surge forward on three or four occasions, but there was

           no crushing at the front at this time.                                PC Smith walked

           towards Gate 3» where he saw a group of fans (approxi­

           mately 2 0 - 3 0 in number) jumping up and down, whilst at

           the same time pushing, thereby causing a surging towards

           the front parts of the terrace.                           According to PC Smith,

           this group were positioned half way down the terracing,

           tothe left                       of Gate 3 and, as he looked towards                  them, a

           cheer went up                            and be knew that the teams had cose cnto

           the pitch.                     PC Smith states:

                 "There was a lot of pushing in the crowd

                 in the                      'pen' in front of me, the Centre

                 South,                     surged forward to the fencing, some

                 r - v p / '- v r - w e   <□ f -   t'V jg   -r            S <r' T >6 2 J B ^ G




                 The crowd then moved back.                           I recall a ball

                 hitting the perimeter fence near to Gate 4,

                 and the fans again surged forward and

                 back..."




5 . 10.8   At this stage PC Smith saw a serial of police officers

           walking in front of the North Stand, near to the corner
with the terracing.



Suddenly, Gate No. 3 "flew open", and the crowd moved

back from the 'pens'.   PC Smith closed the gate

immediately and assumed that the pressure of the surge

had been responsible for the gate opening.    At this

state, there was no great pressure at the front, and

PC Smith was joined by 2 more officers, who he assumed

were from the serial he had seen a few seconds earlier.




Without warning, the gate opened again and PC Smith

states:

     "...I attempted to re-close, but was unable

     to do so, due to pressure from the fans,

     these were not the same fans who had been

     stood there on the previous occasion."




Why the fans were not the same as those who PC Smith had

seen on the "previous occasion" is a matter of conjec­

ture, and it is not felt appropriate that any conclusion

should be drawn in this submission.   On this occasion

PC Smith was assisted by his colleagues to close the

gate, but he is not sure whether it was fully locked at

this point.   Suddenly, PC Smith heard fans shouting and

screaking, "We're squashed, open the gates you bas­

tards."   On stepping back from the gate he   saw

that people were tightly packed up against the perimeter

fence and noticed, in particular, 2 or 3 young women to
the right of the gate.         It was at this stage that the

officer realised the seriousness of the situation and

transmitted a message over his radio, asking permission

to open the gates.       In doing this, he was merely com­

plying with the instruction of his Operational Order.                   APPENDIX
                                                                        39


It is relevant to note (in respect of the order of

events as they took place) that whilst PC Smith received

no reply, he recalls hearing some message about "a gate

being opened elsewhere."         If this timing is correct,

then it would appear that the crushing at the front of

the terraces began prior to (or at approximately the

same time) as permission was granted for the opening of

the exit gates by the Police Commander.




~                 —    sn       fvi tVon de s cr 2.be s new i!the

noise was terrible and people were screaming a different

type of scream."       He opened ■Gate 3 fully, and then saw

                      being forced onto the fence,          anc

ine clue.   He communicated another radio message to tne

      4 ’’This   is serious , reoole are dying m            here    »

before arternoting to puil people out. oi

found, however,       that spectators were "jarred solia" and

that one of the females was "turning a dark colour.”

At this stage, FC Smith climbed onto the hoardings,

looked over the fence, and gestured for the fans to get

back, but to no avail - he was told, "Fuck off, copper ,

and was spat upon.          In his statement, PC Smith concludes
              as follows:

                      "On reflection I cannot see any connection

                      between the gates being opened at the rear

                      of the Leppings Lane stand and the crush

                      in the terraces.    There never appeared any

                      blockage in the tunnel entrance/exit.        I

                      formed the impression when trying to get

                      people out of the gate that there were

                      people underneath the ones I could see.
i

                      Whilst getting people out of the gate, a

                      barrier from the terrace was thrown over

                      the perimeter fence.    It was st this time

                      I realised that a barrier had given way.

                      I was completely unaware of where it had

                      come from.    The fencing mesh had bulged

                      outwards whilst the fans were against it,

                      and I later saw that the barrier was

                      situated directly behind 3 gate and the

                      perimeter fencing had been forced to the

                      perimeter wall and buckled.    At no time

                      did there appear to be any great influx of

                      supporters into the pens.     The crush at

                      the front had been considerably lightened

                      by the time the barrier was thrown."




    5.10.14   *->ne     PC Smith’s colleagues, PC 417 Illingworth, was on   STATEMENT
                                                                            51
              duty at Gate No. 5, and witnessed a similar scene in the

              centre ’pens’.       This officer states:
                "I saw the Centre pen was very full, but

                the two outer pens were only about half

                full.     This surprised roe as I had never

                seen the fans so badly dispersed.      At first

                there did not appear to be a serious prob­

                lem, fans were swaying back and forth and

                sane were climbing...into the stand pen.

               This is a common occurrence at most matches,

                the swaying and pushing became much worse

                to the extent that females were screaming

               and fans were beginning to panic."




5-10.15   By this time,     PC Illingworth had moved near to Gate 4

          and transmitted a radio message to the effect, "There

          is a serious crush down here, it is serious."       At this

          stage, the officer opened Gate No. 4, and assisted an

          injured man onto the track.      Fans began to spill out

          and PC Illingworth attempted to shepherd them back

          through Gates 5 and 6 (into the side 'pens' ), which he

          had also opened.     It was at this stage that PC Illing­

          worth saw the     body of a man behind the fence,   but it was

          impossible at     that stage to get to him, as he   was laid

          flat ana was trodden on by other spectators in their

          attempts to escape.




5-10.16   Police Sergeant 2379 Swift, who was stood nearby,                STATEMENT
                                                                           52
          realised that a serious problem was developing as Gate

          4 was opened.     He fully expected a flood of spectators
to surge onto the track,     but then found that no person

came    through the gate of their own accord.     The crowd

was so tightly packed that each person had to be pulled

through, as officers became embroiled in frantic efforts

to rescue people through the gate.




Paradoxically, it was obvious to the Sergeant that the

problem was confined to only an area at the front of the

terracing; indeed:

       "It was obvious that the people only a

       short distance away   into the terracing

       and only a few feet   away from the fence,

       were unaware of the people in distress...

       there was still a crescendo of noise from

       the main body of the crowd, who were

       engrossed in the match."




This is confirmed by DC 1177 Davies, who states:

       "After assisting a couple of persons over

       the fencing, it became apparent that there

       was no obvious cause for the crushing.

       Behind the 5 deep crush there was plenty

       of space and most people were ignoring

       the crush at the fence and looking forward

       over towards the pitch without any apparent

       distress or discomfort."

These accounts would appear to be further confirmed by

photographs which are now available and also by newsreel
film recordings which were taken at the time.                  VIDEO
                                                               REFERENCE
                                                             news reports
                                                               04.22 (counter)
WPC 3034 Richardson was on duty at Gate 1 when she was         STATEMENT
                                                                54
suddenly confronted by half a dozen people on the perim­

eter track, who had come out of Gate 3.    At this stage

PC Richardson was not aware of what was taking place.




In the Control Room, the scene was being monitored by          STATEMENTS
                                                               3 and 5
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent

Murray, who saw the perimeter gates being opened and

people walking towards Gate 1, who appeared to stand

aimlessly on the track, without any direction.    No radio

communications were being received, and it was con­

sidered at this stage that there had either been a

"pitch invasion" or alternatively spectators had been

re-located in the outer wings of the terraces.




In order to prevent spectators from running onto the          STATEMENT

pitch Chief Inspector McRobbie, who was in the Police

Control Room, went to Gate 1, where he assisted PC

nicnarascn to rc-locats tne spectator’s.




By this time the match had begun and Chief Superin­           STATEMENTS
                                                              3 and 6
tendent Duckenfield directed the Ground Commander,

Superintendent Greenwood, to the Leppings Lane terraces

for an immediate appraisal of the situation.




On his arrival, Superintendent Greenwood saw police
officers near to the open perimeter gates, and it was

immediately apparent to him that there was a crowd prob­

lem involving heavy congestion at the front of the

terraces.     He saw quite clearly that supporters were

being squashed against the fencing in 'pen* 3 and

states:

     "The area behind the gate was heavily

     congested, preventing persons from exiting.

     I snould mention that the perimeter fence

     gate is not wide enough to allow a mass

     exit of persons, being in the order of a

     normal door's width.        The actual terracing

     is at a lower level than the perimeter

     and one has to mount one or more steps

     so as to exit from the terracing, through

     tne gare onto the pitch.        Police officers

    ws* e ui       ^-0   ge - suppor ^.ers out.   i then

    mounted the advertising hoarding, and from

    above fence level, surveyed the whole of

    the crowd in the 'pen'.         I could see that

     there were also people behind the front

    row who were squeezed and being pushed

    towards the fencing.        As one looked further

    back, the crowd, probably more than two

    thirds, were watching the match, quite

    unaware of what was happening at the

    front."
Superintendent Greenwood's immediate assessment was that

the problem could be alleviated if the crowd at the

middle and the back of the terracing moved back to ease

the pressure at the front:

     "There was room to do s o , and the central

     tunnel was clear.      I therefore gestured

     to the crowd in the middle and towards the

     back, with both hands, in a pushing

     motion, shouting at them to move back,

     and also with Doth index fingers, pointing

     down to the front of the crowd, so as to

     indicate to them that there was a problem

     at the front.     I gained no reaction to

     this, and more people started to climb

     towards the fencing.     It was apparent at

     teat stage that the match could not con­

     tinue ."




At j.03pm, as more people were spilling onto the track,

Superintendent Murray saw Superintendent Greenwood            STATEMENT
                                                              5 and 6
standing at the back of the goal, gesticulating by

waving his arms.     The message clearly conveyed to Super­

intendent Murray that this was an indication for the

game to be stopped, and Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

agreed with this request.




Further attempts were made for the spectators to move         STATEMENT
                                                              56
back, and Inspector Beresford, who had attended with his
            serial in response to what he had initially thought was

            a pitch invasion, shouted instructions through a loud

            hailer.




5.10.27     Superintendent Murray went onto the track and approached

            a linesman, whilst Superintendent Greenwood ran onto the                                     STATEMENTS
                                                                                                         5 and 6
            pitch, past the Liverpool goal keeper (who was seem­

            ingly unaware of what was going on around h i m ), and

            succeeded in attracting the referee's attention.                                       The

            referee was informed that a serious incident had

            occurred, that the game must be stopped and the

            players removed from the pitch.                        The referee agreed

            without argument.




5-10.28     Superintendent Greenwood returned to the perimeter fence

                          .   O   VLLLUi   -i.   v E i.. GiiS   6a t K S c * V   uifi. 1 C U j.t


            because of the noise.                An officer was despatched to

            summon the ambulance which was standing nearby, and

            another to alert St. John's Ambulance staff to attend at

            the scene.




5.10.29     The presence of press photographers proved a serious

            hindrance and an officer was deputed to "keep them at

            bay."




5 - 10.30   By now it was obvious to all concerned that a major

            incident had occurred and, at 3 -08pm, Superintendent                                        STATEMENT
                                                                                                         5
            Murray requested a fleet of ambulances, he also asked
                    for cutting equipment to be brought to the scene, and

                    for tannoy messages to be broadcast, asking people at

                    the Leppings Lane end to move back.



5.10.31             Whilst all this was taking place other officers had

                    arrived at the scene. It is appropriate at this

                    stage to quote a number of examples, in order to illus­

                    trate the overwhelming efforts of individual officers to

                    rescue those who were trapped or injured, and also to

                    provide (albeit within a very   limited scope) an illus­

                    tration of the problems which   they encountered.



5-11          (k)   The Rescue Effort
v_n




      .11.1         PC 2887 Grant                                                  STATEMENT
                                                                                   29
                    After the gates had beer, opened, arc the resulting crowd

                    had dispersed into the stadium, PC Grant took a moment

                    to recover, and thought, "thank God that's over."     As he

                    did so, however, he saw a number of police officers

                    running towards Leppings Lane terraces, and at the same

                    "time hi*?ard s tsrncv                                     —

                    tators to leave the pitch.   Together with other officers

                    PC Grant ran onto the pitch, went up to the front of the

                    terrace, and was met with a "scene of carnage", with

                    fans crushed tightly against the fence of the Centre

                    South enclosure, some already blue in the face.     A spec­

                    tator behind Gate 3 fell forward to escape the terrace

                    and, in so doing, became pinned down by those behind him
and completely blocked all escape from this exit.       He

was eventually removed and officers tried to tear down

the fencing around the perimeter.




Throughout this period the officers at the front of the

fence had been subjected to a hail of missiles from the

crowd.   A blue metal crash barrier was thrown from

the crowd, and landed next to them.     PC Grant was hit by

a shoe and coins thrown from the crowd, and removed 9

bodies from the terraces, 4 of which he tried to rescus-

itate, but to no avail.




PC 1790 Craighill

Together with other officers in his serial, PC Craighill

made his way to the back of the terracing and atteniDted

to move supporters from the Centre South    'pen’ into the

less congested South 'pen*.    He states:

     "I shouted to them to move into the South

     'pen', most of the supporters refused

     pointblank, others moved in slowly,

     eitner by ae pushing then; or of   their own

     free will."




At this stage PC Craighill was approached by a drunken

youth, who shouted, "It's your fault, you bastards",

before striking the officer in the face.    PC Craighill

struck the   youth on the arm with his staff and then

lost sight   of him.   The officer then went down the
terracing, and states:

     "I stopped when I reached a number of

     bodies on the floor.    I saw that within

     the pile of bodies, a barrier had fallen

     over, and had been uprooted from the con­

     crete.    There were a large number of

     bodies, mostly lying on top of each other.

     I saw people climbing on top of the

     bodies, trying to climb over the perimeter

     fence."




This officer then tried to rescusitate a youth aged

about 15-16 years, who had been vomitting, and appeared

to have stopped breathing.     As he did so, PC Craighill

was grabbed by a "fan", who was described as "blind

drunk” , who bezan pushing at the officer, swearing and

shouting various obscenities.     Rescusitation on the

youth continued, and he was carried onto the pitch,

where a man who identified himself as a doctor, advised

the officer to "give it up."     He agreed that he was

dead.




PC 2364 Ford also rendered assistance to people in ’pen'

3, assisting in carrying about 10 persons out.     As the

terrace cleared, and through the space in the crowd, he

could see a mass of bodies at the bottom of terrace 3

to the right of Centre.     Bodies were seme 5-6 deep and

below the broken rail.
    5-11.7
             WPC 3023 Martin and WPC 3107 Pearson                          STATEMENTS
                                                                           58 and 38
             Both officers had been standing inside the Leppings Lane

             entrance when they were approached by a man in adis­

             tressed state, who told them that     children at the front

             of the pen were being squashed.     They went through the

             tunnel and found that cries for help were coming from

             different directions.     The officers reached a point

             where they came across "a pile of bodies", at which

             stage PC Martin comments:
r
                  "I think some supporters didn’t realise

                  how serious the situation was, and were

                  more concerned about keeping their spot

                  in case the match started again.     As I

                  was trying to get the injured out, I was

                  getting a lot of verbal abuse    from suppor­

                  ters, and could smell alconcl in the air."




    5.11*8   The dead and injured were removed to the tunnel at the

             rear of the stand, and PC Martin was approached by a

             man, who pointed his finger in her face and called her a

             " fucking murderer."    Both officers witnessed fans

             wandering amongst the dead and injured, frantically

             searching for friends or relatives who were missing.

             PC Pearson recalls:

                  "Most of the fans were in an extreme state

                  of shock.   I tried to comfort and reassure

                  several of these people, but there was

                  little I could do for them, one man clung
        to me and cried hysterically.   I had to

        sit him facing a wall, so he couldn’t see

        the dead bodies lying all around."

This officer believes that from the number of injured

and dead and the condition of some of the bodies, the

crushing must have started some time before the exit

gates were opened. Since her original statement was sub­

mitted PC Pearson has been asked to clarify these re­

marks in greater detail and she has since submitted a

supplementary statement, in which she describes how she

entered the West terrace via the tunnel, forced her way

down the terrace in 'Pen' 4, and was confronted by a

pile of bodies, the uppermost being that of a female,

who was briefly examined.     The deceased had a purple

complexion, and her eyes, lips and nose were almost

blac£.     ?C rearson felt her face and found that it was

cold and it is this officer's opinion that the woman had

been dead longer than the few minutes which had elapsed

between the gates being opened and her discovering the

body.     PC Pearson is an officer of only 8 months service

and, as such has only limited experience.      She is, how­

ever, quite categorical in her belief that the woman had

been dead for some time.




A further statement has since been received from PC 3023

Martin, who confirms that as she went to the terrace via

the tunnel, there were no dead or injured persons within

the tunnel at that time.
Inspector G. Sykes
                                                                       STATEMENT
Inspector Sykes entered the West Stand terrace through

the tunnel and instructed officers in that area to

assist in moving people from the back of the terraces

and out of the ground, in order to enable those at the

front to be rescued.         Some spectators were at first

reluctant to move, but eventually a path was cleared

for the casualties to be transported.            He then saw some

officers who were struggling to carry a young teenage

girl, who was unconscious and who had stopped breathing.

Inspector Sykes assisted to remove the girl, and as she

was being carried up the terracing, her T shirt was

pulled over her head, as a result of which, the top half

of her body was partially naked.          Someone in the crowd

was 't&sn jhsap^ t^o s n c u r.         isr* ii'D Iasi's*,    was

followed by a profane obscenity.          The girl was removed

to the enclosure area, where she was rescusitated, with

the assistance of a young policewoman.




PC 26o6 Butle~                                                         STATEMENT
                                                                        G
In his statement PC Butler describes how he removed

spectators from the terraces, many of whom were

obviously dead.       However, attempts were made to rescusi-

tate each person until death was confirmed by one of the

several doctors, who by this time were at the scene.              PC

Butler tried to rescusitate 7 or 8 persons, and one

subsequently recovered.           Throughout this time, some of
          the fans were being abusive, and missiles were being

          thrown, including a large metal angle plate, which be­

          came embedded in the turf.        PC Butler describes how some

          fans removed hoardings and piled them on the pitch to

          use as stretchers, whilst others climbed onto them,

          singing and jeering, and pulling them to pieces.




5.11.12   PC 2191 Llewellyn
                                                                            STATEMENT
                                                                            60
          PC Llewellyn assisted in directing spectators at the

          back of the terracing, through the tunnel, in order to

          provide more space for the injured at the front.          He

          then saw a man lying on his back, who appeared to be

          unconscious.     With the help of a supporter, PC Llewellyn

          tried to drag him towards the tunnel entrance, and was

          shouting for other spectators to help.          He states that

          "people were watching us struggle" .aitnough, eventually,

          two others came to his assistance ana carried the

          injured man to an ambulance.        Other people were being

          similarly treated, and PC Llewellyn was asked by a young

          female ambulance attendant if he would try to rescus-

          tat 6 3. young b o y , (2,2*00 iO-ll yes.r's , whilst   vo^-'e^

          on another casualty.      The officer saw that the bey had

          been vomitting and that he was not breathing, and did

          not appear to have any pulse.        The officer attempted

          heart massage, and oral rescusitation, but was unable

          to inflate his lungs.      As the ambulance made its journey

          to the Northern General Hospital the boy continued to

          vomit and PC Llewellyn and the young ambulance atten-
dant held him upside down by his legs, in order to re­

move the obstruction, but they were still unable to

inflate his lungs.   The officer continued with oral

rescusitation, until they reached the hospital, but the

child continued to vomit.   On arrival, hospital staff

continued the efforts in vain and approximately 5

minutes after arrival, they pronounced the child dead.




A short time later PC Llewellyn returned in the ambu­

lance with an emergency team, and continued to attend to

the injured who were still being brought out.     PC

Llewellyn states:

     "Many of the fans were shouting and

     swearing at the police, calling us

     'murdering bastards', etc., and on several

     occasions I though" I was going to be

     assaulted, although this never actually

     happened.   I was frightened for my own

     safety, as were other officers."




pr "=g Marsh

The experience of this officer was very similar.       PC

Marsh carried a young boy from the crowd and began

rescusitation as the boy began to vomit.     The same pro­

cedure was repeated and the officer was then joined by

a doctor and together they transported the boy to an

ambulance where, en route to the Northern General

Hospital, PC Marsh repeated the rescusitation and
          eventually got a response.       The child was detained in

          hospital and died a few days later.




5.11.15   WPC 3131 Lewis                                                    STATEMENT
                                                                            *»6
          WPC Lewis succinctly summarises the situation with which

          she suddenly found herself faced - a situation shared        by

          many of her colleagues who were involved in the rescue

          operation:

               "...I went back to the fence, it was

               horrific, I could not get over the fence,

^            I couldn't get into the terracing to help,

              and people were dying in front of me.         I

              went back towards one of the gates, I

              could see police officers inside the

              terracing D e m g pulled back, pushed and

              soused, as zzey tried to cliEb over the
                                       r
              dividing fence, I could see bodies almost

              dead, others badly hurt...I turned and

              attempted tc move wandering fans from the

\            centre of the pitch, again coding up

              against   anger and abuse.     I car. re~e~ber

              seeing other police officers trying to

              rescusitate people who were dead... There

              were still bodies at the front.       I can

              remember seeing a young girl, approxi­

              mately 16-17 years, squashed against the

              fence, again, blue, her eyes open, vomit

              around her mouth and nose, she was still
                       clinging to the fence with her right hand,

                       her face turning a pale yellow colour,

                       again she was dead.   I tried again to

                       get through the gate, I was this time

                       elbowed out of the way by a fan.   I don't

                       know how long all this took to happen,

                       it seemed like a life time."




5-12     (1)   The Soveaent of Casualties and Subsequent Police Action

5.12.1         Despite the concentration of efforts events unfol­

               ded quickly and, by 3.07pm Chief Superintendent Ducken-

               field had instituted 'Operations Support' to make                STATEMENT
                                                                                3
               available the services of every available police officer

               in South Yorkshire who was on duty at that particular

               time.     In addition, appeals were made over local radio

               for off—dury personnel to report to Hssnerton Road

               Police Station, and arrangements were made for the

               Casualty Bureau to be set up at Ecclesfiela.         By 3-10pm

                                                                                STATEMENT
               Superintendent Chapman had entered the ground in res­
                                                                                15
               ponse to immediate calls for assistance and saw that

               the mood amongst the Nottingham Forest supporters was

               hostile, and that they were making violent gestures

               directed towards the Leppings Lane end.




5-12.2         Together with Chief Superintendent Nesbit, a police              STATEMENT
                                                                                61
               cordon was then formed along the centre line of the

               playing area, to separate the two factions, and to pre­

               vent the immediate probability of spontaneous public
             disorder.            This, however, will be covered in more detail

            in subsequent sections, and it is relevant at this point

            to briefly summarise the immediate action taken by the

            police in respect of the dead and injured.




^           Initially, the casualties were placed on the perimeter

            track of the playing area, many being passed through a

            hole in the perimeter fencing which had been 'forced'

                 p o n c e officers.           Gradually, however, as spectators

            were moved from the rear of the terracing, it became

            easier          lo   iemcve the casualties to the tunnel area, and

            also to the concourse within the entrance of the

           Leppings Lane turnstiles.




5 *12*^    Evidence is forthcoming that many of the bodies were

           recovered in the vicinity -f the crush barrier (?sr.               3   )

           and others in the adjacent pen (Pen               4   ).



    12.1   With the exception of the initial 'crush' at the turn­

           stile. prior to the gates being ODened, there is no

           0 vi.c.0 n c 0    tnar c.a a ti^ c***        -   :ry occurred at any

           location, other than the two pens behind the Leopings

           Lane goal.




■12-6      Police Constable Aitken recalls that at 3.02pm he                          STATEMENT
                                                                                      39
           looked at his watch and remarked to one of his collea­

           gues to the effect that "they should have kicked off by

           now."      Within a minute or so PC Aitken was directed to
                   the West Stand, he saw that this was clear, apart

                   from a few spectators making their way out.




5.12.7             Similarly, WPC 3107 Pearson also entered the terraces      STATEMENT
                                                                              38
                   via the tunnel and noted that the tunnel "was empty at

                   this stage except for a couple of fans making their

                   way out."
in




     .12.8         Any reference, therefore, to casualties "in the tunnel"

                   would appear to arise solely as a consequence of the

                   dead and injured being moved to this location.




5.12.9             In this respect, it was felt that the statement of

                   Inspector Bullas (who was located at the West Stand) was   STATEMENT
                                                                              48
                   slightly ambiguous and, subsequently, he was asked to

                   clarify the situation and has since submitted an adden­

                   dum to his original statement.   He now states, quite

                   clearly, that he is not aware of any casualties

                   receiving their injuries at this location.



^.12.10            Within a short space of time the injured were trans­

                   ported to hospital and the dead were removed to tempor­

                   ary mortuary facilities in the gymnasium at the Hills­

                   borough Stadium.



5    .I3     (m)    Behaviour of Supporters and Actions of Ground Staff

5* 13-1            jn the preceding paragraphs a number of references have
     been made to the unruly behaviour of some of the spec­

     tators.          It is important, however, that a sense of

     perspective should be maintained, as it would appear

     that this behaviour was limited to a relatively small

     minority of the total number of spectators in atten­

     dance.         Indeed, PC 1543 Aitken makes the following                                         STATEMENT
                                                                                                       39
     observation:

                 "Some fans were abusing officers, some

                 called us murderers, and some were still

             complaining about Liverpool having the

             wrong end of the ground.                                   However, this

                 abuse was taken by the officers, and the

             majority of Liverpool supporters were

             sympathetic towards us, and kept the angry

             element under control.                                 Several fans came

             and shock hands with ~e and thanked m e ,

             some said they were sorry for the behaviour

             of a small number of their friends."




.2   Some stewards, whose duties include marshalling spec-

     ta tC T S    SLT1G   HI S J IH 2, Pi g   6 H *’ T' S.H C £ S / S X " *“ c   r*   ^   y   p 1 i~



     intimidated by some of the Liverpool supporters, as they

     were seer, replacing their stewards' tabards, which had

     been removed.                  This was witnessed by a number of

     officers, including PC 2717 Savoury, who states:                                                  STATEMENT
                                                                                                       62
             "Stands searched for items left behind.

             Negative result.                         During this time I

             noticed two stewards taking tabbards from
    under coats and putting them on again.

        I spoke to the Chief Steward,

               and told him what I had seen.    He

        replied,   'What do you expect them to do

        if they're going to get thumped?'"




It should be noted, however, that many spectators

rapidly tore down hoardings once they realised the

severity of the incident, in order to supply improvised

stretchers for the transportation of the casualties.




Nevertheless, there is strong evidence that elements of

the crowd were abusive and unruly and that, as 3-00 pm

approached, the influence of alcohol was strongly evi­

dent.     This is referred to in the statements of a number

of officers, including Inspector D. Bullas, who entered

the terraces via the West Stand tunnel and noted:

        "...one of the first things that struck

        me as I entered the tunnel - was the strong

        smell of intoxicants.    I hadn't really

        noticed this before with me being out in

        the open - but on entering the confined

        area of the tunnel, it was immediately

        apparent. It was also apparent to me that

        the people that were in front of me had

        consumed intoxicants to varying degrees."




Once the scale of the disaster was known, it was agreed
                   that the game should be postponed.   However, the

                   decision was taken by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield     STATEMENT
                                                                              3
                   to withhold such information from the crowd in order to

                   prevent a mass exodus, which would have hampered the

                   rescue efforts and would have seriously impeded the

                   rescue services as they fought to rescue the injured and

                   remove the dead.




e       ,          Immediate consultations took place between Chief Super-
D •1 5 -o
                   intendent Duckenfield and the managers of the two teams

                   involved, Mr. Brian Clough and Mr. Kenneth Dalglish,

                   and the latter was asked by Chief Superintendent

                   Duckenfield to make an appeal over the tannoy system

                   for calm and tolerance amongst the Liverpool supporters.

                   This was done, and the effect appeared to be both

                   positive and immediate.




5 .13.7            The rescue operation progressed and, by 4.00pm, only

                   one casualty awaited transportation to hospital, and the

                   stage had been reached where the crowd could be fully




            (n )   Conmunications

                   The Hillsborough Inquiry Report Part Vll relates to the

                   Police Communication System used during the FA Cup Semi­

                   final. This gives a detailed account of the arrangements

                   for the UHF and the VHF channels operating during that

                   day, 15 April 1989.   The radio reception area, use of
equipment and method of operation of those radios is dis

cussed.    Within that report reference is made to the

fact that, at about 2.20pm that day the Radio Operator

within the Ground Control Room notices that messages

from the Controller were clipped, the full text of the         STATEMENT
                                                               63
message was not being transmitted.    Messages passed via

personal radio were not effective.



The radio fault was rectified at 2.30pm when Communi­

cations staff changed the battery pack, a task which

necessitated there being no radio communication for 30

seconds.



This differs somewhat from the account given in state­

ments of officers who were engaged in various areas

around the football stadius.    Officers report inter­

ference on their radios and Superintendent Chapman, Sec­       STATEMENT
                                                               15
tor Commander of the Nottingham area of the ground,

stated that radio communication was poor and that

messages were broken.



 Chief Inspector Edmondson in the HQ Force Control states      STATEMENT
                                                               64
 that the radio was w o rK in g correctly at 2.15pm bur from

 that time, for the next 20 to 25 minutes, reception was

 poor, transmission was broken and there was a constant

 whistle, so much so that the Control Room monitor had to

 be turned down to enable all the monitors, VHF to be

 heard.
    5 .I4.5     At 2.42pm, Force Control (F C } contacted Hillsborough     APPENDIX
                                                                           63
                Ground Control (GC):

                     FC to GC   - Are you calling us?

                           GC   - No, the radio is down.

                           FC   - Is there anyone from Communications

                                   there?

                           GC   - Yes, they are working on it.




    jk ij 5     Shortly after this the radio was working properly.

t   "     '




    5-14.7      Superintendent Marshall, Liverpool Sector Commander,       STATEMENT
                                                                           4
                tried to radio Ground Control at 2.40pm, requesting

                assistance at Leppings Lane, but Ground Control did not

                acknowledge this transmission.   Superintendent Marshall

                changed channel from 25 to the Harder ton F.caa cnannej.

                35, this is corroborated by the 'F' Division Incident

                Log, timed 1444:                                           APPENDIX
                                                                           64
                     "Request contact Ground Control for tannoying

                      a request for people not to push at Leppings

                     Lane entrance."




        .14.8   This message was passed to Sergeant Goddara at Hills­

                 borough Ground Control.




     5-14.9      Superintendent Murray was Ground Controller and recalls   STATEMENT
                                                                            5
that someone, possibly Mr. Marshall, was trying to con­

tact Ground Control, but the message was unreadable,

transmission was breaking up badly and difficult to

understand.   The Superintendent said:

     "We must have communication at least talk

     through."




Suddenly, the radio started to function properly and

Ground Control had no further problems.    There is no

indication as to what caused the transmission faults but

a Communications Officer did attend at the Ground Con­

trol Room and exchanged the W15U battery back-up pack

and this appears to have restored normal transmission.




The fault was rectified by 2.45pm in sufficient time to

enable Chief Superintendent Duckenf ie.iu anci tu. otr^er

officers engaged in the serious crowd disturbance at

Leppings Lane to communicate easily with clear, uninter­

rupted transmission through the remainder of the inci­

dent .




Traffic Movement

Traffic problems on the 15 April 19^9 were almost

exclusively restricted to the Nottingham Forest suppor­

ters routes, the only exception being a build up of

traffic at about 1.00pm at the junction of the A616/A61

which was quickly alleviated.
5.15.2    At 1.30pm the officer in charge of the motorway patrols,

          Inspector Scholey, stated that motorways were quiet.     At   STATEMENT
                                                                        65
          2.20pm he relayed a further message to Force Control,

          informing them that all motorways were clear.




          At 2.11pm reports to Force Control from traffic per­          APPENDIX
5.15.3
                                                                        63
          sonnel indicate that there was congestion on Attercliffe

          Road, this most probably would be attributed to

          Nottingham Forest supporters.   The traffic in and around

          Sheffield was moving freely.




5.15.4    At 2.21pm there was a report of a solid line of traffic

          at Hillfoot Bridge on Neepsend Lane approaching the

          ground.   This congestion once again was from the

          Nottingham side of the city.    There were no recorded

          messages of any congestion on reads leading from the

          direction of Liverpool.




          Superintendent Brougham states that despite vehicular
5 15. 5
 -
                                                                        STATEMENT
          traffic arriving in the vicinity of the ground from           66

          all directions, there was sufficient time for both

          Liverpool and Nottingham Forest supporters to get to the

          ground before kick-off.   At 2.40pm the Superintendent

          informed Force Control that all main roads were now-

          clear .




5.15.6    All modes of transport appeared to have arrived at the

          Hillsborough Football Ground without hindrance and well
                before the kick-off.   Any suggestion that traffic delays

                may have caused Liverpool supporters to arrive late at

                the ground would appear to be without foundation.



5.16
         (p )   Turnstiles at Leppings Lane

5-16.1          This must be regarded as a key issue when considering

                the question of why the crowd of Liverpool supporters

                failed to gain admittance into the Hillsborough Football

                Ground in a rapid, orderly manner.    There are two

                matters which could possibly be pertinent to this issue:




5.16.2          (a)   Tickets to both the Liverpool and Nottingham

                      football supporters were colour coded to enable        APPENDIX
                                                                             50
                      the recipient to be aware of which section of

                      ground he was to proceed to in order to gain entry,

                      crown tickets denoted entry into the North Stand

                      via turnstiles 1-10.   The red tickets allowed entry

                      into the West Stand at turnstiles 11-16, and

                      supporters with purple tickets were able to enter

                      the West Stand terraces at turnstiles A-G.     A

                      sketch plan shows the flow of the direction fans       APPENDIX
                                                                             0 4

                      would have to take as they entered via the

                      Leppings Lane turnstiles.   One can quickly envisage

                      the major confusion that could and in fact did

                      develop outside those turnstiles as fans queued for

                      some considerable time, only to arrive at the turn­

                      stile to be told they were in the wrong queue, and

                      then having to return back to Leppings Lane in
order to join the correct queue.



There are numerous accounts from police officers of

the confusion that ensued outside the turnstiles,

when spectators were refused admittance due to them

being in possession of the wrong colour coded

ticket for that particular turnstile.             Chief

Inspector Creaser states:
                                                               STATEMENT
                                                               67
     "The signs above the turnstiles were

     not clear and many fans were concerned

     and confused.    It was necessary for

     police officers to give constant

     advice and assistance as fans

     endeavoured to gain entry into the

     ground




This problem is exacerbated by a lack of adequate

signs and notices informing the approaching

Liverpool supporters of which queue to form for

their particular colour coded ticket.




The only colour code direction indicators were

boards measuring   18"       x l8 r mounted on the turnstile   APPENDIX
                                                               67
walls approximately      5   '   6"   from the ground to the   (PHOTOGRAPH
                                                               13)
base of the notice.      As the crowd of people formed

up in front of turnstiles it would have been almost

impossible to see those colour direction boards.
5 .16.6   (b)   When one considers the question of late arrivals

                and the large crowd which formed at the Leppings

                Lane turnstiles one must take into account the

                ground capacity and the turnstile allocation

                available to accommodate the influx of spectators.

                The turnstile allocation for Nottingham football

                supporters is 62 turnstiles, which are set at

                intervals along the South Stand and the Penistone

                Road area of the ground, a total of 62 turnstiles

                covering an area of 50 per cent of the ground

                perimeter.   This is to enable a total of 29,844

                persons to pass through the turnstiles.   The Liver­

                pool supporters, however, were allocated only 23

                turnstiles within the restricted area of Leppings

                Lane, this has been referred to as a funnel or

                bottleneck leading directly into these turnstiles

                and this area was allocated to accommodate the

                admission of all of the 24,270 Liverpool suppor­

                ters.




                The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, paragraph

                47, states that the maximum notional rate at which

                spectators will pass through turnstiles is unlikely

                to exceed 750 persons per hour.   It is therefore

                possible to calculate how many spectators can be

                accommodated in the final hour running up to the

                start of the game.
     So far as the Nottingham supporters are concerned,

     by use of the maximum notional ratio, 62 turnstiles

     would have easily accommodated the 29,844 fans in

     the last hour before kick-off.    When this same

     equation is compared to the Liverpool allocation,

     the number of turnstiles being 23, the 24,270

     Liverpool supporters could not have been accommo­

     dated in the last hour.




     This is exactly what occurred on the 15 April 1989

     and must be regarded as a contributory factor as a

     major crowd disorder problem developed outside

     those turnstiles.




Photographs

j.n the course of planning the semi-final, to be held at

Hillsborough on the 15 April 19S9i arrangements were

made for Scenes of Crime officers to be present at the

stadium, together with members of the Underwater Search

Unit, who were identified as an evidence gathering team

in possession of* both vid6 o and still csnerEs.




Owing to their presence, a large number of photographs

were taken pre-match and subsequently following the

events in the Leppings Lane terrace.   A total of 22

albums of photographs resulted and these contain a

variety of views both inside and outside the stadium,

covering a time scale of 12.24pm to 16.02pm.   Each
          photograph is timed automatically. However, due to a

          lack of overall synchronisation of watches, the time

          scales are generally out for a period ranging from 30

          seconds to 1 minute 30 seconds.




               Albums                        Time Shown is

               1. 31 6 ,     8               1 min 30 sec        ahead

               2, 4, 5 i    7, 9             1 min      10 sec   ahead

               10, 11,     1 2 ,1 3 , 14     1 min 50 sec        ahead

               15                                       30 sec ahead

               16,   17, 1 8 , 19, 20         1   min 20 sec ahead

               20, 22                         No time sequence shown



5 '17*3   The photographs give a graphic indication of events.




 "“1‘     examination of the     22   albums reveal certain as Dec ts

          which may be of assistance in determining crowd build-up

          and events on the terraces.         To this end, two composite

          albums have been prepared from the total photographs                  APPENDICES
                                                                                6 5 and 66
          available, the first containing          28   photographs depicting

          the build-up outside the Leprings Lane turnstiles.             The

          second album contains       18   photographs and depict the

          scene on the Leppings Lane terraces, particularly pens

          3 and 4 respectively, known as South Centre and North

          Centre pens.     It should be noted that in no way do

          these albums provide a definitive picture of what took

          place but merely give some indication of the activity

          and problems being addressed.
5.17.5       Album 1

             As stated, this album shows a collection of photographs        APPENDIX
                                                                            65
             outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles and in time scale

             the album covers the period from 2 .08 pm to 2 .5 9 po,

             taking into account the real times this period is

             2.07pm to 2.58pm.      The first photograph shows Inspector

             Hand-Davis, the officer in charge of the Mounted congin-

             gent and other Mounted officers escorting the special

             train supporters to the ground.      The crowd is orderly

             and well contained.      Photographs 2-12 are a continuation

             of this, shewing the general pictures in Leppings Lane

             and indicating that supporters are being contained

             against the wall in an orderly queue and without diffi­

             culty.     Photograph 13 displays the crowd outside turn­

             stiles A-G and the time is now shown as 2.31 (2.30 in

             real time' once again The crowd is orderly and well

             contained.




5   .17..6   Photographs 14 arid 15 show similar views, photograph 16

             timed at    2.35   (2.34 real time) shows that the crowd has

             grown somewhat a:

             being contained.




5-17-7       Photograph 17 shows a view from the South service road

             to C Gate and displays a mass of people in the Leppings

             Lane area.



5.17.8       Photographs 18 and 19 show similar views and the fact
that whilst some of the crowd has spilled into this area

between turnstiles A and G and the South access road,

the situation in that immediate vicinity is fairly well

controlled.




Photograph 19 shows a build-up in that area and a move­

ment towards Gate C which appears to be closed.    Despite

this, a Mounted man on photograph 20 is moving towards

the gate and on photographs 21 and 22 appears about to

enter.   On photograph 22 there is an indication that the

gate has been pulled back and a large number of fans

are following and appear to be entering in an orderly

fashion through Gate C.




Photograph 24 shows that the effects of this appear to

have thinned the crowd but on photograph 25 the time new

being 2.56 (real time 2 .5 5 ) they ars being followed by a

larger number of supporters who appear to have come

through the outer perimeter gate but who are once again

being controlled by Mounted men.   At this time the Gate

C is wide coers and the crowd is passing through in

large numbers but there is nothing to suggest that they

are other than orderly.   Photograph 2 ( shows a large

number of people heading towards Gate C in an orderly

 fashion and officers do not appear to be distressed.

 Photograph 28 shows the barriers adjacent to Gate C with

 officers relatively relaxed and no sign of large crowds.

 The time is now shown as 2.59 (2.58 real time).
5.17.11   Album _2                                                        APPENDIX
                                                                          66
          As indicated, this album relates to a series of photo­

          graphs commencing at 2.45 (2.46 real time) and goes

          through to 3.07 (3.06 real time) photographs are all

          concerning the centre pens and the first picture shows

          Gate 4 to the pens and shows that the rear gate is

          fastened back against the wall and open.




5.17.12   Photograph 2 significantly shows the tunnel and particu­

          larly identifies a number of people who are in situ at

           the time (2.45 - 2.46 real time).   In particular there

           is a young man in a green anorak immediately in the

           centre of the tunnel and a child sitting on the wall to

           the left of the tunnel in a blue anorak with a young

           man behind him in a white s m rt.   More particu_ar_3? *he

           packing of the pen appears to be fairly loose, particu­

           larly at the front of the pen where at least one indi­

           vidual has his arms stretched against the mesh and does

           not appear to be under any pressure.    Photograph   3   re­

           confirms the peocle in situ around the tunnel ana again

           indicates the relative space at the iront of the pens.

           Whilst the crowd is fairly heavy it is clear that the

           packing is not excessive and there are no apparent signs

           of distress.   Photograph 4 shows the time at 1459 (real

           time 1500) and shows Sergeant Swift going to Gate 4 of

            the pen, there is some movement onto the pitch which

            indicates that between those 14 minutes there has been
some change.             Photograph 5 shows much the same situation

and is timed at 1500 (1501 real time).




Photograph 6 timed 1501 (1502 real time) shows the same

people in situ at the entrance to the tunnel.




Photographs 7 and 8 show an over-view of the South

Centre pen and whilst there is some indication of

crowding at the front of the pen, it does not appear

that there are difficulties, the crowd appear to be

watching the game and responding accordingly.




Photograph 9 is much the same but there are clearly

signs of anxiety and photograph 10 shows the gate baing

opened,         it is now 1503 (real time 1 5 0 2 ).




Photograph 11 shows clear problems at the entrance to

the pen with people being forced against the fencing.

Photograph 12 repeats that but extends the view to the

tunnel and it is interesting to note that the same

 -n   2.v '*cu 2.1 s        ioned "fc*?f4or*0      m    siT.u m

location.              Photographs 13, 14 ana 15 show similar views.

The time is now 1506 (1505 real time).                       Photographs 16,

 17 and      18   continue on the same theme and show those

 individuals at the tunnel mouth still in position with

 the time being shown as 1507                   (1506   real time).
5 .1 8      (r)   Observations

5 .18 .1          It is not felt appropriate in this submission to draw

                  any definitive conclusions or to attempt to identify the

                  cause of the tragedy from the (necessarily) limited

                  amount of information available to the Force.        Rather,

                  the Chief Constable is content to make a number of

                  observations which he feels may be pertinent to the

                  Committee of Enquiry:-




5 .13.2           (fl)   Every conceivable care and effort was taken

                         at the pre-planning stage to provide a

                         sufficiency of police resources to deal

                         with the normal (or anticipated) oper­

                         ational problems associated with a major

                         sporting event.




5 .18.3           (b)    Such arrangements have been implemented

                         on many previous occasions and have been

                         found to be entirely satisfactory.      Indeed,

                         the   1988   semi-final involved the same

                         teams and the event passed without inci­

                         dent, as evidenced by the statement of

                         Inspector R. Walker, who was present at                 STATEMEK"
                                                                                 68
                          that location.




 5 .I8 .M         (c)    The manner in which sections of the stadium

                         were segregated between visiting suppor­

                          ters was based not only on historical
f "■

                       precedence, but primarily in order to pro­

                       tect law abiding spectators and local

                       residents (in accordance with the recommen­

                       dations of the Popplewell Enquiry) in this

                       highly urbanised and environmentally con­

                       gested area by minimising the opportunity

                       for conflict and violence between the

                       minority of opposing spectators who regard

                       such actions as being normal and acceptable.




 ^5.18.5         (a) Saturday 15 April 1SS9 was a warm and

                       sunny Spring day, which should have pro­

                       vided the perfect atmosphere for a major

                       sporting attraction.     Instead, however,

                       it would appear that many visiting spec­

                       tators used this as an opportunity to

                       find local public houses and off licences

                       where they could purchase and consume

                       alcohol, to the extent that in so doing

                       their arrival at the stadium was seriously

                       delayed.




       5 .18.6   (e)   The s i t u at ion was exacerbated by the

                       obvious influx of a large number of Liver­

                       pool supporters who did not have a ticket

                       to gain admission, and whose presence

                       seriously aggravated the worsening situa­

                       tion at the Leppings Lane turnstiles as
                the time approached for the game to

                commence.




5.18. 7   (f)   Despite substantial police resources which

                had been allocated for the event, senior

                officers found themselves suddenly and

                unexpectedly overwhelmed by several

                thousand spectators who had converged on

                the Leppings Lane entrance within a few

                minutes of the designated time for kick-

                off, many of whom being the worse for

                drink embarked upon a determined course

                of action, the aim of which was to enter

                Hillsborough Football Stadium at all cost;

                irrespective of any danger to property or,

                jsors important j.y, ths lives ssic ss.re'ty cf

                ethers.




5.18.3    (g)   Faced with the immediate danger which had

                arisen, senior police commanders had to

                make an instant operational decision tc

                protect those involved from death or

                serious injury.
The senior officers in command did not

shed their responsibility; but rather

embarked on a course of action which

they knew presented certain risks.       Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield took account

of all the information which was then

available and decided that -

      (i)    if the gates were not opened

            then casualties WOULD occur;

     (ii)    if the gates were opened

            casualties MAY occur.

Based on this reasoning, the decision was

taken to open the gates, and in so doing,

the immediate danger tc the life and

safety of those at risk was relieved.

v    pelz.cb oTTLzb^s i.s.vc ird*        i7!

their statements their total support for

the initial decision by senior police

commanders to open the gates.       Typically,

PS 1757 Burns, a serial supervisor, states

in his concluding paragraph that "being

on duty in the inside of Leppings Lane,

seeing and hearing the mass of the crowd

outside, I agree in full with the actions

taken by Superintendent Marshall.       I saw

the state and pleading of spectators

entering the ground.    I am certain if

these gates had not been opened, many
    «




          would have died outside the turnstiles.

          I myself became very apprehensive for my

          safety shortly after Z.^p®-     Despite the

          fact that additional resources were

          deployed to try to contain that situation,

          the best efforts of those officers were

          not successful.




5.18.10   Police officers were later   suddenly faced

          with a situation, the true nature of

^         which did not become fully    apparent until

          tragically the bodies of the deceased

          were recovered from the West Stand

          terrace.   Accounts provided by officers

          nearest to the scene indicate that the

          crush say nave occurred as a consequence

          of lines of spectators swaying backwards

          and forwards.     It is a fact that by 3-05p®

          the spectator 'pens' on the West Stand

^         terraces were apparently filled to capacity

          However, a number of officers at the scene

          refer to the fact that on their arrival,

           despite the crushing at the front of the

           'pens', spectators only a few yards away

           towards the rear were totally unaware of

           what was taking place, and were engrossed

           in the spectacle on the field, whilst the

           tragedy unfolded within a few yards from
                  where they were stood.      One officer (PC

                  Pearson) considers that the first body          STATEMENT
                                                                  38
                  which was recovered had been dead for

                  some considerable time, whilst another

                  officer (PC Smith), who was nearer the          STATEMENT
                                                                  49
                  scene of the tragedy than any other

                  officer, can draw no association between

                  the crush at the front and any "great

                  influx” of spectators into the 'pens'.




5 - 18.11   (j)   Once it became evidence that serious

                  injuries had occurred, police officers

                  acted totally selflessly in their efforts

                  to help and rescusitate victims, in

                  conditions of congestion, threats, abuse,

                  and in soae cases, physical violence.




5-18.12     (k)   The help and assistance provided by many

                  spectators is worthy of the highest praise

                  and should be a matter of public record.

                  Once the ful^. ex tent of* the tr,s.cfedv   —

                  came clear, a sense of grief descended

                  upon the stadium and spectators rapidly

                  provided improvised stretchers for those

                  who were dead and injured.




5 - 18.13   (1)   Regretably, however, it must also be a

                  matter of public record that within the
                crowd during that fateful afternoon was

                an unruly element of individuals, whose

                actions were clearly influenced by alco­

                hol.     Such was the degree of intimidation

                that there was evidence that certain

                stewards discarded their identification

                at the crucial time, thus negating their

                presence in any official role, and any

                capacity to steward or direct the large

                number of spectators.




5*18.14   (m)   The decision not to inform the crowd of

                the true nature of the occurrence was

                taken by the Commander in charge of the

                stadium, in order to ensure that the

                immediate area outside the stadium re­

                mained relatively free from congestion

                to allow those who were injured to be

                transported as quickly as possible to

                hospital.



          (n)   Despite the scale of the tragedy, resources
vn




                were quickly organised, temporary mortuary

                facilities and a Casualty Bureau were set

                up     and. in a little over an hour all the

                casualties had been transported from the

                scene.
      #
5.18.16       The South Yorkshire Police has been deeply involved with

              the tragic events which occurred on Saturday 15 April

              1989.   Police officers and civilian personnel involved

              in the operation have been deeply grieved by the death

              and suffering which they witnessed on an occasion which

              should have been an enjoyable sporting event.    Many have

              had to seek professional counselling.




    5.18.17   This has been further exacerbated by many reports in the

              media which have wrongly communicated the role played by

^             the South Yorkshire Police.   It is hoped, therefore,

              that this submission may rectify this imbalance.




    p ig 28   For those most directly involved, memories and a deep

              sense of sorrow will remain with them for the rest of

              their lives, particularly those officers who tried so

               desperately to save the li%Tes of men, women ar.d

               children.




) 5.18.19      The Force extends it sincere condolences to the rela­

               tives and loved ones of those who died.
