    Incident                110589 OP5012            TYPING SERVICE DOCUMENT
                                                                                '   V          ■^
* f ~ *          .                                              OFFICERS REPORT NUMBER      R381

                                                                                           Station

      Surname                JUSTICE

      Forenames              A    ^
      Age                                                 Date of birth

      Address                S.YORKS.POLICE, E DIVISION, HACKENTHORPE


            ipation          POL PC2372

      Telephone

      Number of Pages

m         ated               090589                                                           Signed   j


                     150489 Liverpool FC       v.   Nottingham Forest FC Hillsborough FA Cup

                     Semi Final.       Exact match as last year at same location.       When found

                     out we were working I personally did not anticipate any major

                     problems, due to previous years match passing in order.            Expected

                     same duties as previous year, in fact had heard that almost same

                     operational order to be used.

                     It was confirmed during week of match that we would be engaged on

                     same duties as previous year i.e. Standby Leppings Lane and getting

                     Liverpool fans in ground.

                     Match day.       Virtually same briefing as previous year.     As last year

                     after briefing ate packed meal in van.        Then took up position or

                     Leppings Lane.

                     After approx 3/4 hours asked or directed to Kop turnstiles (N) to

                     assist with Forest fans.       Very few fans to deal with no problem

                     officers (D Group E2) there in plenty of numbers.         In my opinion our

                     presence was not required.       All the same atmosphere almost carnival,

                     laughing and joking with few fans entjaring at our points.

                     2.30 pm looked at watch commented to Bob' (5444-) that any time large             ]

                     crowds of fans would converge on turnstiles, he agreed or at least
                                                                       PAGE   21
                                                                       R381    ]
                                                                              1
thought so.    One fan arrested by one of our serial bodily dragged to        j
                                                                              I
police room, slight assistance given by myself.      No crowds as such.       {
                                                                              »

2.45 pm approx. Forest fan jumps over turnstile without ticket.   Speak j
                                                                        I
to turnstile operator informs me the door will be shut at 3 pm by       j
                                                                              !
him.    Messages over radio re congestion at Leppings Lane turnstiles. {
                                                                       I
2.55 pm looked at watch as heard cheers of team coming out.   Spoke to j
                                                                       I
turnstile man again.  2607 then tells me and Bob to go to Gym          j
                                                                       *
quickly. About this time or shortly afterwards hear on radio "F Y openj
                                                                       i
the gate” "F Y open the gate” . Get to gym with our serial bobbies

stood around.

Insp. 2607 tell us to get to track opposite Leppings Lane.        Walk

round pitch to position see some fans behind Liverpool FC goal on

pitch others    climbing into West Stand from terrace.      Think to myself

stupid idiots.    Walk to corner plenty of bobbies no one knowing what

to do or what was happening,     All decide to stop fans running on

pitch.    Some fans injured S t . John's helping them.

One fan shouts at us "We should have had that end.” pointing at Kop

"This happened last year” continue to try to help them off playing

area.    Another fan screams at us that there is a dead man in crowd

just look at him not believing or doing anything.        This man or

another continues screaming at us tel1ing us about a dead m a n .        We

eventually walk to perimeter fence and look.      Just a sea of arms

outstretched towards me, peoples faces showing sheer panic,

screaming, crying, wanting me to get them out.      A feeling of immense

helplessness overcomes m e .   So I stand on advertising hoardings

and reach over the fence to try and pul1 people out of the crush on

the terrace.    Then see m a n ’s body, face 1ifeless being passed about

by fans over their heads like a dummy.     I didn’t believe it was a

human being.    Fans shouting at us to get him out.      Reach down for him

fans try to lift him u p, but we couldn’t reach him. _ Next recall
                                                                        PAGE
                                                            .           R381

Westy (2496) at my side saying "We have to g e V »them out” .     See a gate

open with Steve Payne (Sgt El) pulling fans out of terrace at it,
shout at him to get his attention.       Noise too loud he doesn’t hear me.

Ran through gate with Westie to this dead man, Westy gives heart

massage I give mouth to mouth oblivious to anything else.         Run out of

breath.    Billy McCall (Sgt ex E2 CID) pulls me off he then tries

mouth to mouth on man.     Liverpoool FC fans screaming about fence we

then start pul1ing at it with bare hands, bobbies on other side start

kicking at it.     Welds start to break, tear fence open, pass this man

out, see ambulance on pitch.

Look round see at least 3 bodies lying on terrace, rest of fence

being torn down along length of terrace.       Go to another fan start

mouth to mouth Liverpool fan attempts heart passage, not.pushing hard

enough, I scream at him tel1ing him so, a b o b B y c o n t i n u e s   with

massage.                                                            1

think about aids.     Continue mouth to mouth,

      fans shouting "Go on ACE” one wipes man’s face with handkerchief

                   breathing into him,                  etc -

Mind then blank.      Until see Frostie (2130) say "Can’t believe it to

him” , Look roi^ d |t;jiee^o^bie 3 in next p e n , climb fence Liverpool fans

help u W o w   ST With megaphone shouting can't hear what h e ’s saying.

Bobbies just passing bodies out of terrace to pitch, just tangled

mass of arms and legs.      Help lift bodies out.    See John Nesbit in

terrace.
All bodies out of terrace think must be 15-20 people dead here,

terrible.      See Steve Fairclough crying.   With Frostie onto pitch to

halfway line, some Liverpool fans running to Forest end looking for

fight attempt to calm them but what to say.        All say it is our fault

(SYP) See Insp. B on halfway 1ine cordon formed by him, why?

No help here, me and Frostie, go outside with FY don’t know why.
                                               ^   \_____
                                                                            PAGE
                                                                            R381

         Outside see more injured and dead bodies think they are ones I ’d

         already seen inside.    Help injured by keeping warm with coat.    What

         else could I do, see Ian Selwood, with doctor.

         Walk back into ground via North Stand, abused by fans, can't look
         them in eye, onto pitch find serial.   Just stand on pitch no one

         knowing what to d o .

         Eventually go to van, hear that 80 are dead.   Can't believe it.     Just

         stare out of window.

         Just patrol in van, Hi 1lsborough and Town Centre.   Stood dpwa, return n .
                                                                         I UA/i-r
         to Heeley, go off duty, then to Crown for a big drink, all the

         go for one.     ^

END OF REPORT
