Note for file;                                                             ACC(D&C)/ ___
                                                                             20 May 1991


HILLSBOROUGH - COMPLAINT ENQUIRY


Further developments regarding the above are detailed below:-

1.     Legal Advice

       Further to 'note for file' dated 17 May:

       a.   Stephen Walker    has   spoken with Richard Payne QC           and
             established that he will be happy to act on our behalf.

       b.   Richard Payne will begin his task as soon as the reply is
             available from Mr Sharp.

       c.   Richard Payne requests that a copy of Dr Popper's summing-up
             at the inquest be made available to him.

       d.   Stephen Walker has discussed with Richard Payne whether
             there would be any ethical problems in representing any
             officer subject of disciplinary action at a discipline
             hearing, and offering the advice that we have requested.
             He sees no conflict of interest.

2.      Computer Records

        Further to 'note for file' on this subject dated 15 May, I spoke to
        Brigadier Pownall on 17 May regarding the release of the computer discs
        and tapes to us for loading at the time of commissioning on the HOLMES
        computer.    He  referred the decision to Captain Noel        Taylor who
        subsequently telephoned me and agreed to release the discs and tapes
        to South Yorkshire.   He promised to contact Det Chief Supt Foster and
        communicate this decision to him.    I have not yet been able to contact
        Mr Foster to see if this has in fact been done.


Action;

 (i)    ACC(D&C) / A/Chief Supt (D&C) to contact Mr Foster.

(ii)    A/Chief Supt (D&C) to obtain a      copy   of   Dr   Popper's   summing-up
        at the inquest for Richard Payne.




Assistant Chiei constable
(Discipline and Complaints)


Copy to;      DCC
Note for file:                                                         ACC (D&C )J\
                                                                        17 May 1991




HILLSBOROUGH - COMPLAINT ENQUIRY


Further to item (3) Legal Advice on 'note for file' dated 15 May 1991, at
2.30 pm on Thursday 16 May I spoke to Stephen Walker regarding the
appropriateness of seeking early legal advice in respect of the PCA letter
and recommendations of 7 May.

His view is that the advice of Counsel should be sought and that Richard
Payne QC would be the best Counsel to engage.     He will contact Richard Payne
with a view to arranging a meeting between ACC (Disc & Comps), A/Chief Supt
(Disc & Comps), Stephen Walker and Richard Payne.

He suggests that the meeting should take place after          we     have   received
Mr Sharp's response to the PCA letter mentioned above.


Action:

1.   Stephen Walker to contact Richard Payne QC.

2.   ACC Mr Moore and A/Chief Supt Fell to attend the meeting with
     Richard Payne QC, when arranged.




Assistant Chief Constable
(Discipline and Complaints)


Copy to:   DCC
                                                      DCC/I
                                                      16 May 1991



NOTE FOR FILE:


HILLSBOROUGH DISCIPLINE ENQUIRY - COMPUTER SUPPORT


This 'Note' should be read     in conjunctionwith the previous   'Note for File'
dated 14 May 1991, item one refers.

Following consultations, in the absence of Mervyn Jones who is on holiday,
with Mr Roach (A/Deputy Chief Constable, West Midlands Police) and Detective
Chief Superintendent Michael Foster (Investigating Officer) regarding the
possible availability to ourselves of (a) the HOLMES computer used during
the enquiry; and (b) the investigation data, the situation is as below:-



Computer

This is already being de-commissioned and transferred to South Yorkshire.
It could be re-commissioned in situ and up and running by Wednesday next
but this is not requested.   There is a need to clear with Bull (the computer
company concerned) details of      maintenance and this currently    is a minor
sticking point in the transfer arrangements.                     |t° deal.

With regard to the investigation data, the staff in the West Midlands
computer department are working under an      existing policy statement from
Mr Jones which says on no account, until the discipline decisions are known,
must the data be made available  to the South Yorkshire      Police.

The data includes much evidence  not used and seen as unrelated to the enquiry
itself.   Also a policy file used by Mr Sharp (Chief Constable, Cumbria)
which will not be made available to us and this is accepted.    Additionally,
activity categories based on events or individuals - a kind of computerised
Anacapa system.

Detective Chief Superintendent Foster has liaised with Mr Sharp who is quite
happy to overturn the Mervyn Jones' decision and make the data available
to us provided this is agreed by the Police Complaints Authority.

Attempted to contact Brigadier Pownall this date but he, Captain Noel Taylor
and others with knowledge of this are at Bramshill with the Senior Command
Course and not available.

   Action:

   a.   DCC to inform                  regarding the maintenance problem;

        ACC(SS) - on Friday 17 May - to seek approval from the PCA as above
        and, if given, to inform Detective Chief Superintendent Foster on
           either           or




 Deputy Chief Constable


 copy to ACC(S S )
Note for file:                                                           ACC(D&C)J
                                                                          15 May 1991




HILLSBOROUGH - COMPLAINT ENQUIRY -
INTERIM POSITION


Had discussion with the Chief Constable this date concerning the above,           and
as a result came to the conclusions shown below:-

1.   Computer Records

     The Chief Constable agrees that it is important to expedite the loading
     of the HOLMES computer with Hillsborough material as soon as possible,
     and agrees that the matter should be dealt with urgently.

2.   Accused Officers

     After reflection, the Chief Constable has decided to let the present
     position prevail but that a change inthe welfare needs of theofficers
     subject of discipline might result in a revising of the strategy.

3.   Legal Advice

     The Chief Constable agrees that legal advice should be sought as a matter
     of urgency, and that early legaladvice might   have a significant impact
     on the decisions of the PCA.


Action:

a.   Re (1)    above - DCC to continue his approach to Mervyn Jones.

b.   Re (2)   above - ACC(D&C), at the moment, not to consult with Brigadier
      Pownall but to review the position of the officers under investigation
      re welfare.

c.   Re (3)    above - DCC to proceed with obtaining legal advice.


Note:      DCC has now seen    four of the six officers under        investigation re
           present position.   The two not yet contacted will        be spoken to as
           soon as possible




Assistant Chief Constable
(Discipline and Complaints)




Copy to:      DCC
                         7 ^
                                                     DCC/
                                                     14 May 1991


NOTE FOR FILE:


HILLSBOROUGH - COMPLAINT ENQUIRY
- INTERIM POSITION


Had discussion this date concerning the above with A/Chief     Superintendent
Fell and as a result came to the conclusions shown below:-

1. Computer Records

  To assist and progress our on-going liaison with the PCA it may be
  necessary to access all those records considered by the Investigating
  Officer as part of his enquiry. This comprises:-

        a report comprising 9,560 questionnaires
        5,341 statements
        2,392 sets of documents
        71 hours of video recordings
        transcripts of evidence of 174 people who appeared before
          Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry

  Whilst physically much of this data and related exhibits will probably
  be transferred from the West Midlands Police and Furnival House to
  Hammerton Road Police Station within the next few days, access is
  only possible through the HOLMES indexation package.

  The HOLMES computer used for this is currently being de-commissioned
  in West Midlands and will be transferred to South Yorkshire Police
  computer room in about two weeks' time.     Re-commissioning will then
  start to ensure availability for the World Student Games.    The urgent
  need is as part of the re-commissioning to input the indexation and
  related data currently on disk and tape at West Midlands.      Approval
  has yet to be formalised and this needs to be dealt with urgently.


2. Accused Officers

   A/Chief Supt Fell advances the view that it is absolutely intolerable
   that those officers accused whom no discipline action is intended
   should not, for their own welfare, be informed of this now.      This
   point-of-view needs   discussing with   the PCA.    There are other
   advantages to this.


3. Legal Advice

   Whilst the Investigating Officer is, before the end of this month,
   to communicate to us an expansion of his reasoning as to why the
   specific charges now referred to are not appropriate, it may be safe
   to assume that the end product, either by agreement or direction,
   will be a tribunal inquiry.
                                     -   2   -




  In this situation it may be sensible now - in advance of the
  Investigating Officer's comments - to seek independent legal advice
  as to the viability of the charges;     the first ground being that if
  the Director of Public Prosecutions considered a burden of proof for
  criminal action not proven then this must be extremely persuasive
  with regard to the purported charges of negligence.    Any such advice
  would be sought through the Secretariat who undoubtedly would lay
  off to Counsel, in all probability the Counsel they would arrange
  to present the case, if this becomes appropriate.


  Action:

  a.    Re. (1) above - DCC to consider with Mervyn Jones;

  b.    Re. (2) above - ACC(SS) to consult with Brigadier Pownall;

   c.   Re. (3) above - DCC to discuss with Chief Constable.




Deputy Chief Constable
     WEST MIDLANDS POLICE




      Chief Superintendent
  David Godfrey DUCKENFIELD



COMPLAINTS and DISCIPLINE
          FILE
                                                                                                                    WP 665
                                                                                                                    (S.O. B16I
                                                                                                                    (1.86 )

                                                                                          R«f. No.
  West Midlands                                                                                           1/89
                                   COMPLAINT AGAINST POLICE
  Police                                                                                  Oat*
                                         Enquiry Summary
                                                                                                         27 July 1990
 NAME & ADDRESS                                                                           • F O R M A L IN VE STIG ATIO N
            OF
 COMPLAINANT(S)                SEE SCHEDULE 'A'                                           • IN F O R M A L IN V E S T IG A TIO N

                                                               *                          t,




  NATURE OF
 COMPLAINTS         S)
                               SEE SCHEDULE 'B*


                                     ?




                         On 15 April 1989, a disaster occurred at the F/A Cup Semi-Final
 BRIEF D ETAILS          between Liverpool and Nottingham Forrest held at Hillsborough Football
OF EVENTS                Stadium, Sheffield which resulted in death and injuries to a large
 L E A D IN G TO         number of the Liverpool supporters. The Complaints set out in this
C O M PLAINT             file emanate from events preceding, during and immediately following
                         that disaster.




OFFICERS
SUBJECT TO               Chief Superintendent David Godfrey DUCKENFIELD - South Yorkshire Police.
COMPLAINT
(Rank, Number
 and Name)


                                                                       Station                    Phon.    Q 21    35g     m   2
IN V E S T IG A T IN G      CHIEF CONSTABLE L SHARP                              POLICE HQ
OFFICER                                                                          CI1MRRT A

B R IE F D ETA ILS       These complaints have been supervised by Captain E N .Taylor of the
OF                       Police Complaints Authority. Following extensive enquiries Chief
IN V E S T IG A T IO N   Superintendent DUCKENFIELD was seen for interview but declined to
                         answer questions put to him by the Investigating Officer.

                         Files in respect of the criminal culpability of Chief Superintendent
                         DUCKENFIELD (and other officers) in respect of these complaints are
                         already with the Director of Public Prosecutions and the Police
                         Complaints Authority.




                                         Section 89(1) PACE Act 1984                YES/W0*
 INVESTIGATION SUPERVISED BY
                                         Section 89(2) PACE Act 1984                XEtfNO*
 POLICE COMPLAINTS AUTHORITY:
                             SCHEDULE ’A*

                             COMPLAINANTS



MR LESLIE JONES (1.10.37)                   MASTER FILE
                                            PART IV PAGES
                                            2373
LIVERPOOL                                   2368-2377
MERSEYSIDE                                  ALSO REFERS

SECURITY OFFICER
COMPLAINT NUMBERS 1, 3, 4, 7, 9 and 11


MR TREVOR HICKS (7.5.46)                    MASTER FILE
                                            PART IV PAGES
                                            2331
                                            2331-2356
KEITHLEY                                    ALSO REFERS

MANAGING DIRECTOR
COMPLAINT NUMBERS 2, 6, 8, 10 and 12


MRS JOAN McBRIEN (3.10.39)                  MASTER FILE
                                            PART IV PAGES
                                            2432A-R
HOLLYWELL                                   ALSO REFERS
CLWYD


TEACHER
COMPLAINT NUMBER 5
                              SCHEDULE »B»

                          NATURE OF COMPLAINTS



That he failed to acquaint himself with the planning and problems related
to the control of the semi-final on 15 April 1989.

He failed to prevent a dangerous build up of supporters outside the
Leppings Lane gates.

That he failed to monitor the crowd numbers packing into pens 3 and 4.

He failed to act when it became obvious that pens 3 and 4 were overfull
when he had an excellent view point from the police box above the pens.

He should not have opened the gates under any circumstances giving
unlimited and uncontrolled access into the football ground by supporters.

He failed to control the movement of supporters subsequent to the opening
of Gate C.

He failed to make provision for fans coming through Gate C after he had
given the order for the gate to be opened.

He failed to respond to the developing tragedy and was slow to effect a
rescue operation.

He failed to act when it was obvious that people were in distress.

He was deceitful and intentionally misled senior police officers and
members of the public regarding his command and control of police officers
on the day.

He attempted to mislead the Assistant Chief Constable at the ground and
others, namely, representatives of the Club, the F.A., and the fans
themselves regarding the origin of the order for gate ’C ’ to be opened.
That is by inferring supporters had forced open the gate when he had, in
fact, given the order to open the gate.



ALTERNATIVE TO COMPLAINT 10

He colluded with Mr JACKSON, the Assistant Chief Constable, to mislead the
public over the opening of Gate C.
                FOREWORD



 This report is submitted in the normal and accepted

complaint format.        However, some explanation is

required to assist the reader in identifying where to

find certain statements and documents.



In the margin of the report it will be seen that

Document numbers, Statement pages, Appendices and on

occasions Lord Justice Taylor’s interim and final

report are referred to as well as to extracts from the

transcripts of his Public Inquiry.



Where a document number or statement is prefixed with a

part number this can be found within the seven volumes

(parts) of evidence submitted to the Director of Public

Prosecutions.



eg:        PART IV            or          PART IV

           Document No 6                  Statement

           Pages 44-52                    Pages 2331-2356



If a document number or statement is not prefixed with

a part number that particular item can be found within

this file.



Where reference is made to a video then each VHS tape

has been given a separate, Part III, document number.

Not only that but within the same Part III is a written

description/schedule of what the video contains.        For

example;
                   Part III (Documents)

                   Document No 115

                   (Video)

                   Pages 757



identifies the VHS tape number as 115 and the schedule

page in the documents where the description can be

found.



A similar system is used to identify photographs which

also feature in Part III.    For example;



                   Part III (Documents)

                   Document No 150

                   Photo No 14



This easily identifies that this photograph can be

found in the Album marked Document Number 150 and

within each album the photographs are numbered

consecutively.



A reference to one of Lord Justice Taylor's reports

will be shown as follows;



                   LJT (interim) or (final)

                   Page

                   Paragraph
A reference to a transcript from the Public Inquiry

will be shown as follows;



                   e.g.

                   Transcript 26.5.89

                   Day 9

                   Pages 74-75




L SHARP QPM, LLB

CHIEF CONSTABLE

CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY
                  CIRCUMSTANCES SURROUNDING COMPI-ATNTS



                  R1    On 15 April 1989 a Football Association Cup Semi

                  Final match was played between Liverpool and

                  Nottingham Forest Football Clubs at the neutral

                  Sheffield Wednesday ground at Hillsborough.     It is

                  well documented that shortly after ’kick-off’ the

                  match was abandoned due to crushing in pens 3 and 4 of

                  the Leppings Lane/West Stand terraces, which resulted

                  in the death of 95 Liverpool Supporters and injuries

                  to many others.



                  R2    As a result of the tragedy Mr G J DEAR, QPM,

                  Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police was

                  appointed to investigate the disaster and to collate

                  evidence for H M Coroner and for a Judicial Inquiry

                  which was carried out by Lord Justice TAYLOR.     On 27

                  September 1989 following submission of the TAYLOR

                  Interim Report into the disaster to the Director of

                  Public Prosecutions Mr DEAR agreed to accept

                  additional responsibility for the criminal and

                  disciplinary aspects of the investigation.    On 1 April

                  1990, with the retirement of Mr DEAR, these

                  responsibilities were transferred to Mr L SHARP, QPM,

                  LLB, Chief Constable of Cumbria.



Part IV           R3    Richard JONES (25 years - deceased) was the son

Statement Pages   of the complainant Mr Leslie JONES and attended the

2368-2377         match with his sister Stephanie JONES and his

                  girlfriend Tracey COX.   Arising from his son’s death,
                  JONES Senior makes a number of complaints relating to

                  the lack of planning and control/management of

                  Liverpool supporters at the match; the alleged attempt

                  to mislead his Assistant Chief Constable and members

                  of the public concerning the opening of exit Gate C;

                  and the delay in responding to people in distress;

                  against Chief Superintendent David Godfrey DUCKENFIELD

                  and other officers.



Part IV           R4    Trevor HICKS the father of Sara Louise HICKS

Statement Pages   (19 years - deceased) and Victoria Jane HICKS (15

2 3 31-2356       years - deceased) attended the match with his wife

                  Jennifer HICKS and the two daughters.    Whilst he went

                  to stand in pens 1/2 and his wife went to a seat in

                  the North Stand, both girls went into pen 3.     Mr

                  HICKS makes a series of complaints which also relate

                  to the lack of planning and control/management of

                  Liverpool supporters both prior to and during the

                  match as well as to organisation of the rescue

                  operation after it was abandoned.    In addition he

                  complains about the alleged false statement/collusion

                  in relation to the opening of Gate C into the ground.

                  These complaints are against Chief Superintendent

                  DUCKENFIELD and other officers.



Part IV           R5    John McBRIEN (18 years - deceased)

Statement Pages   attended the match with friends.    His mother Joan

2432A-R           McBRIEN complains against Chief Superintendent
                DUCKENFIELD and one other officer concerning the

                authorising of the opening of exit Gate C allowing an

                uncontrolled entry of Liverpool supporters into the

                Leppings Lane end of the ground.



                DETAILS OP COMPT.ATNTS



Document 1      R6    On 19 October 1989 Mr JONES sent a letter to the

Pages 1-2       South Yorkshire Police Authority enclosing a schedule

                of specific complaints against individually named

                officers including Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.

                This was forwarded by Assistant Chief Constable Mr

                ANDERSON, South Yorkshire Police, on 23 October,

Document 2      together with a separate letter to Mr JONES, Assistant

Page 3          Chief Constable, West Midlands Police requesting Mr

                DEAR to undertake the investigation and indicating

                that Captain TAYLOR would supervise on behalf of the

Documents 3-4   Authority.   This was confirmed by letters from Captain

Pages 4-5       TAYLOR on 25 October and on 27 October Assistant Chief

                Constable Mr JONES accepted the investigation on

                behalf of Mr DEAR.



                R7    As a result of receipt of the letter/schedule

                from Mr JONES, he was seen by Detective Chief

                Superintendent Michael Jon FOSTER on 2 November 1989,

                in company with his solicitor and he then made a

                formal statement of complaint.   Those relating to

                Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD are as follows:-
a)   You failed to acquaint yourself with the

     planning and problems related to the control of

     the Liverpool v Nottingham Forest Semi Final on

     Saturday, 15 April 1989.



b)   You failed to monitor the crowd numbers packing

     into Pens 3 and 4.



c)   You failed to act when it became obvious that

     Pens 3 and 4 were over full when you had an

     excellent viewpoint from the Police Box above

     the pens.



d)   You failed to make provision for fans coming

     through Gate ’C ’ after you had given the order

     for the gate to be opened.



e)   You failed to act when it was obvious that

     people were in distress.



     You attempted to mislead the Assistant Chief

     Constable at the ground and others, namely,

     representatives of the Club, the F.A., and the

     fans themselves regarding the origin of the

     order for Gate 'C* to be opened.   That is by

     inferring supporters had forced open the gate

     when you had, in fact, given the order to open

     the gate.
             R8    Dealing with the complaints made by Mr HICKS

             involving Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, on 7 June

Document 5   1989 Mr HICKS sent a letter to the Home Secretary

Pages 6-7    Douglas HURD primarily complaining about another

             senior officer of the South Yorkshire Police.



             R9    That letter was interpreted as containing a

             further complaint against Chief Superintendent

             DUCKENFIELDs-



             a)    That you were deceitful and intentionally misled

                   senior police officers and members of the public

                   regarding your command and control of police

                   officers engaged on that duty.



             RIO   The complaint was initially allocated to Mr

             Kenneth Philip Douglas COOPER, Assistant Chief

             Constable Northamptonshire Constabulary for

Document 6   investigation by letter dated 25 July 1989, with the

Page 8       Police Complaints Authority being formally requested

Document 7   to supervise the investigation in a further letter the

Page 9       same day.



             Rll   On 4 August 1989 Mr SKITT, Deputy Chief

             Constable, Northamptonshire Constabulary agreed to the

             appointment of Mr COOPER as the Senior Investigating

             Officer on behalf of his Chief Constable.   This

Document 8   appointment was later ratified and in a letter dated 4

Page 10      August Mr HICKS was informed that Captain TAYLOR of

             the Police Complaints Authority was to supervise the

             investigation.
                  R12   Following his appointment, Mr COOPER saw Mr

                  HICKS on 24 August and he made a formal statement of

                  complaint outlining a series of new complaints against

                  a number of officers including Chief Superintendent

                  DUCKENFIELD.    Details of the complaints against this

                  officer are as follows:-



                 b)     Failed to prevent a dangerous build up of

                         supporters outside of the gates.



                 c)     Failed to control the movement of supporters

                         subsequent to the opening of Gate 'C* and



                 d)     Failed to respond to the developing tragedy and

                        were slow to effect a rescue operation.



                 R13    Subsequent to this interview Mr COOPER received

Document 9       a letter dated 5 September 1989 from Captain TAYLOR

Page 11          informing him that, the enquiry would be dealt with      by

                 another force.    On 27 September following protracted

                 negotiations, responsibility for all criminal and

                 disciplinary aspects of the investigation into the

                 Hillsborough disaster, including the earlier

                 complaints by Mr HICKS were passed to Mr DEAR for

                 enquiries by West Midlands Police.



Part IV          R14    Arising from that transfer of responsibility,   Mr

StatementPages   HICKS was re-interviewed on 22 November 1989 by

2331-2356
                  Detective Superintendent TAYLOR with a view to

                  clarification of the complaint contained in his

                  earlier letter to the Home Secretary.    He then made a

                  further/alternative complaint against Chief

                  Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and another Senior Officer

                  as follows:-



                  e)      That he colluded with Mr JACKSON the Assistant

                          Chief Constable to mislead the public over the

                          opening of Gate C.



Documents 10 11   R15     Correspondence relating to the acceptance of

Pages 12-13       that investigation by Mr DEAR and supervision of the

                  investigation by Captain TAYLOR is included in the

                  file.



                  R16     Regarding the complaint by Mrs McBRIEN, on 7

Document 12       November 1989 she sent a letter to Mr DEAR (one of a

Pages 14-28       number of letters received from this lady who is

                  understandably still very distressed and having

                  difficulty coming to terms with the death of her

                  son).    The letter was couched in such a way that it

                  could be regarded as a complaint against South

                  Yorkshire Police, consequently it was decided to

                  obtain clarification.



                  R17     On 6 December 1989 Mrs McBRIEN was interviewed

                  at her home by Detective Superintendent TAYLOR and she

                  then confirmed her intention to complain.    She made a
                          formal statement of complaint against Chief

                          Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and another officer.

                          Details of this complaint are as follows



                          a)    You should not have opened the gates under any

                                circumstances giving uni *mited and

                                uncontrollable access into the football ground

                                by supporters.



Documents 13-14           R18   Correspondence concerning the acceptance of that

Page 29                   investigation by Mr DEAR and from the Police

Page 30                   Complaints Authority confirming supervision by Captain

                          TAYLOR are produced.




Documents 15-16                 Letters dated 13 December 1989 and 24 January
Pages 31-32
Pages 33-34               1990 have since been received from Mrs McBRIEN

                          concerning her complaint and enclosing respectively a

Document 17               newspaper cutting and a more detailed account of
Page 35
Part IV                   events as she saw them on 15 April 1989.    She
Statement Pages 2432F-0
                          considers these add to or clarify the details of her

                          complaint.



                          R20   As will be appreciated these complaints raise

                          allegations of both criminal and disciplinary

                          offences.    The file on the criminal aspect of the

                          investigation is already with the Director of Public

                          Prosecutions and the Police Complaints authority.

                          This report deals solely with the disciplinary

                          aspects.
SUE/13 6 .7 .9 0         DETAILS OF IHVgSTIGATIOH



                   R21     That he failed to acquaint himself with the

                   planning and problems related to the control of the

                   semi-final on 15 April 1989.



Part IV            R22     Made only by Mr JONES, he explains it as failing

Statement Pages    to correctly make plans before the match and did not

2368-2377          provide himself with the knowledge necessary to

                   control a football match of this nature.



                   R23     This particular complaint is part and parcel of

                   the evidence gathered towards the proof of the

                   criminal offences of Manslaughter or Culpable

                   Malfeasance which is currently being considered by the

                   Director of Public Prosecutions.    Should that evidence

                   be insufficient to prove these crimes then this

                   particular complaint could still give rise to

                   disciplinary offences under the Police Discipline

                   Code.



                   R24     The allegation requires consideration of the

                   following disciplinary offences



                   (i)     Disobedience to orders.



                   Without good and sufficient cause disobeyed or

                   neglected to carry out a lawful written order, viz the

                   South Yorkshire Police Standing Instruction for

                   Policing Football Matches.    Contrary to The Police

                   (Discipline) Regs 1985. Schedule 1 . Regulation 4(1).

                   paragraph 3(a).
Part V          R25    The written order in question is the South

Document 192    Yorkshire Standing Instructions for the Policing of

998-1044        Football Matches.   Although there are various other

                documents, instructions and guidelines in existence,

                some national and others confined to South Yorkshire

                Police, it is only the Standing Instructions which are

                relevant to the disciplinary charge under

                consideration.



Part V          R26    At paragraph 5.1 the Standing Instructions

Document 192    requires-

Page 1002       "In estimating manpower requirements, the following

                factors must be considered:



                (ii)   the history of previous encounters between clubs

                       and the supporters of the clubs.*



Part V          R27    Although the Standing Instruction goes on to say

Document 192    at paragraph 5.2 that it is the responsibility of the

Page 1003       Force Football Liaison Officer to collate and

                disseminate intelligence relative to football fixtures

                within South Yorkshire, that same paragraph makes it

                clear that the Football Liaison Officer is there to

                'assist” the officer in command, in this case Chief

                Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.



Part IV         R28    The intelligence report for the 1989 semi-final

Document 179    was compiled by Detective Sergeant CHARLESWORTH and

Pages 867-872   was incorporated into the briefings to all officers,
 but this particular Standing Instruction must be taken

to include encounters between various clubs at

Hillsborough in previous years, particularly in FA Cup

 semi-finals.



R29   The incomplete nature of the information

received from other forces to prepare the intelligence

briefing is dealt with later in this report.



R30   Documentary evidence suggests an awareness of

crowd crushing on the Leppings Lane terraces as early

as 1956.     In 1981, during another FA Cup semi-final

there was a significant crushing problem on those

terraces and crowd injuries resulted.    Although some

remedial action was taken during the following years,

including the installation of the radial fences on the

Leppings Lane terraces, there is evidence that some of

the crowd were injured on those terraces in 1988.



R31   Although Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD has

refused to answer any questions in respect of this or

any other matters, from his unsworn testimony to the

Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry it seems that his

knowledge of these past events, was sketchy, to say

the least.



R32   However, he had only a short time to prepare for

the match (discussed in more detail later in this

report) and he had at his disposal to advise him, the
                   best expertise that South Yorkshire Police could

                   produce.     That advice was to the effect that the 1988

                   semi-final at Hillsborough between the same teams had

                   been policed effectively and successfully.     Chief

                   Superintendent DUCKENFIELD was entitled to assume that

                  any lessons learned by police from past events at

                  Hillsborough had been remedied, no problems had arisen

                  in 1988 which called for any serious alterations to

                  the police plan and he would have virtually the same

                  team of key personnel to help him police the event in

                  1989.



Part V            R33      At paragraph 6.3 the Standing Instruction

Document 192      requires that the Operation Order for a particular

Page 1004         match:

                  "Will specify individual duties for each serial so

                  that supervisory officers are aware of their exact

                  roles prior to, during and after the match."



Part V            R34      The Operation Order signed by Chief

Document 194      Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and approved by Mr JACKSON,

Pages 1128-1210   the Assistant Chief Constable (Operations), makes no

                  mention of the responsibilities of serials or

                  individuals in respect of monitoring or distributing

                  the crowd so as to prevent or relieve overcrowding

                  other than in respect of "safety" which seems to

                  relate to evacuation procedures.
                              R40   Directions are given to "Officers on the playing

                              area track" and at paragraph (a) (iv):-



                              "Spectators will not be allowed to remain in

                              passageways adjacent to entrances and exits or to be

                              in terrace or stand gangways.   Persons seen to be so

                              remaining will be directed to move."



                              R41   This, an accepted police responsibility, seems

                              to be particularly relevant to Pens 3 and 4 of the

Part V                        West Terraces and the associated entry tunnel, yet the

Document 194                  Operation Order is silent in this respect.

Pages 1128-1210

Part V                        R42   At Appendix L under the Section on "Safety at

Document 192A                 Sports Grounds - Stewards," at paragraph 3, the

Page 10441                    Standing Instruction states:-



                              "Stewards should be distributed throughout the ground

                              in accordance with a detailed prearranged schedule

                              agreed between the police and management."




Part I                        R43   No detailed prearranged schedule had been agreed
Statement Page 5 9 8 -6 1 6
Part II                       between the police and management, but liaison between
Statement Pages
846-859C                      police and the Club was conducted in this respect on a
8 6 0 -8 6 9
Part V                        match by match basis.
Statement Pages
2470-2488
Document 192            R44      Also in Appendix L of the Standing Instructions,

1044J                   under "Specific Duties of Stewards" at paragraph 7, it

                        states:-



                        "Specific duties to be undertaken by stewards include:



                        (a)      Preventing overcrowding, ensuring that crowd

                                 limits in various parts of the ground are

                                 complied with and that gangways and exits are

                              kept clear."



                        R45      It has to be recognised that this order is a

                        police instruction directed at police, not at

                        Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.     The Club’s

                        perception of the duties of their stewards differs

Part 1                  from the police perception as is evidenced by the

Document 1              Club’s internal memorandum on the subject.    A copy of

Pages 1-5               that memorandum was received by police in 1988.



Part V                  R46   The Standing Instructions had been properly

Document 192            communicated and promulgated, were continuously

Pages 998-1044          reviewed and amended within South Yorkshire Police

                        Force.




Lord Justice TAYLOR’S   R47   Although Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD has
Public Inquiry
24. 25 & 26 May 1989    refused to answer any of the Investigating Officer’s
Page No 113-143
          1-130         questions in respect of these or any other matters,
          1-52
                        from his unsworn testimony to the Lord Justice Taylor
                  Inquiry it is clear that he was aware of the Standing

                  Instructions although not fully conversant with them.



                  (ii)   Neglect of Duty



                  Without good and sufficient cause neglected or omitted

                  to attend to or carry out with due promptitude and

                  diligence anything which it is his duty as a member of

                  a police force to attend to or carry out, viz he

                  failed to brief himself adequately in respect of the

                  planning and problems related to the control of the

                  policing of the FA Cup Semi-Final at Hillsborough on

                  15 April 1989.



                  Contrary to The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.

                  Schedule 1. Regulation 4(1) paragraph 4(a).



Part V            R48    Although Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD has

Statement Pages   refused to answer any of the Investigating Officer’s

2457-2469         questions in respect of this, or any other matter,

                  there is a considerable amount of information which

                  shows in some detail what Chief Superintendent

                  DUCKENFIELD did in those respects.



                  R49    That he had between 16 and 19 days notice that

                  he would be in command of the police operation on the

                  day, seems clear.
                          R50   It is also clear that the draft planning was in

Part II                   the hands of other officers.   Chief Superintendent

Statement Pages           MOLE took the lead assisted by the Police Headquarters

846-859C                  Operations Department, the Force Football Liaison

                          Inspector and a significant number of others.



                          R51   That Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD was

                          personally involved with the best experience that the

                          force and others, could offer is beyond doubt.



                          R52   It is also pertinent that although the Operation

                          Order was signed by Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

Part II                   the final approval was that of Mr JACKSON, the

Statement Pages 860 869   Assistant Chief Constable Operations.



Part V
Documents                 R53   That Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD was
197 and 198
Part III                  personally involved in a comprehensive briefing system
Document 151
Schedule Page No          for the football match is also capable of proof.
Photos 820-821
1A. 2A. 3A 4A


Part I                    R54   He also attended the stadium on 1 and 5 April

Statement Page 607        1989 for the Millwall and Wimbledon matches and made

                          the opportunity to see for himself the area he would

                          command on 15 April 1989.



                          R55   It also seems clear that he did not undertake

                          research personally into the documentary evidence

                          relating to the history of the matches held at
                      Hillsborough and the problems that arose therefrom.

Part V                In this respect he could have studied the Police

Statement Pages       Headquarters and the *F* Division Policy Files

3480A-3480B           which document these matters in detail.



                      R56   There are also strong indications that the

                      nationally adopted but loosely structured system for

Part IV               bringing to notice information and intelligence about

Document 179          matches teams and supporters, failed to bring to his

Pages 867-872         attention matters which could have been relevant to

                      Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD on the day, and

                      before.



Part IV               R57   For example, there is nothing in the

Statement Page 1145   intelligence report to indicate the tendency of

                      Liverpool supporters to arrive late.   Subsequent to

Part IV               the event reports from the Metropolitan Police about

Document 180          the past behaviour of Liverpool fans include

Page 883              significant references to this propensity.     Although

                      this tendency was not unknown to Merseyside Police and

                      South Yorkshire Police, the information was not

                      specifically passed to South Yorkshire Police and was

                      not included in the intelligence report which deals

                      only with potential crimes and disorder.   Whilst the

                      new computer based police football intelligence system

                      will make such information readily available, in April

                      1989 it is not apparent from the written orders and

                      briefings that it was ever considered as a serious

                      possibility.   Entreaties for early arrival were made
 through the media and club programmes but no plans

 were made to cover the contingency of late arrival by

 large numbers of fans.



 R58   All of this forms part of the evidence submitted

 to the Director of Public Prosecutions for

 consideration of the criminal offences of Manslaughter

 or Culpable Malfeasance.   The evidence required to

 prove Manslaughter must amount to gross negligence or

 recklessness but the offence of Culpable Malfeasance

 is an alternative offence to Manslaughter and although

 it is based on the same evidence it requires a lesser

^degree of negligence or recklessness and embraces

neglect of a duty.   The mental element required to be

 proved for Culpable Malfeasance is the same as for the

disciplinary offence of Neglect of Duty.   Should the

Director of Public Prosecutions decide that there is

 insufficient evidence to prove the offences of

Manslaughter or Culpable Malfeasance, there will be

 insufficient evidence to prove the disciplinary

offence of Neglect of Duty.



R59    There is sufficient evidence to show that Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD did enough in his planning,

orders and briefings to satisfy the requirements of

the South Yorkshire Police Standing Instructions.

Time was short; he was newly promoted into an area

where Hillsborough events were prominent; to a
                   considerable extent he had to take the well-tried and

                   overtly successful South Yorkshire Police system as he

                  found it; he had the best advice possible; and on the

                  day he would have a very experienced team working for

                  him with reserve resources available to deal with

                  unforeseen contingencies.    There is insufficient

                  evidence to prove a disciplinary offence of

                  Disobedience to Orders.



                  R60   In that case this complaint is unsubstantiated.



2   .             R61   He failed to prevent a dangerous build   up   of

                  supporters outside the Leppings Lane gates.



Part IV           R62   This complaint is made only by Mr HICKS who can

Statement Pages   have no personal eyewitness knowledge of what occurred

2331-2356         outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles other than at

                  about 2 pm when he entered the ground and the scene

                  there was calm.   He has levelled the same complaint

                  against other officers, including Superintendent

                  MURRAY and the Ground Commanders, Superintendents

                  MARSHALL and GREENWOOD, but in respect of Chief

                  Superintendent DUCKENFIELD his specific complaint must

                  relate to the manner in which he planned the policing

                  of that specific area, allocated resources to it,

                  briefed the senior officers who were deployed there,

                  responded to their requests for assistance and

                  directed their activities.
                  R63      The disciplinary offence which has to be

                  considered is;-



                  Neglect of duty.



                  Without good and sufficient cause he neglected or

                  omitted to attend to or carry out with due promptitude

                  and diligence anything which it was his duty as a

                  member of a police force to attend to or carry out,

                  viz he failed to prevent a dangerous build up of

                  supporters outside the Leppings Lane gates at

                  Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989.



                  Contrary to the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.

                  Schedule 1. Regulation 4(i). paragraph 4(a).




Part V            R64      Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD in his
Statement Pages
2457-2469         Operation Order for 1989 had ensured that the
Part V
Document 194      reduction in manpower did not affect the Leppings Lane
Pages 1128-1210
                  turnstile area and 53 police officers were deployed

                  there.



Part IV           R65      He had also taken steps to encourage the
Document 185
Page 929          supporters to arrive at the ground early.     Some

                  turnstiles were open from 1130 hours and all were open

                  by 12 noon.



Part V            R66      Although supporters arrived in considerable
Statement Pages
2719-2728         numbers by the time the turnstiles were opened, many
2740-2750
                  of them started to gather on or around the bridge over
2751-2755                the River Don in Leppings Lane.    There was a

2756-2762                noticeable reluctance on the part of many fans, to

2763-2767                enter the ground.

2768-2772

2917-2924                R67     Police officers made random checks to locate non

2925-2930                ticket holders and others carried out searches both

2806-2810                inside and outside the ground to prevent crimes and

2811-2814                breaches of the ground rules.



Part V                   R68     By 1400 hours it was apparent to Chief

Statement Pages          Superintendent DUCKENFIELD that far fewer Liverpool

2457-2469                fans had entered the stadium than Nottingham Forest

2470-2488                fans.    The Kop and the South Stand were filling up

                         steadily, but the North and West Stands, were

                         relatively empty.



                         R69     On the West Terraces, the Liverpool end, pens 3

                         and 4, the central pens, were filling up, but pens 1,

                         2, 6 and 7 were nearly empty.    Pens 3 and 4 are the

                         two pens behind the goal.



Lord Justice TAYLOR *S   R70     At 1415 hours a tannoy message was broadcast to

Interim Report           the crowd for them to move forward in pens 3 and 4 to

Para 59                  make room for others.



Lord Justice TAYLOR *S   R71     At about 1417 hours the Traffic Division

Interim Report           reported that the indications were that the majority

Para 61                  of the Liverpool supporters were in the Sheffield

                         area and at the turnstiles the numbers of fans coming
                      along Leppings Lane towards the stadium had increased

Part V                to such an extent that Superintendent MARSHALL
Statement Pages
2527-2547             radioed to the Police Control Box for the road to be

                      closed to traffic.   The request was granted and

                      implemented by about 1430 hours but by then the

Part III              the CCTV camera 1 showed that the area
Document 109
Schedule Page No      outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles inside the
740-741
                      perimeter gates, was heavily congested with no signs

Part III              of the orderly queuing which the 1988 video pictures
Documents 145 & 146
Schedule Page No      reveal was the experience the previous year.
806-808
809-812


                      R72   In 1988 there had been three special trains from

                      Liverpool to Sheffield and the passengers on that

                      train had been met by police and either bussed to the

                      stadium or escorted in crocodile fashion along

                      Leppings Lane to the turnstiles.   In 1988 the iron

                      perimeter gates had been closed early so that entry

                      into the area outside the turnstiles was restricted

                      and police officers had little difficulty in

                      controlling the crowd in separate queues with no

                      overspill into the South Road area near to the outside

                      of Gate C.



                      R73   In 1989 there was only one special train from

Part V                Liverpool, it arrived by 1400 hours and the 350 or so

Statements            Liverpool supporters who had travelled on it were met

2633-2647             by police, escorted in crocodile fashion down Leppings

2648-2654
                         Lane and gained access to the ground easily and safely

                         by 1420 hours.     The escorting officers were then

                        deployed on other duties in accordance with the

                        Operation Order.     The increasing crowd which followed

                        them came along Leppings Lane unescorted and although

                        police officers mounted and on foot were deployed to

                        keep them on the pavements, the numbers were such that

                        the crowd over spilled onto the roadway hence

                        Superintendent MARSHALL’S request to close the road to

                        traffic.



                        R74     There is an argument which runs to the effect

                        that traffic flow is one way of keeping crowds

                        confined to a pavement or similar controllable safe

                        space, but in the circumstances prevailing at the time

                        I have no doubt that the request and the decision were

                        correct.



                        R75     But in 1989 the iron perimeter gates outside the

                        Leppings Lane turnstiles were not closed early as they

                        had been in 1988.     Consequently the previous year’s

                        filtering effect of those gates was not possible in

                        1989 and the crowd became swiftly a single seething

                        mass of people filling the whole area between

                        the iron perimeter gates and the turnstiles including

                        the area of the South Road near to the outside of Gate

                        C.    This effect can be seen clearly from a comparison

Part III                of the relevant 1988 and 1989 CCTV videos from camera
Document 14 3A
Schedule Page(s) 803A   1.    This may go some way to explain the various
                   arguments which emerged during the Lord Justice

                   Taylor Inquiry, about filtering the crowd in Leppings

                   Lane with barriers or otherwise.     The fact is that

                   when the iron gates were eventually closed (just

                   before the opening of Gate C at 1452 hours), they were

                   broken open by the Liverpool supporters in Leppings

                   Lane, but it must be remembered that the forcing of

Part IV           the iron perimeter gates did not occur until after

Statement Pages   Gate C was opened.      The fans still in Leppings Lane

1678-1679         saw Gate C open and made a ■bee-line" for it knowing

1680-1686         that the kick-off was imminent and there had been no

1687-1696         indication that the start of the game would be

Part V            delayed.      If these iron perimeter gates had been

Document 190      closed early, as in 1988, better crowd control may

Pages 987-990     have been possible.




                  R76   It may be pertinent that for Sheffield Wednesday

                  Football Club league matches, which of course occur

                  almost fortnightly throughout the football season,

                  spectators with tickets for the West Stand, North

                  Stand, the West Terraces and the South Stand, all use

                  the Leppings Lane entrance.     Those for the South Stand

                  enter the ground through turnstiles 19-22 and 23-28

                  and reach them along the private road at the rear of

                  the South Stand (called South Road).     To achieve this,

                  the iron perimeter gates outside and across the mouth

                  of the Leppings Lane turnstiles, are kept open.        No

                  such considerations are necessary for a FA Cup

                  semi-final.     The league match positioning of the iron
                   perimeter gates could be regarded as the ■norm" and

                   that may have influenced the configuration used on 15

                   April 1989.




                  R77    Up to the time that Leppings Lane was closed to

                   traffic, although there was a large mass of people

                  outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles, and there were

                  large numbers of Liverpool fans still approaching the

                  turnstiles along Leppings Lane, there was nothing

                  either inside or outside of the ground which was

                  recognised by the Police Control Box staff as a cause

Part V            for alarm.     It was about this time that Superintendent

Statement Pages   MURRAY advised Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD    that

2470-2488         everyone would get into the stadium by kick-off    time,

2457-2469         and he rehearsed his policy for delaying the

                  kick-off.    This specific aspect is considered

                  elsewhere in this report.


                  R78   Between 1430 hours and 1444 hours the crowd in

Part IV           pens 3 and 4 continued to increase to the detriment of
Statement Pages
1731-1741         pens 1 and 2; and 6 and 7.     The crowd outside the
1742-1750
1751-1757         Leppings Lane turnstiles continued to grow and spread
1758-1763
1805-1808         both along Leppings Lane and over the River Don bridge
1809-1816
1817-1820         faster than the trickle of fans coming through the

                  turnstiles could disperse it.     The police officers

                  deployed on foot and on horses were no longer able to

                  carry out their appointed duties because of the crush

Part V            of the crowd.     The foot officers at one stage were
Statement Pages
2821-2829         forced to retreat through the turnstiles and then
2890-2895
2912-2916         emerge again through Gate C.
                  R79      The mood of the crowd rapidly changed and any

                  attempt to control them was resented.     Officers and

                  horses were attacked and there is some evidence that a

                  significant proportion of the crowd, mostly young men,

Part V            who had been drinking, tried to push their way forward

Statement Pages   through the crowd.    There were some signs of panic,

2843-2848         mainly at the turnstiles themselves, as people were

2849-2857         pressed against the turnstile walls.     In the crowd

                  young people and women were fainting and some fans

Part V            climbed over the turnstile building and the dividing

Statement Pages   fence.    Only some of this could be seen on the CCTV

2527-2547         monitor in the Police Control Box, but Superintendent

2947-2955         MARSHALL on the spot had gained a vantage point on the

2964-2970         parapet of the River Don bridge.    He radioed to the

3043-3048         Police Control Box at 1444 hours for reinforcements,

3184-3190         for a Tannoy message to be broadcast to urge the crowd

3368-3371         to stop pushing, and for this to be reinforced by a

Part II           police vehicle equipped with a public address system.

Statement Pages   Because of police radio failure at about that time

1123-1128         only the requests for the tannoy and the

                  reinforcements were received and acceded to, but

Part V            Police Constable BUXTON in a police Landrover equipped

Statement Pages   with a Public Address system arrived at the scene,

2830-2835         by 1446 hours and started to broadcast to the crowd to

                  stop pushing forward towards the turnstiles.    By this

                  time the crowd outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles

                  had grown to some 5,000 strong.    Police Constable

                  BUXTON radioed from his police vehicle requesting
 Part V             that the kick-off be delayed.     From the Police Control

 Statement Pages    Box the request was refused.

3311A-J

3368-3371           R80      The mounted police officers, now reinforced,

Part V              formed a cordon across the mouth of the Leppings Lane

Statement Pages     turnstile area, and the iron perimeter gates were

2836-2842           shut.    This reduced the pressure within the iron

2843-2848          perimeter gates which gave a few minutes respite during

2849-2857          which the area outside the turnstiles could be

2858-2863          cleared.     However, time was of the essence and clearly

2864-2867          because of non-ticket holders; tickets with confusing

2868-2873          direction printed thereon; supporters trying to buy

2874-2878          their way into the ground; and some supporters getting

                   stuck in the turnstiles; the turnstiles were not

                   functioning quickly enough to achieve this, so at 1447

Part V             hours Superintendent MARSHALL asked the Police Control

Statement Pages    Box for permission to open the exit gates, an

2527-2547          extraordinary action but one well justified given the

                   circumstances prevailing at that time.



Part V             R81      At 1448 hours while Chief Superintendent

Statement Pages    DUCKENFIELD was considering the request, Gate C was

2457-2469          opened so that police could eject a youth who had

                   climbed into the ground without a ticket.     As the gate

                   opened some of the fans outside took advantage and

                   about 150 of them forced their way through it into the

                   ground.     The gate was quickly closed with the

                   assistance of a mounted officer who blocked off the

                   entrance.
Part III                 R82       This 'illegal* entry was seen on the CCTV
Document 110
Schedule Paee(s)         monitors in the Police Control Box and may have puzzled
742-747
                         Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD who was still

                         considering the request for the exit gates to be

                         opened.     Superintendent MARSHALL made a second and then

                         a third request for the gates to be opened.      At 1452

                         hours Gate C was opened wide in response to Chief

Part V                   Superintendent DUCKENFIELD*S approval so to do.
Statement Pages
2457-2469
                         R83       Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD *S approval was

                         for the "gates" to be opened so he was surprised very

Part V                    shortly afterwards when Police Sergeant HIGGINS

Statement Pages          radioed for Gate A to be opened.      Approval was given

3043-3048                and Gate A was      opened despite protests fromthe stewards

                         employed at that location.      Gate B was   also opened for a

                         short while.



                         R84   Gate C was opened for about five minutes and

                         during that time about 2,000 fans passed through it at

Part IV                  no more than a fast walk but the sight of this gateway

Statement Pages          to the match was too much for the Liverpool fans outside

1821-1831                the iron perimeter gates.      They pushed towards Gate C .

1832-1841                broke through the iron perimeter gates and joined onto

1842-1847                the rear of the fans going through Gate C.

Part III                 From the video      pictures available from the CCTV camera

Document 110             1, there was athird group of fans who went       through

Schedule Pages 742 747   Gate C on that occasion - these fans who had been

                         standing about for a considerable time without
                         attempting to enter the ground through the turnstiles.



Part V                   R85     Of those who entered through Gate C, either at

Statement Pages          1448 hours, or at 1452 hours, there can be little doubt

3006-3012                that some had tickets for the North and West Stands.

3013-3019                some had tickets for the West Terrace, some had no

                         tickets at all.



                         R86     Some made their way to the wing pens 1 and 2,

                         some went through the opening in the dividing wall

Part III                 making their way to the West Stand or to the pens 6 and

Document 110             7.    But from the CCTV pictures from camera 1 . there can

Schedule Pages 742 747   be no doubt that the majority of them went straight and

                         unchecked to the tunnel leading to pens 3 and 4.



                         R87    These matters are identical to those currently

                         under consideration by the Director of Public

                         Prosecutions in respect of Chief Superintendent

                         DUCKENFIELD’S culpability for Manslaughter or Culpable

                         Malfeasance.



                         R88    Should the Director find that there is

                         insufficient evidence to prosecute these criminal

                         offences, then the same must be said in respect of the

                         disciplinary offence.    In which case this complaint is

                         unsubstantiated.



3.                       R89    That he failed to monitor the crowd numbers

                         packing into pens 3 and 4 .
Part IV           R90      This complaint is made by Mr JONES only and he

Statement Pages   explains that Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD should

2368-2377         have ensured personally that the number in those pens

                  only reached a safe level.



                  R91      The disciplinary offence which has to be

                  considered is:-



                  Neglect of Duty



                  Without good and sufficient cause he neglected or

                  omitted to attend to or carry out with due promptitude

                  and diligence anything which it is his duty as a

                  member of a police force to attend to or to carry out,

                  viz he failed to monitor the crowd in pens 3 and 4 at

                  Hillsborough on 15 April 1989 so as to ensure that the

                  number of people in those pens did not exceed a safe

                  level.



                  Contrary to the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985

                  Schedule 1. Regulation 4(i). paragraph 4(a).



Part II           R92   Because a knowledge of the Guide to Safety at

Document 88       Sports Grounds 1986, known as the Green Guide is a

                  requirement for a Police Football Ground Commander,

                  Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD must be taken as

                  having a responsibility in respect of capacity and

                  safety of supporters.
                      R93   At Hillsborough, The Club have provided a system

                      albeit an unsatisfactory one, to monitor the number of

 Part V               supporters entering the ground by reference to a

Document 189          turnstile counting system.   That Chief Superintendent

Pages 963-986        DUCKENFIELD had access to this information and did

Part II              consult it, albeit through subordinates, is well

Document 89          documented.   That it could not be related specifically

Pages 571-573        to pens 3 and 4 is also clear.



                     R94    That only leaves the option of visual

                     monitoring, either by stewards, or police, or a

                     combination of both.



                     R95    Clearly, on 15 April 1989, the perception of the

                     Club as to whose was the responsibility for the

                     monitoring and packing of the crowd, differed from

Part V               that of police.   The South Yorkshire Police Standing

Document 192         Order on Policing Football Matches promulgates the

Pages 998-1044       view that it is a prime responsibility of the Club

                     with police responsibilities in this respect catered

                     for by training of stewards and briefing both annually

                     and match by match.



Part I               R96    The Club’s view does not reflect the Police

Document 1           Standing Instruction.   From the Club’s internal

Pages 1-5            memorandum dated 8 June 1988, which was copied to, and

Statement Page 605   received by South Yorkshire Police, a much narrower

                     view is taken of the responsibilities of stewarding.
Part V              R97   The net result was that Chief Superintendent

Statement Pages     DUCKENFIELD took the view, shared by the senior police

2457-2469           officers in South Yorkshire, that on the terraces

Part II             supporters find their own level, and on the day

Statement Pages     neither police officer, nor Club employee recognised

846-859C            the fact that pens 3 and 4 were overcrowding early

860 - 8 6 9         enough to do anything to alleviate it.




Part III            R98   In so far as Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD is

Document 176        concerned on the day, his view was the view from the

Schedule Page 864   Police Control Box window and on his CCTV monitors.

                    Additional information was available to him from the

                    Club Control Room (crowd numbers) and from officers on

                    the ground.    That he could see the imbalance of the

                    crowd in the various pens at the Leppings Lane

Part IV             terraces is beyond any dispute, but there is no
Statement Pages
1898-1908           evidence that he could see, or should have seen that
1909-1915
1916-1923           the imbalance was in fact serious overcrowding and
1924-1929
1965-1971           crushing in pens 3 and 4 .   By the time information
1972-1975
2035-2041           came to him from the track around the ground, the
2042-2046
2047-2055           situation was beyond monitoring and packing.
Part III
Document 128
Pages 774-775
                    R99   This particular aspect is part of the evidence

                    currently under consideration by the Director of

                    Public Prosecutions in respect of Chief Superintendent

                    DUCKENFIELD’S culpability for Manslaughter or Culpable

                    Malfeasance.   Should the Director decide that there is

                    insufficient evidence to prosecute these criminal
                         Contrary to The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.

                         Schedule 1, Regulation 4(1) paragraph 4(a).



Part III                 R103   Photographs have been taken from the Police

Document 176             Control box in an attempt to show the view that Chief

Schedule Page 864        Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and his staff in the Police

                        Control Box, had on 15 April 1989.    The photographs

                         show empty terraces because, not unnaturally, the

                        Leppings Lane terraces pens 3 and 4 have not been used

                        to accommodate spectators since the tragedy.      The

                        pictures give a clear sight of the perimeter fence,

                        the radial fences, the tunnel entrance, and the gates

                        in the radial fences.    On the day the presence of the

                        supporters obstructed the view of most of those

                        structures which played a part in the crushing which

                        resulted in deaths and injuries.



Part III                R104    There is video evidence of supporters in pens 3

Document 128            and_4, not taken from the view point of the Police

Schedule Page 774-775   Control Box, which shows the crowd playing with an

                        inflated beach ball, some supporters sitting on the

                        radial fences, some supporters standing on crush

                        barriers, and some supporters climbing from one pen to

                        another, but there is no evidence of any activity or

                        disorder in pens 3 or 4 which would have caused the

                        attention of the Police Control box staff to be

                        directed specifically to these pens prior to the

                        occurance of the crushing.
                   The perspective of the two views was different and it

                  cannot be shown that Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

                  was able to see what the camera saw.



                  R108   The Police CCTV camera which covered the West

                  Terraces, and thus pens 3 and 4, was camera No 2 but it

                  was never in recording mode so no pictures from it are

                  available.



                  R109   Although it has proved to be impossible to

                  establish an exact time, it seems likely that at about

                  the time that the teams came out onto the pitch, or

                  were kicking off, Police Constable ILLINGWORTH and

                  Police Constable SMITH tried to send a radio message

                  from the perimeter track directly outside pens 3 and 4,

                  to the Police Control Box to the effect that a serious

Part IV           crushing problem was occurring in those pens.    Neither

Statement Pages   message was acknowledged as being received and they

2145-2147         were not repeated.    There is no evidence that either

2148-2151         of these messages were received in the Police Control

2165-2172         Box, but it may be that an unintelligible message

2173-2182         heard by Police Sergeant GODDARD in the Control Box

                  relates to one or other of them.



Part V            R110   At about 1500 hours, or shortly thereafter,

Statement Pages   Inspector BULLAS from his position in the West Stand

3269-3274         overlooking pens 3 and 4, saw some abnormal crowd

                  behaviour in pen 3.   He describes an extraordinary surge
                   in the crowd much like a river of molten lava from a

                   volcano.   He tried to contact the Control Box to

                   report it but heard no acknowledgement.     There is no

                   evidence that this message was ever received.

Part V

Statement Pages   Rill Superintendent MARSHALL, Chief Inspector PURDY,

2527-2547         Chief Inspector WARING, Police Sergeant GREEN, and

2616-2619         other officers all recall the radio difficulties they

2694-2699         were experiencing at this time.

2719-2728

                  RH2    This particular aspect is part of the evidence

                  currently under consideration by the Director of

                  Public Prosecutions in respect of Chief Superintendent

                  DUCKENFIELD’S culpability for Manslaughter or Culpable

                  Malfeasance.   Should the Director decide that there is

                  insufficient evidence to prosecute these criminal

                  offences, then the same must be said in respect of the

                  disciplinary offence.    In which case this complaint is

                  unsubstantiated.



                  R113   He should not have opened the gates under any

                  circumstances giving u n H m H e d and uncontrolled access

                  into the football ground by supporters.



Part IV           R114   This complaint is made by Mrs McBRIEN only and

Statement Pages   she explains that it was unnecessary to open Gate C

2432A-R           because the crush was at the turnstiles not in the
                          vicinity of Gate C.     Police should have controlled the

                          crowd and delayed the kick off rather than open an

                          exit gate.



                          R115   It is difficult to see how this specific

                          complaint gives rise to any specific disciplinary

                          offence.     In logic it cannot be said that gates should

                         not be opened under any circumstances.      Without

                         entering the realms of fantasy it is possible to

                         envisage many circumstances which would justify the

                         opening of a gate or gates, and on 15 April 1989, such

                         was the build up of circumstances at the Leppings Lane

                         turnstiles that Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD had

                         no alternative but to open the gates.     The late and

                         uneven flow of Liverpool supporters at the inadequate

                         number of unsatisfactory constructed turnstiles,

                         aggravated by a substantial minority of fans who had

                         drunk too much, many of them without tickets, led,

                         among other things, to a loss of police control at

                         Leppings Lane.     Whether or not these circumstances, or

                         some of them, should have been avoided or prevented,

                         is discussed elsewhere in this report, but the fact

                         remains, given the circumstances prevailing at the

Lord Justice TAYLOR *S   time, "Superintendent MARSHALL was right at that atapo

Interim Report           to ask for it and Mr DUCKENFIELD was right to

Para 228                 agree."     The opening of the gate or gates was a

                         positive decision made by Chief Superintendent

                         DUCKENFIELD and cannot amount to a neglect of duty.
                  R116   It might be argued by the complainant to be a

                  wrong decision but that does not amount to neglect.



                  R117   It is pertinent here to consider the option of

                  delaying the kick-off and announcing that fact to the

                  crowd outside the turnstiles so that the anxiety of

                  getting into the ground "on time" is removed and with

                  it the need for pushing and shoving.



Part V            R118   Although Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD has

Statement Pages   refused to answer any questions about this, or any

2457-2469         other matter, a number of issues are capable of proof.



                  R119   First, Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD had

                  decided in advance his policy about delaying the

                  kick-off.   It was that if there was an identifiable

                  problem, such as a serious incident, accident on the

                  motorway or fog on the Pennines, which would prevent

                  large numbers of fans arriving on time, he would

                  consider delaying the kick-off but not in respect of

                  those fans who had got to the area within a reasonable

                  time but had chosen not to enter the ground as soon as

                  possible.



Part V            R120   Second, that shortly after Superintendent

Statement Pages   MARSHALL made his request to the Police Control Box

2527-2547         for Leppings Lane to be closed to traffic, Chief

2457-2469         Superintendent DUCKENFIELD rehearsed that policy in

2470-2488         conversation with Superintendent MURRAY.
Part V            R121     Third. that Police Constable BUXTON asked for

Statement Pages   the kick-off to be delayed some time before Gate C was

2830-2835         opened at 1452 hours.



                  R122 Fourth. that some players came onto the pitch

                  from the player’s tunnel at 1438 and after kicking a

                  ball about for a while they left the pitch through the

                  player’s tunnel at 1444.



                  R123     Fifth, that the Liverpool team came out onto the

                  pitch through the player’s tunnel at 1454 hours.

Part III

Document 128      R124     Sixth, that the Nottingham Forest team came out

Schedule Pages    onto the pitch through the player’s tunnel at 1455

774-775           hours.



                  R125     Seventh. that the referee and two linesmen came

                  out onto the pitch at 1457 hours.



                  R126     Eighth, that the match started at 1459-30 hours

                  (BBC Time).



                  R127     Ninth, that there was a group of press and other

                  photographers around the mouth of the player’s tunnel

                  from 1439 hours to 1459 hours.     They were there, not

                  only to photograph the teams and match officials as

                  they came onto the pitch, but also to photograph Mr

                  Brian CLOUGH the Nottingham Forest Manager, a

                  controversial figure who had recently been banned from

                  the trainers bench by the FA.
                        R128     The only indication that Chief Superintendent

                        DUCKENFIELD ever considered delaying the start of the

                        match arise first, somewhere between 1417 and 1435

Part V                  hours, when Superintendent MARSHALL requested the

Statement Pages         closure of Leppings Lane.     Chief Superintendent

2527-2547               DUCKENFIELD then sought the advice of Superintendent

                        MURRAY as to whether the crowd of supporters still

                        outside Leppings Lane turnstiles would get into the

                        ground by kick-off time, and was assured that they

                        would.     He then asked Superintendent MURRAY to remind

                        him of the agreed policy for delaying the kick-off.



                        R129     Second, there is no doubt that at about 1452

Part V                  hours, that Police Constable BUXTON asked for the

Statement Pages         kick-off to be delayed.     That message was received in

2830-2835               the Control Box and the request was refused.     That

                        time is much closer to the arrival of the teams onto

                        the pitch.



Lord Justice TAYLOR'S   R130     In his unsworn testimony to the Lord Justice

Public Inquiry          Taylor Public Inquiry, Chief Superintendent

24.25 & 26 May 1989     DUCKENFIELD refused to accept that he was considering

Page No 113-143         delaying the kick-off.    At various stages of his

            1-130       evidence he gave three reasons as to why he

             1-52       thought it was too late to delay the kick-off:-



                        (i)      One of the teams had already come out onto the

                                 pitch.
R131    It seems very likely that what Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD saw was the players coming

onto the pitch for the early kickabout at 1438 hours.

That time corresponds to the time he was consulting

Superintendent MURRAY about the delay policy.      That is

only correct if Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD is

right in his estimation of the timing of the request

for the closure of Leppings Lane to traffic.

Superintendent MURRAY’S log ends with that request

timed at 1417 hours.   Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

estimates the time of the request as 1435 hours, or

thereabouts, and that estimation has some support from

Superintendent MARSHALL.



(ii)   The sight of a group of photographers at the end

       of the players’ tunnel had mislead him into

       believing that the teams were coming out.



R132   The photographers were in that position for such

a lengthy period of time as to be a very unreliable

signal that the teams’ arrival on the pitch was

imminent.   Nevertheless, that could easily have been

the belief of Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD who

would have had no reason to watch them other than by

infrequent glances from time to time.



(iii) He believed the teams were coming out but does

       not know why he believed that.
R133   It seems likely that Chief Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD did consider the option of delaying the

kick-off at the time he was consulting Superintendent

HURRAY about the policy.   He looked out of the window

of the Police Control Box and saw either the players

having an early kickabout at 1438 hours, or the ring

of photographers around the players tunnel.    From this

he wrongly concluded that the players had come out to

start the match, or their arrival on the pitch was

imminent.   He therefore decided that he had lost the

option of delaying the kick-off.



R134   That may have been so in respect of Police

Constable BUXTON’S request because the timing of his

request is uncertain.   However, it seems likely that

he would have made it before the opening of Gate C at

1452 hours, otherwise it would have lost its point.

That the request was received in the Control Box, and

refused, seems to be beyond doubt.



R135   Although Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD has

refused to answer any questions on this or any other

matter, it seems likely that his failure to delay the

kick-off stemmed not from the inflexibility of his

policy which he had discussed with Superintendent

MURRAY, but because he had mistimed and misread the

situation when he was considering delaying the kick

off.   That he was reluctant so to do is clear from his
                  policy and his opinion that to postpone a kick-off

                  whenever a proportion of the fans choose to arrive

                  late at the turnstiles, would set a precedent and

                  develop into a practice which would make kick-off

                  times meaningless.     That he had the opportunity to

                  delay the kick-off is clear.    That he should have done

                  so is also clear, but that is not to say that if he

                  had done so it would have solved the problem at the

Part V            Leppings Lane turnstiles.    Indeed, there is some

Statement Pages   suggestion that the crowd outside the Leppings Lane

2821-2829         turnstiles were misinformed that the kick-off would be

2633-2647         delayed, but that message had no effect.



                  R136   Because Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, for

                  whatever reason, chose not to delay the kick-off, we

                  shall never know what the effect on the crowd would

                  have been.   What we do know is that having lost

                  control of the overcrowding outside Leppings Lane and

                  having rejected the option of delaying the kick-off,

                  Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD had no option but to

                  open the exit gates.




                  R137   That the possible effects of such an action

                  required steps to have been taken is considered

                  elsewhere in this report, but this particular

                  complaint is unsubstantiated.



6.                R138   He failed to control the movement of supporters

                  subsequent to the opening of Gate C .
7.                R139     He failed to make provision for fans coming

                  through Gate C after he had given the order for the

                  gate to be opened.



Part IV           R140   These complaints are made by Mr HICKS and Mr

Statement Pages   JONES and they explain that although not witnesses to

2331-2356         the influx of supporters into the stadium once Gate C

Statement Pages   had been opened, once through the turnstiles the only

2368-2377         sign visible was above the tunnel which led to pens 3

                  and 4.    The natural inclination of the crowd would be

                  to make for the tunnel and should have been

                  controlled.



Part V            R141   The decision to open Gate C was made by Chief

Statement Pages   Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and passed to

2457-2469         Superintendent MARSHALL by Superintendent MURRAY over

2527-2547         the police personal radio which was on

2470-2488         "talk-through."    That means all officers in possession

                  of a personal radio, on duty at Hillsborough that day

                  should have heard the message.     Of course, the din

                  within the stadium, preoccupation with other matters,

                  and the fallibility of personal radios, would all

                  create difficulties in this respect.



                  R142     However, the decision to open the gates was not

                  followed by any direct or indirect orders to deal with

                  the 2,000 or so fans who entered the ground in this

                  way for a period of five minutes.     On entering the
Part IV           ground there were no stewards or police officers

Statement Pages   checking or directing them so the majority of them

1863-1869         made for the tunnel leading to pens 3 and 4 . either

1870-1878         following those in front, or making for the only sign

1879-1883         clearly visible to them, above the tunnel.     Once

1884-1889         inside the ill-fated pens the crowd pressure was such

1890-1897         that lateral movement through the gates in the radial

Part II           fences into other less crowded pens was not possible.

Statement Pages

941-949           R143   In his unsworn testimony to the Lord Justice

                  TAYLOR Inquiry, Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

                  stated that he had not considered where the fans would

                  go once Gate C was opened.   It did not cross his mind

                  to deploy police officers to block the concourse end

                  of the tunnel leading to pens 3 and 4, and he had no

                  knowledge to suggest that this had been done in 1988.



                  R144   That he had time to consider such action seems

                  clear because from 1447 hours when Superintendent

                  MARSHALL made his first request, until 1452 hours when

                  the Gate C was opened, five minutes elapsed.    During

                  that period, however, he was concerned with other

                  matters.   It must also be said that the five minute

                  period embraces within it the time taken for the

                  request to be received by the radio operator and

Part V            conveyed to Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.    His

Statement Pages   decision has then to be conveyed to his radio operator

2457-2469         and on to Superintendent MARSHALL.   Once the decision
2470-2488         was made there was some dispute between stewards and

2554-2565         police about the opening of the gates, probably

2566-2577         because those on the inside of the gates did not

2578-2588         appreciate the problems on the outside.

2589-2596

                  R145   This suggests that the period of time available

                  to Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD between the well

                  documented first request from Superintendent MARSHALL

                  at 1447 and the actual opening of Gate C (on video) at

                  1452 was considerably less than five minutes.



                  R146   Although Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD has

                  refused to answer any questions on this, or any other

                  matters, it seems clear that his failure to control

                  the influx was not a deliberate decision not to act,

                  simply he did not even consider taking such action.

                  This was acknowledged by Chief Superintendent

                  DUCKENFIELD at the Public Inquiry.



                  R147   Having given the decision to   openGate C, Chief

                  Superintendent DUCKENFIELD kept the matter in mind

                  because he continued to watch what    effects the

                  extraordinary influx of fans would    have   insidethe

                  stadium.   For example, it was at this time that a

Part V            request was made for Gate A to be opened.    Although

Statement Pages   puzzled by this request, because he believed he had

3043-3048         already given permission for Gates A, B and C to be

                  opened, Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD approved the
                          order for serials to be deployed on the concourse

                          inside Gate A and the North Stand.       Because he had
                                 %


                          time to do that it can be argued that he had time to

                          arrange for the reception of the influx through Gate

                          C.     There are two points of significance in that

                          respect.



                          R148       First an influx of unchecked fans through Gate A

                          could lead to disputes as to seating in the all-ticket

                          North Stand and possibly a pitch invasion from that

                          area because of the lack of perimeter fencing.



                          R149       Second, there would be no disputes as to places

                          on the Western Terraces which were standing only, and

                          no danger of a pitch invasion because of the perimeter

                          fences.



Part V                    R150       Because the Senior Officers of South Yorkshire

Statement Pages           Police, including Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.

2457-2469                 believed that crowd monitoring and crowd packing were

Part II                   the responsibility of Sheffield Wednesday Football

Statement Pages 860-869   Club, the possibility of overcrowding simply was not

                          considered.



                          R151       However, Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

                          personally, and through his subordinates did continue

                          to monitor the effects of the influx through Gate C

                          onto the West Terraces, but saw nothing which they
                          recognised as overcrowding or crushing in pens 3 or 4

                          until it was too late to prevent it.



                          R152   Because of Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD’S

                          refusal to answer questions there are a number of

                          unresolved issues in respect of this particular

                          complaint.



                          R153   First, did he intend to authorise the opening of

                          Gates A, B and C, or just Gate C7    It seems very

                          likely that he intended for all the gates to be

                          opened.



                          R154   If he was expecting Gates A, B and C to be

                          opened simultaneously then he could have expected the

                          supporters would be able to "find their own level" by

                          distributing themselves to three separate match

                          viewing areas.



                          R155   If so, for how long did he intend Gate C to

Part II                   remain open?     The iron perimeter gates outside the

Statement Pages 958-960   Leppings Lane turnstiles were closed by police in

Part V                    order to prevent any more supporters from entering the

Statement Pages           overcrowded concourse between these iron perimeter

2815-2820                 gates and the turnstiles.    The opening of Gate C would

                          then have relieved the pressure there very quickly and

                          allow the gate to be closed again to allow for

                          controlled entry through the turnstiles.    That might

                          well have produced only a relatively small number of
                         supporters to enter the ground unchecked and the "find

                         their own level" policy might have had some chance of

                         limited success.     However, once the crowd outside the

                         iron perimeter gates saw the opening of Gate C, the

                         rush towards it burst open the iron perimeter gates so

                         that an unbroken stream of supporters flowed from

                         Leppings Lane itself into the stadium.     That was

Part III                 clearly visible on the CCTV monitor for camera 1 and

Document 110             should have sounded warnings to anyone who was

Schedule Pages 742-747   watching it.     Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

                         undoubtably was so watching.



                         R156     It is probable that Chief Superintendent

                         DUCKENFIELD did not intend to close Gate C himself,

                         and in view of his approach to policing the event

                         which emerges from his unsworn testimony to the Public

                         Inquiry, he would have waited for a request to close

                         the gates from his officers on the ground, or would

                         have expected them to take such action themselves.



                         R157     Clearly the opening of Gate C, and other gates,

                         was the right decision given the circumstances

                         prevailing at the time.    It was intended to relieve

                         the crowd pressure outside the Leppings Lane

                         turnstiles so as to prevent injury or even death

                         there.     The opening of Gate C achieved that.



                         R158     Clearly, no orders or directions were given for

                         police, or stewards, to control the influx of
supporters through Gate C, and to that extent Hr

JONES’8 and Hr HICKS’s complaints are correct.



R159   The following disciplinary offence arises for

considerations -



Neglect of Duty.



Without good and sufficient cause neglects or omits to

attend to or carry out with due promptitude and

diligence anything which it is his duty as a member of

a police force to attend to or carry out, viz he

failed to control the movement of supporters

subsequent to the opening of Gate C at Hillsborough on

15 April 1989.



Contrary to The Police (Discipline) Regulations. 1985

Schedule 1. Regulation 4(1) paragraph 4(a).



R160   It can be proved that Chief Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD did fail to control the movement of

supporters once he had authorised the opening of Gate

C, in fact he did not even consider deploying any of

his very large work-force to steer the supporters away

from pens 3 and 4.   He could have achieved this quite

simply by directing a small number of officers, or

even stewards or a mixture of police and stewards, to
                          act as a cordon at the concourse end of the tunnel

                          leading to pens 3 and 4.



Part II                   R161     There is a suggestion that this had been done in

Statement Pages 1128A-B   1988 at Hillsborough but that was not known to Chief

                          Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, despite what appeared at

                          the time to be a commendable system of debriefings and

                          information sharing, adopted by South Yorkshire

                          Police.



                          R162     Although Hillsborough has some history of

                          overcrowding, before the 1989 semi-final it would have

                          been a reasonable assumption to make that these

                          incidents had been addressed and remedial action

                          taken.     This is particularly so when on the face of

                          the record available to Chief Superintendent

                          DUCKENFIELD, the 1988 semi-final had been policed so

                          successfully.     The order for the 1989 semi-final had

                          been prepared by the well respected and experienced

                          Chief Superintendent MOLE, the previous officer in

                          command, and the planning team, and the key personnel

                          were the same in 1989 as had policed the 1988 event

                          and before.



                          R163     The philosophy of policing football matches, not

                          only of South Yorkshire Police but also nationally,

                          was reflected in the South Yorkshire Police Standing

                          Instructions for Policing Football Matches, with its

                          emphasis on hooliganism, disorder and pitch invasion.
                R164   The fairly recent Bradford fire disaster, a West

                Yorkshire tragedy, was also prominent in the Standing

                Instructions with its emphasis on crowd safety

                evacuation procedures.



                R165   That some thought was given to crowd problems is

                indicated by the lengths that Chief Superintendent

                DUCKENFIELD went to in order to keep non-ticket

Part IV         holders away and to get the fans into the ground as

Document 185    early as possible.   But even in this respect there is

Page 929        no indication that it was an "overcrowding problem

Document 186    which was envisaged."

Pages 930-931

                R166   Having got the job as officer in command no more

                than sixteen to nineteen days before the event, it is

                reasonable that Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD had

                to take the ground with its various configurations, as

                he found it; and the advice of experienced officers,

                as given.



                R167   Consequently, it is understandable that his

                planning made no specific provision to deal with

                overcrowding.   In any event, he knew he had a

                considerable number of officers held in reserve so as

                to provide flexibility on the day.
                  R168   Given the circumstances on the day at about 1452

                  the decision to open Gate C was the right one.      Given

                  Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD’S understanding of

                  the priorities for preventing disorder and evacuation

                  if necessary, it is perhaps understandable that he

                  gave no thought of overcrowding as a police

                  responsibility.



                  R169   When the decision was made to open the gate, no

                  warning was given by Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

                  either to police or to the Club.   Not even

                  Superintendent GREENWOOD, the Ground Commander inside

                  the stadium, was alerted.    The fact that the personal

                  radio system was on "talk-through" is quite inadequate

                  for action to be taken by officers on the ground even

                  if they heard the message.   The message was directed

                  to Superintendent MARSHALL from Superintendent

                  MURRAY.   To expect other officers to act on that

                  message is dangerous and unrealistic.



Part II           R170   The day in question was plagued by the

Statement Pages   intermittent failure of the police personal radios

1123-1128         which made the gathering and dissemination of

Part V            intelligence, information, request and decision, a

Statement Pages   serious problem.   For one period at about 1440 hours

2470-2488         the Police Control Box was out of radio contact.

2489-2501         Although quickly repaired the remedy was a hand held

                  set in the Control Box which meant that the control
2502-2514   could not override any messages.    Superintendent

2527-2547   GREENWOOD’S request for the match to be stopped and

2566-2577   various messages from the track serials reporting

2694-2699   distress in the pens were not received.    No effective

2719-2728   radio messages reached the Control Box from the

2939-2946   perimeter track or from Leppings Lane at the relevant

2947-2955   times. Undoubtedly the poor radio communications on

3184-3190   the day made it extremely difficult for Chief

3269-3274   Superintendent DUCKENFIELD to make proper assessments

3305-3311   and exercise effective command.

3315-3323

3324-3328

            R171    It is arguable that between the request at 1447

            and the opening of Gate C at 1452, there was time for

            Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD to organise a police

            reception group to control the sudden influx of

            supporters, bearing in mind all of the matters inside

            the stadium which were capturing the attention of the

            Police Control Box at that time.    The supporters would

            come in unchecked perhaps with weapons perhaps with

            intoxicating drink, perhaps without tickets.     The

            danger of a pitch invasion or similar disorder must

            have appeared to be more than likely.   Consequently,

            such arrangements as were made by or for Chief

            Superintendent DUCKENFIELD were in prevention of that

            risk.   Attention was spread around the ground and not

            confined to the West Terraces.
                   R172   The view from the Police Control Box of the

                   crowd and the pens was not the view captured by

                  various still and video cameras.   Nor was it the view

                  enjoyed by supporters in various parts of the ground.

                  Gate C remained open until about 1457 hours and there

                  is no evidence to show that Chief Superintendent

                  DUCKENFIELD saw anything amiss, or was informed about

                  anything amiss, on the West Terraces apart from an

                  imbalance between the crowd in pens 3 and 4, and the

                  crowd in pens 1 and 2, and 6 and 7.   Even after the

                  match had started and police officers on the track

                  were beginning to realise that there was an over­

Part II           crowding problem, John MOTSON. the BBC TV commentator

Statement Pages   broadcasting live, a man who is very experienced

1110-1118         observing large crowds at football matches, did not

                  notice until 1504 hours that there was a crowd problem

                  at the Leppings Lane end.   Albeit that his attention

                  would be centred on the play he was observing from a

                  position far superior to that of Chief Superintendent

                  DUCKENFIELD and does lend credence to the view that up

                  to the point of stopping the game Chief Superintendent

                  DUCKENFIELD was not aware of the real problems in pens

                  3 and 4.   It was not until 1505 hours that Hr HOTSON,

                  in his live television commentary suspected that there

                  was an overcrowding problem on the West Terraces.     It

                  is difficult to prove that Chief Superintendent

                  DUCKENFIELD should have taken action to block off the

                  end of the tunnel, or some similar action designed to
                  R175   That prohibition was repeated in the 1989

                  Operation Order and was printed in capital letters,

                  presumably because there had been a pitch invasion

                  during the 1988 semi-final and a repetition was feared

                  in 1989.



                  R176   However, despite what appears to be a mandatory

                  order, there is clear evidence that even before the

Part V            crushing was recognised in pens 3 and 4 at least one

Statement Pages   police constable opened the perimeter gate and

3315-3323         relocated fans in other pens, without the prior

3324-3328         approval of a senior officer.



                  R177   Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD’S life-saving

                  decision to open Gate C in respect of the fans being

                  crushed outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles was not

                  fully thought through, but that presumes that his

                  knowledge of the ground, its geography and signing,

                  particularly at the Leppings Lane end, was sufficient

                  to expect a natural progression from Gate C to the

                  tunnel and into pens 3 and 4.   His knowledge of

                  Hillsborough on 15 April 1989 depended upon ten years

                  old experience, and two ground inspections at the

                  Millwall and Wimbledon matches on 1 and 5 April 1989.

                  Neither of these games attracted large crowds and his

                  inspections were conducted in the light of the

                  successful 1988 semi-final and the draft Operation

                  Order prepared by Chief Superintendent MOLE and

                  supported by the key personnel who would be working

                  with him on 15 April 1989.
                   R178    All of that would have coloured his thinking on

                   the day when the crisis occurred.    That he neglected

                   to make any arrangements to receive the crowd in the

                   ground once he opened Gate C is beyond doubt.       Given

                   the information available at the time, I doubt that it

                   can be proved that he should have done.



                  R179     This complaint forms part of the evidence

                   currently being considered in respect of Chief

                   Superintendent DUCKENFIELD*S culpability for

                  Manslaughter or Culpable Malfeasance.      Should the

                  Director decide that there is insufficient evidence to

                  prosecute these criminal offences, then the same must

                  be said in respect of the disciplinary offence of

                  Neglect of Duty.    In that case these complaints are

                  unsubstantiated.



8.                 R180 He failed to respond to the developing tragedy

                  and was slow to effect a rescue operation.



9.                 R181 He failed to act when it was obvious that people

                  were in distress.



Part IV           R182    These complaints are made by Mr HICKS and Mr

Statement Pages   JONES and by way of explanation they say it was

2331-2356         obvious the Police totally misread events, believing a

Statement Pages   pitch invasion/trouble was underway and mounted a

2368-2377         restraining rather than a rescue operation.    The

                  rescue commenced some ten minutes too late and was
totally disorganised, the death toll being much higher

as a consequence.    Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

did not use his senior officers to good effect in

order to coordinate the disaster and he failed to act

himself in a way his position demanded.



R183   In this instance Mr HICKS was an eye-witness but

there are a number of discrepancies in his

statements.    However, he is also Chairman of the

Hillsborough Family Support Group so his complaint

goes wider than his own personal experience.     The

first difficulty with his personal recollection is one

of timing.    On the day of the disaster when he was

under extreme emotional shock, he saw nothing untoward

until the game had been in progress for four or five

minutes. At that time he saw people pushing and

shoving in pens 3 and 4, and people being    pushed up

against the perimeter and radial fences.     One of these

people was an old man in a grey suit, and his tongue

protruded from his mouth.   Mr HICKS shouted to a

senior police officer who ran onto the pitch and

stopped the game.   There is no criticism of any police

officer in that recollection statement.



R184   In a detailed prepared statement which was    sent

to police on or about 18 May 1989 he describes a

similar series of incidents but says they occurred "a

little before kick off (approximately 1450 pm)."       This
                          change of timing is important because it suggests Mr

                          HICKS was witnessing crushing in pens 3 and 4 as early

                          as 1450 hours.   Still before kick-off he describes

                          people being hoisted out of pens 3 and 4 into the West

                          Stand, and an increasing number of fans climbing over

                         the perimeter and radial fences of pens 3 and 4.



                         R185   Having noted that the teams then kicked off he

                         describes a police cordon two to three officers deep

                         placed in an arc around pens 3 and 4 "and it was

                         obvious that their purpose was to prevent anybody

                         climbing over the barrier."



                         R186   While the game was still in progress he believes

                         that several fans were trying to climb the perimeter

                         fence and were pushed back into the pens by police

                         officers.   The officers in the arc, or cordon, were

                         standing watching with their arms folded.



                         R187   This continued for some five to ten minutes and

Part III                 during that period the game was stopped.    He believes

Document 128             incorrectly that the game was stopped at 1500 hours.

Schedule Page 774

Video Ref 15.05.33       R188   From a study of the photographic and other

                         evidence it is clear that his estimated timings for

Part III                 the incident he recounts are incorrect.    Consequently

Document 162             because timing is a crucial factor in this particular

Schedule Pages 84L 842   complaint, and incorrect timings can only mislead, it

Photo 1.18.28.29
is to the complaints made by Mr HICKS as Chairman of

the Hillsborough Family Support Group, that this

report will be directed.



R189   The disciplinary offence which has to be

considered is:-



Neglect of Duty.



Without good and sufficient cause neglected or omitted

to attend to or carry out with due promptitude and

diligence anything which is his duty as a member of a

police force to attend to or carry out, viz failed to

respond to the crushing by overcrowding of spectators

in the pens 3 and 4 of the Hillsborough Stadium on 15

April 1989 and was slow to effect a rescue operation.



Contrary to The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.

Schedule 1. Regulation 4(1) paragraph 4(a).



R190   In the Police Control Box no one recognised the

overcrowding or anything amiss in pens 3 and 4 until

the first fans spilt out onto the perimeter track just

before kick-off.   Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD may

have been unsure as to what was actually happening but

it is more than probable that he assumed there was a

pitch invasion.
Part V                   R191   From the Police Control Box the reserve serials
Statement Pages
2470-2488                on standby in the gymnasium were directed to go to the
2502-2514
2566-2577                pitch and a request was made to Police Headquarters

Part VI                  for more dog-handlers. again indicative that it was a
Document 216
Page 1504                disorder situation which was perceived.


Part V                   R192   Police Constable ILLINGWORTH on the track serial

Statement Pages          at pen 4, prior to the kick-off, had recognised crowd

3324-3328                discomfort, had opened the perimeter gate to allow

                         some of the crowd onto the perimeter track and tried

                         to relocate those released into pen 5.     That action

Part III                 is visible on a video recording and if it was

Document 109             observed by the Control Box staff, although it would

Schedule Pages 740-741   have alerted them to the fact that something was amiss

                         it would have seemed that it was being dealt with by

                         the officer on the spot.



Part V                   R193   From 1500 hours the perimeter gates to pens 3

Statement Pages          and 4 were open and remained so.     This should have

2566-2577                been seen from the Police Control Box and is such an

2578-2588                extraordinary event that it should have attracted

2589-2596                specific attention and enquiry.



Part V                   R194   However, Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD sent

Statement Pages          Chief Inspector McROBBIE from the Police Control Box

2457-2469                onto the track to facilitate the relocation of fans

2554-2565                from the central to the wing pens.
Part V                       Ri95     By 1504 police officers were hauling fans out of
Statement Pages
3383-3386                    the pens over the perimeter fence and this must have
3387-3391
3392-3400                    been seen by the staff in the Police Control Box.
3401-3410
3411-3418

Part III                    R196     By this time an increasing number of police
Document    155
Schedule    Pages 827-828   officers and others were congregating on the pitch
Part III
Document    128              side of the perimeter fence of pens 3 and 4 making it
Schedule    Page 774
Part III                    increasingly difficult for a clear view from the
Document    136
Schedule    Page 791        Police Control Box.


Part V                      R197     Superintendent GREENWOOD was at the players

Statement Pages             tunnel as the teams kicked off.     Shortly afterwards he

2515-2526                   noticed the fans on the track and went to the West

                            Terraces end of the ground to investigate.     It was not

                            until he was close to pens 3 and 4 that he recognised

                            the overcrowding problem.     He climbed onto the wall

                            below the perimeter fence and signalled with his hands

                            for the crowd to move back.     This action was seen in

                            the Control Box, but in the absence of information

                            over the personal radio, again the matter would be

                            seen as being dealt with by the senior officer on the

                            ground.



Lord Justice TAYLOR’S       R198    As was suggested at the Lord Justice TAYLOR

Interim Report              Public Inquiry, the hand movements made by

Para 248                    Superintendent GREENWOOD may well have been

                            interpreted by the fans as being attempts to stop

                            supporters from climbing out of the pens at the

                            front.     If that was the likely interpretation made by
                  fans on the spot, it is not unlikely that these hand

                  movements were not properly interpreted by those in

                  the Police Control Box.



Part V            R199     Although Superintendent GREENWOOD tried then to

Statement Pages   contact the Police Control Box by radio, he was

2515-2526         unsuccessful so he had to resort to hand signals

                  indicating that the match should be stopped.     This

                  action was seen in the Police Control Box and

                  recognised.     Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD sent

                  Superintendent MURRAY from the Control Box to have the

                  match stopped via the linesman in accordance with the

                  agreed procedure, but before this could be done,

                  Superintendent GREENWOOD had run onto the pitch and

                  the referee stopped the game.



Part V            R200     Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD remained in the

Statement Pages   Police Control Box and Superintendent MURRAY returned

2470-2488         from his unsuccessful attempt to stop the match.     He

                  did not realise there were injuries at that stage and

                  did not so realise until he saw fans being laid on the

                  pitch.     He sent Superintendent MURRAY back down onto

                  the pitch to assess the situation and clear the

                  pitch.     The crowd on the pitch was increasing rapidly

                  and adding to the chaos were a significant number of

                  press photographers who, in their gruesome search for

                  pictures, upset many fans and minor scuffles broke

                  out.     None of this made it any easier for Chief

                  Superintendent DUCKENFIELD to see and interpret what
                          was happening so a Tannoy message was broadcast for

                           the pitch to be cleared.



Part II                   R201   At about 1507, the Assistant Chief Constable. Mr

Statement Pages 860-869   JACKSON, came into the Police Control Box and Chief

Part V                    Superintendent DUCKENFIELD was unable to say with any

Statement Pages           clarity what was happening.    It is likely that he told

2457-2469                 Mr JACKSON that there had been a pitch invasion and

                          although he refuses to answer any questions on the

                          subject it seems clear that Chief Superintendent

                          DUCKENFIELD did not tell Mr JACKSON that the exit

                          gates had been opened on his authority.



                          R202   Mr JACKSON left the Control Box and went onto

                          the pitch to gain more information and while he was
Part V
Statement Pages           away Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD requested
2457-2469
Part VI                   Operation Support from Police Headquarters.
Document 221
Pages 1590                Operation Support is the South Yorkshire Police

Part V                    Contingency Plan for dealing with outbreaks of
Document 205
Pages 1315-1351           spontaneous public disorder.   This seems to indicate

                          that as late as 1507 when the request for Operation

                          Support was made, Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

                          believed he was dealing with a pitch invasion or

                          similar disorder.



Part II                   R203   On his return to the Control Box at about 1510,

Statement Pages 860-869   Mr JACKSON was aware that there were casualties.    He

Part VI                   confirmed the request for Operation Support because

Document 216              clearly more manpower resources would be required, but

Page 1509
                  he also ensured that the emergency services were

                  alerted and that Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

                  implemented the South Yorkshire Police Major Incident

                  Plan.    Although there is no specific direction to
Part V
Document 206      implement the Major Incident Plan it is clear that it
Pages 1352-1444
Part VI           was implemented at that time.
Document 216
Page 1521
                  R204    A call for more ambulances was made from the

Part V            pitch by Superintendent MURRAY at about the time Mr

Statement Pages   JACKSON arrived back in the Police Control Box.    It

2470-2488         was not until that moment that Chief Superintendent

                  DUCKENFIELD was aware of the real nature of the

                  disaster.   Although the Major Incident Plan seemingly

                  inflexibly places the Divisional Commander in overall

                  command as Site Commander, there is no doubt that from

                  that moment Mr JACKSON had accepted he was in command

                  even if he did not say so specifically at the time.



Part V            R205    The awful truth of the dying, dead and injured

Statement Pages   was recognised at various times by individual officers

3315-3323         in different locations.   Even those police officers

3324-3328         closest to the front of pens 3 and 4 of the Western

3329-3336         Terraces did not immediately recognise the problem.

3337-3340         Even when they did recognise a problem, they thought

                  it could be resolved by a relocation of fans from one

                  pen to another.
                  R206   Of course, at that time they were unaware that

                  the exit gates had been opened so they could not know

                  that the trickle of supporters they were releasing

                  onto the track through the perimeter gates could never

                  match the flood of supporters entering the pens from

                  the rear.

Part IV

Statement Pages   R207   The lack of instructions as to overcrowding and

1916-1923         a formidable deterrent to opening perimeter gates

1924-1929         inevitably led to slow recognition by police of

2145-2147         crushing in the pens.   Certainly there can be no doubt

2148-2151         that the seriousness of the overcrowding in pens 3 and

2311-2313         4 between 1450 hours and 1459 hours was not recognised

2314-2316         and therefore was not effectively remedied.

2320-2322

                  R208   It should not be too surprising therefore, that

                  the staff in the Police Control Box were the last to

                  know. However, the delay in police recognition of the

                  problem was not as great as some witnesses believe.



Part V            R209   Although the immediate assumption in the Police
Statement Pages
2566-2577         Control Box was that a pitch invasion was starting,
2578-2588
2589-2596         and that assumption persisted until the request for

Part V            ambulances was received at about 1507, action was
Statement Pages
2554-2565         being taken at pens 3 and 4 .   Before 1500 hours fans
3315-3323
3324-3328         were being relocated from pens 3 and 4.    From 1500
3329-3336
3337-3340         hours gates 3 and 4 were open and remained so.
Part III                 R210     It is probable that it was at 1504 that the
Document 134
Schedule Pages 786-788   final surge occurred as a Liverpool player shot at the

Part V                   Nottingham Forest goal and hit the bar.     That is the
Statement Pages
3383-3386                most likely moment that a crush barrier in pen 3 broke
3387-3391
3392-3400                and the perimeter gates became blocked.     Police
3401-3410
3411-3418                and fans worked frantically at the narrow perimeter

Part IV                  gate to rescue those trapped. Police Officers and
Statement Pages
1617-1623                fans were trying desperately to haul fans over the
1731-1741
1751-1757                perimeter fence to safety.     Police officers, fans and

                         others were doing what they could to resuscitate the

                         injured, the dying and the dead as they were laid on

                         the pitch.     In the confines of the disaster site it is

                         not surprising that there were many officers, willing

                         and able, who could do nothing other than stand and

Part V                   watch.     That at least some of these officers were
Statement Pages
2515-2526                effectively directed is clear.     It is also not
2711-2718
3049-3054                surprising that hostility and aggression mounted in

                         some of the fans to such an extent that positive

                         action had to be taken by police officers.



Part V                   R211     The morbid press photographers had to be dealt
Statement Pages
2628-2632                with not only in terms of control but also for their
2633-2647
2655-2668                own protection.     Other officers, on their own
2671-2677
                         initiative went to the rear of the pens to persuade

                         reluctant fans to leave the pens through the tunnel.

Part VI                  Ambulances were sent for at about 1507.     The temporary
Document 216
Page 1507                mortuary was set up and running effectively by 1535

                         hours.
Part V                   R212   Sometime between 1506 hours and 1510 hours

Statement Pages         Police Constable SMITH radioed from the pitch to the

3315-3323               Police Control Box for bolt croppers to cut the

Part V                  perimeter fence.    Although he did not know it, Police

Statement Pages         Sergeant GODDARD had received his request and tried to

2566-2577               locate the necessary equipment at a nearby police

                        garage without success.    It was not until 1513 hours

Part V                  that Police Constable BICHARD, in the Control Box,

Statement Pages         requested Police Headquarters Control Room to call the

2578-2588               Fire Brigade to bring hydraulic cutting equipment to

                        the Leppings Lane entrance.



                        R213    Fire appliances with the necessary equipment

Part VI                 arrived at the stadium at 1522 hours.    Station Officer

Statement Pages         FLETCHER rushed the equipment to the front of the West

3664-3670               Terraces but by then the last of the dead and injured

                        were being removed from pens 3 and 4.



Lord Justice TAYLOR’S   R214    Clearly the Fire Brigade could have been called

Interim Report          earlier but it is extremely doubtful that would have

Para 301                saved more lives.



Part VI                 R215    On the day two South Yorkshire Metropolitan

Statement Pages         Ambulance Service Officers were on the ground with one

3529-3540               ambulance, and another ambulance on standby.    As soon

3541-3551               as the ambulance officers noticed the fans on

3552-3559               the track, and while the game was still in progress,

                        they went to them and began to render assistance to

                        the injured.
Part V            R216   Chief Inspector EDMUNDSON in Police Headquarters

Statement Pages   Control Room, had been monitoring the police radio

2600-2605         traffic   at Hillsborough and both he and Police

Statement Pages   Constable WAUGH heard sufficient for them to make

2608-2610         enquiry of the Police Control Box at 1459 hours as to

                  whether ambulances were required.    The response at

                  that time was in the negative but "standby."       It was

                  not until 1507 hours that the Ground Control notified

                  the Headquarters Control Room that injuries were

                  possible, that the call went to SYMAS that ambulances

                  might be required.    This was confirmed into a positive

                  request during the same telephone conversation.      The

                  first ambulance arrived at the stadium at 1513 hours

                  and in all, 42 ambulances arrived.



                  R217   It is correct to say that the distress of those

                  in the front of pens 3 and 4 was recognised by those

                  officers closest to them at about 1500 hours.      It is

                  also correct that the Major Incident Plan was not

                  implemented until 1507 hours when the ambulance

                  service was called.   It is also correct that for

                  various reasons no cutting gear was located until the

                  request was made to the fire brigade at 1513 hours.

                  But there is no evidence to show that if these

                  shortcomings had not occurred then lives would have

                  been saved.   Given the poor radio transmissions and

                  reception and the chaos of the moment from

                  the vantage point of the Control Box it is difficult
 to see how these complaints can be substantiated.

 Once the real problem was identified in the Control

 Box the Major Incident Plan was implemented

 effectively and swiftly.   The fact that the injured

 were safely cleared by 1545 hours, the dead were being

 dealt with in the gymnasium under the supervision of H

M Coroner by 1615 hours, and that all dead had been

 identified by 0430 hours on 16 April 1989 is some

evidence to support that view.      That it could have

been done better and perhaps quicker is not the real

issue, that it was done to the best of the officer’s

ability given the information available and the

circumstances prevailing at the time, is.



R218   This complaint forms part of the evidence

currently being considered by the Director of Public

Prosecutions in respect of Chief Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD’S culpability for Manslaughter or Culpable

Malfeasance.   Should the Director decide that there is

insufficient evidence to prove these criminal offences

then the same must be said in respect of the

disciplinary offence of Neglect of Duty.     In that case

the complaint is unsubstantiated.



R219   He was deceitful and intentionally nHsled senior

police officers and members of the public regarding

his command and control of police officers on the dav.
11.                R220    He attempted to mislead the Assistant Chief

                   Constable at the ground and others, namely

                   representatives of the Club, the Football Association

                  and the fans themselves regarding the origin of the

                  order for Gate C to be opened.    That is by inferring

                  supporters had forced open the gate when he had, in

                  fact, given the order to open the gate.



Part IV           R221    These complaints are made by Mr HICKS and Mr

Statement Pages   JONES who explain it by alleging that Chief

2331-2356         Superintendent DUCKENFIELD misled Mr JACKSON, the

Statement Pages   Assistant Chief Constable, by making a false statement

2368-2377         to the effect that Liverpool supporters had gained

                  entry to the stadium by forcing Gate C at 1452 hours

                  whereas the gate had in fact been opened on the

                  instructions of Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.

                  This led to Mr JACKSON or Chief Superintendent

                  DUCKENFIELD repeating the false account to officials

                  of the Football Association and other people later in

                  the day.    The consequence was the maligning of

                  Liverpool supporters by the media which caused anguish

                  and distress to them.    Although Mr HICKS and Mr JONES

                  have no evidence to support the complaint they rely

                  upon the unsworn testimony given by Chief

                  Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and others at the Lord

                  Justice TAYLOR Public Inquiry.



                  R222    The disciplinary offences which have to be

                  considered are:-
(i)    Falsehood or prevarication.



That he, being a member of a police force knowingly,

or through neglect, makes any false, misleading or

inaccurate oral statement required for police purposes

viz made a false statement to an Assistant Chief

Constable that Liverpool supporters had broken down an

exit gate and forced entry into Hillsborough stadium

at 1452 hours, knowing that statement was false.



Contrary to the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.

Schedule 1. Regulation 4(i). paragraph 5(a).



(ii)   Discreditable conduct.



R223   That being a member of a police force he acted

in a manner reasonably likely to bring discredit on

the reputation of the force or the police service, viz

made a false statement to       members of the public so

as to create a false impression that Liverpool

supporters had broken down an exit gate and forced

entry into Hillsborough Stadium at 1452 hours on 15

April 1989.



Contrary to The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.

Schedule 1. Regulation 4(i). paragraph 1 .
                   R224   Whilst conscious of the fact that charges of

                   Discreditable Conduct should be brought sparingly, a

                   more specific charge would be difficult in these

                   particular circumstances where Mr KELLY and Mr KIRTON

                   of the Football Association are involved.



                   Alternatively Mr HICKS complains that:-



12 .               R225   He colluded with Mr JACKSON, the Assistant Chief

                   Constable, to mislead the public over the opening of

                   Gate C .



Part IV            R226   This complaint is made only by Mr HICKS and he

Statement Pages.   explains it by saying he questions whether Mr JACKSON

2331-2356          was unaware of the truth about the opening of Gate C

                   and there may have been collusion between Mr JACKSON

                   and Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD to create a false

                   impression.



                   R227   The disciplinary offence which has to be

                   considered is:-



                   Falsehood or prevarication.



                   Being a member of a police force he knowingly colluded

                   with the Assistant Chief Constable, Mr JACKSON, so as

                   to make a false, misleading or inaccurate oral

                   statement, viz that Liverpool supporters had broken
 down an exit gate and forced entry into Hillsborough

 Stadium at 1452 hours on 15 April 1989.



Contrary to The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.

Schedule 1. Regulation 4(i). paragraph 5(a).



R228    The Assistant Chief Constable Mr JACKSON,

attended the match in civilian clothes, but was the

Chief Officer "on call".    He came down from his seat

in the stand when he saw fans coming onto the

perimeter track from the Western Terraces.      As he left

his seat the match was still in progress.     He did not

have a police personal radio with him, nor did he have

any other means of communication.



R229   By the time he reached the Police Control Box at

about 1507 the match had been stopped.     He did not

know that a sequence of events had occurred as

follows:



1447   Superintendent MARSHALL requests Chief

       Superintendent DUCKENFIELD’S approval to open

       the exit gates to relieve pressure outside the

       Leppings Lane turnstiles.



1448   While Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD was

       considering this request, Gate C was opened for

       police to eject a youth who had climbed in

       without a ticket.   Fans outside took advantage
r#

             of this opening of the gate and about 150 of

             them forced their way in before a mounted

             officer blocked the opening so that the gate

            could be closed.



     1449   Superintendent MARSHALL repeated his request for

            authority to open the exit gates.



     1451   Superintendent MARSHALL repeated his request

            with the caveat that if the exit gates were not

            opened somebody would be killed.



     1452   Gate C was opened wide and in the five minutes

            it was open something in the order of 2,000 fans

            passed through it.     Fans outside the iron

            perimeter gates on the road side of the

            turnstiles at Leppings Lane had seen the opening

            of Gate C and in surging towards it had forced

            open the iron perimeter gates.



     1454   Police Sergeant HIGGINS radioed a request for

            authority to open Gate A because of crowd

            pressure.     Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD gave

            the necessary approval and supporters entered

            through it.



     1455   Gate B was opened briefly against the stewards

            wishes and about 200 supporters entered through

            it.
                          1457   Gate C was closed.



                          1459   Gate C was reopened but only a trickle of

                                 supporters entered on this occasion.



Part II                   R230   On his arrival in the Police Control Box Mr

Statement Pages 860-869   JACKSON asked Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD what had

Part V                    happened but he was unable to say.   At that time Chief

Statement Pages           Superintendent DUCKENFIELD did not yet know there had

2457-2469                 been any injuries and was still under the impression

                          that there had been a pitch invasion.   It will be

                          recalled that it was shortly after Mr JACKSON’S arrival

                          in the Control Box that Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

                          requested Operation Support.



                          R231   Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD had still not

                          recognised an overcrowding problem so it may be that he

                          had not linked the opening of Gate C with the activities

                          of the crowd and police at the Leppings Lane end.

                          Although Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD has refused to

                          answer any questions about this, or any other matters,

                          it seems certain that he did not tell Mr JACKSON that

                          the exit gates had been opened on his authority.

Part II

Statement Pages 819-829   R232   At about 1515 hours Mr Graham KELLY. Chief

Statement Pages 829A-J    Executive of the FA, Mr KIRTON. also of the FA, and Mr

Part I                    Graham MACKRELL. Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday

Statement Pages 36-59
                          Football Club, went to the Control Box to seek

                          information.    Clearly they wanted to know what had

                          happened and advice as to the abandonment of the

                          game.    By this time Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

                          knew the nature and scale of the disaster and the

                          Major Incident Plan had been implemented.



                          R233    Although Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD has

                          refused to answer any questions on this, or any other

                          matter, it is apparent that he told them there had

Part I                    been fatalities in the crowd, that the game should be

Statement Pages 36-59     abandoned, and he told them that a gate had been

Part II                   forced by Liverpool supporters and there had been an

Statement Pages 819-829   influx into the ground.    The words he is alleged to

Statement Pages 829A-J    have used are to the effect "Thafs the gate thafs

Lord Justice TAYLOR*S     been forced:   there’s been an inrush."   At that time

Interim Report            the live pictures of a calm and peaceful Gate C would

21 June 1989              have been showing on monitor 1 in the Control Box, but

Pages 33-103              whether or not Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

                          pointed to it, is not clear.   If those are the words

                          used by Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD then strictly

                          they are not untruthful.   At 1448 hours Gate C had

                          been forced by supporters and there had been an influx

                          of fans.   Again at 1453 hours, or thereabouts, the

                          iron perimeter gates outside Gate C had been forced by

                          supporters and this had swelled the influx.   However,

                          he did not tell them that he had authorised the

                          opening of Gate C at 1452, even though he had the best
                           of reasons for so doing.    He might not in the strict

                           sense have told a lie, but he certainly did not tell

                           them the whole "truth.*



                           R234    Clearly at this time Chief Superintendent

                           DUCKENFIELD knew there had been overcrowding and

                           crushing in pens 3 and 4.    By then he knew the extent

                           of the disaster, but there is no evidence to show that

                          he had linked his approval for the opening of the

                          gates at 1452 hours, to the overcrowding and crushing

                          that followed on from it.



Part II                   R235    The result was that he misled Mr KELLY and the

Statement Pages 819-829   others into thinking there had been an inrush due to

Statement Pages 829A-J    Liverpool fans forcing a gate.    It should have been

Part I                    obvious to Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD that Mr

Statement Pages           KELLY could not avoid talking to the media and that

36-59                     anything he might say, as the officer in command at

Lord Justice TAYLOR*S     the time, would be given great credence and emphasis.

Public Inquiry            Inevitably Mr KELLY was interviewed live on television

21 June 1989              and he repeated the police assertion that the fans had

Pages 33-103              forced their way in.



                          R236    Again, Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD has

                          refused to answer any questions on this, or any other

                          matter but in his unsworn testimony to the Lord

                          Justice TAYLOR Inquiry he explained that his reason

                          for not telling the "truth" was that he did not wish
                           to divulge it until he had spoken to a senior

                           officer.   He felt that if the crowd became aware of

                           the fact that he had authorised the opening of Gate C

                           there might be a hostile reaction which might impede

                           the rescue work.



                          R237   His explanation does not bear scrutiny.      By 1515

                          hours when he was talking to Mr KELLY and the others,

                          Mr JACKSON, the Assistant Chief Constable, had been at

                          his disposal since about 1507.     For whatever reason,

                          reluctance to tell Mr KELLY the "truth" did not

                          require that he was told an "untruth."     Better he was

                          told nothing than he be misled.



Part II                   R238   About 1530 hours Mr JACKSON and Chief

Statement Pages 860-869   Superintendent DUCKENFIELD by invitation, went to the

Statement Pages 819-828   Club Boardroom.     Mr KELLY was there, so was Mr

Part I                    MACKRELL. the referee and representatives of the three

Statement Pages 36-59     clubs, Sheffield Wednesday, Liverpool and Nottingham

Lord Justice TAYLOR’S     Forest.   Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD indicated

Public Inquiry            that the match was likely to be abandoned but he did

21 June 1989              not want the matter to be announced lest the

Pages 33-103              dispersing crowd hamper the emergency operations.      He

                          certainly did not disclose at that meeting the fact

                          that he had authorised the opening of Gate C but it is

                          not clear whether he repeated the story he had told

Part VII                  previously to Mr KELLY.    However, Mr JACKSON is clear

Appendix C                when he says that when he entered the Boardroom he

Pages 1315-1322           believed Liverpool fans had forced an exit gate and
                            had flooded through it into the ground, and he still

                            had that belief when he left the Boardroom.



Part I                      R239    It was about 1615 hours when Mr JACKSON was

Statement Pages 860 :869    briefing the Chief Constable, Mr Peter WRIGHT, by

Part V                      telephone from the Police Control Box, that

Statement Pages             Superintendent MARSHALL told him that police had

2527-2547                   opened the gates at his request.    That was the first

                           occasion that Mr JACKSON learned of Chief

                           Superintendent DUCKENFIELD*S authorisation for the

                           opening of Gate C.



                           R240    It may well be that Lord Justice TAYLOR was

Lord Justice TAYLOR* S     right when in his Interim Report he said that the

Interim Report             likeliest explanation of Chief Superintendent

Para 284                   DUCKENFIELD’S conduct is that he simply could not face

                           the enormity of the decision to open the gates and its

                           aftermath.    That would explain what he said to Mr

                           KELLY and what he did not say to Mr JACKSON.



                           R241    However, it is a fact that the supporters either

                           deliberately, or by sheer weight of numbers, forced

                           open the iron perimeter gates just after Gate C was

                           opened at 1452.    Although it has not been possible to

                           interview Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD about this,

                           or any other matter, it is possible that in the

                           inevitable confusion of the moment the two gates

                           became confused in the minds of those in the stress of

                           the Control Box.   It is also possible that the earlier
                   opening of Gate C to eject a fan at about 1448 hours

                  which resulted in fans forcing their way into the

                  ground, had become part of the confusion over gates.

Part V            It was on this latter occasion that Police Constable

Statement Pages   BICHARD cried out, "They’ve broken down the gate."

2578-2888

                  R242   None of these events, including the unannounced

                  visit of Mr KELLY and others, occurred in a vacuum.

                  They all occurred at times when there was little time

                  for thought, never mind analysis.   Causes were not

                  important at that stage, actions were.   Lord Justice

                  TAYLOR may be right when he speculates as to the

                  reasons for Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD’S lack of

                  candour, but it is an extremely difficult speculation

                  to prove.




                  R243   That Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD misled Mr

                  JACKSON, Mr KELLY and Mr KIRTON seems clear, that he

                  did it deliberately or deceitfully is not supported by

                  the evidence available.



                  R244   The evidence supports the view that Mr JACKSON

                  was unaware of the request and decision to open Gate C

                  at 1452 hours, and he remained unaware of that fact

                  until Superintendent MARSHALL enlightened him at

                  between 1600 and 1615 hours.   That being the case

                  there cannot have been collusion between him and Chief

                  Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.
                   R245   There is insufficient evidence to support a

                   disciplinary charge of Falsehood or Prevarication

                   against Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and the

                   complaints are unsubstantiated.



                   R246   Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD was seen by the

                   Senior Investigating Officer Mr SHARP in an interview

                   room at Furnival House, Furnival Gate, Sheffield on 3

                   July 1990.    His solicitor Mr COUGHLAN was also

Part VII           present.     The interview was audio recorded and a full

Appendix C         transcript has been prepared and is produced by

Pages 1390- 1399   Detective Chief Inspector Kevin TOPE.      Superintendent

                   DUCKENFIELD declined to answer questions put by Mr

                   SHARP concerning any of the allegations.     This leaves

                   only his written submission to the Inquiry by Lord

                   Justice TAYLOR, and the transcript of his evidence to

                   that Inquiry to answer the many outstanding questions

                   and is not an ideal situation.



                   R247   Regulation 7 Notices were served on Chief

                   Superintendent DUCKENFIELD as follows:




                   COMPLAINT           DATE               OFFICER

Document 18        Mr JONES            7 November 1989     Detective Chief
Page 36                                                   Superintendent
                                                          FOSTER

Document 19        Mr HICKS            3 August 1989       Assistant Chief
Page 37                                                   Constable Mr
                                                          COOPER
                                                          (Northamptonshire
                                                          Constabulary)
               COMPLAINT         DATE                OFFICER

Document 20   Mr HICKS           5 September 1989   Assistant Chief
Page 38                                             Constable Mr
                                                    COOPER
                                                    (Northamptonshire
                                                    Constabulary)

Document 21   Mr HICKS           15 December 1989   Assistant Chief
Page 39                                             Constable Mr
                                                    JONES

Document 22   Mrs McBRIEN        15 December 1989   Assistant Chief
Page 40                                             Constable Mr
                                                    JONES



              ANTECEDENTS


              R248   Mr DUCKENFIELD is almost 46 years of age, having

              been born on 30 August 1944, a married man with two

              children aged 17 and 18 years and owner/occupier of

              his detached home at                   Sheffield

                     He joined the City of Sheffield Police on 8

              September 1963 after Police Cadet service and has

              performed duties within the Sheffield area of South

              Yorkshire throughout his career which has encompassed

              uniform patrol, detective duties and specialist

              Community Liaison duties.   He was promoted to the rank

              of Sergeant in October 1969, Inspector in September

              1974 and Chief Inspector in March 1977.   On promotion

              to Superintendent in September 1983 he commanded D2

              (Attercliffe) Sub Division in Sheffield and was

              appointed to Deputy Divisional Commander of D

              (Sheffield City) Division May 1985, a post he held

              until his promotion to Chief Superintendent on 27
                  March 1989 when he took command of F (Sheffield North)

                  Division.



                  R249   He has no matters of a disciplinary nature

                  recorded against him and has been commended on three

                  occasions during his service, twice by his Chief

                  Constable for vigilance and initiative and once by a

                  Learned Recorder for ’timely action.’



Documents 23-24   R250   In consultation with Mr WELLS. Chief Constable,

Pages 41-43       South Yorkshire Police, agreement has been reached to

                  forward all files direct to the Director of Public

                  Prosecutions and to the Police Complaints Authority.

                  Once a final decision is made by the Director the full

                  main file and the separate discipline files will be

                  forwarded to South Yorkshire Police following the

                  certificate of satisfaction from the Police Complaints

                  Authority.




                  L SHARP
                  CHIEF CONSTABLE
                  CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY
            West Mkiland* PoI^b;




DOCUMENT
 *~ . • .
                 SECTIO
          -w •/ * *. ;** r.r-'-.#>*«?
                                   m & m




                                              '-fA
                                                 ;j?4*.‘
                                              fvi'-'Xii),-?




                            p!*§Sp||pf^cg|p




                                                     mimml
                                                     pllllSIgt




 Reference No




 Investigating L. SHARP*.
 O fficer
m

    SHARPS/9
                               DOCUMENT LIST


    NUMBER     DESCRIPTION                              PAGE(S )

    1          Letter dated 19 October 1989,             1-2
               from Mr JONES to Assistant
               Chief Constable Mr ANDERSON, South
               Yorkshire Police, requesting
               his complaint to be recorded and
               investigated.

    2          Letter dated 23 October 1989,               3
               from Assistant Chief Constable
               Mr ANDERSON, South Yorkshire Police,
               to Assistant Chief Constable Mr JONES,
               West Midlands Police, requesting
               Chief Constable Mr DEAR, West
               Midlands Police, to undertake
               enquiries into complaints made by
               Mr Les JONES.

    3          Letter dated 25 October 1989, from         4
               Captain E N TAYLOR, Police Complaints
               Authority, to Assistant Chief
               Constable Mr ANDERSON, South
               Yorkshire Police, confirming
               supervision by Captain TAYLOR on
               behalf of the Authority.

    4          Letter dated 27 October 1989, from         5
               Assistant Chief Constable Mr JONES,
               West Midlands Police to Assistant
               Chief Constable Mr ANDERSON, South
               Yorkshire Police, acknowledging
               receipt of letter dated 23 October
               1989, regarding complaint made by Mr
               Les JONES and accepting responsibility
               for the investigation on behalf of
               Chief Constable Mr DEAR, West Midlands
               Police.

    5          Letter dated 7 June 1989, from           6-7
               Mr Trevor HICKS, to the Right
               Honourable Douglas HURD, MP,
               regarding complaints involving Chief
               Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, South
               Yorkshire Police.

               Letter dated 25 July 1989, confirming
               Assistant Chief Constable Mr K P D
               COOPER, Northamptonshire Police, as
               the investigating officer in the
               complaint against Chief Superintendent
               DUCKENFIELD, South Yorkshire Police.
NUMBER   DESCRIPTION

7        Letter dated 25 July 1989, from
         South Yorkshire Police to Sir
         Cecil CLOTHIER, Police Complaints
         Authority, formally requesting
         the Police Complaints Authority
         to supervise the investigation.

8         Letter dated 4 August 1989,                  10
         from Captain E N TAYLOR, Police
         Complaints Authority, confirming
         his supervision of the complaint
         on behalf of the Authority.

9         Letter dated 5 September 1989, from          11
         Captain E N TAYLOR, Police Complaints
         Authority, to Assistant Chief
         Constable Mr COOPER, Northamptonshire
         Police, informing him that the enquiry
         will be dealt with by another force.

10        Letter dated 5 December 1989, from           12
         Assistant Chief Constable Mr JONES,
         West Midlands Police, to Assistant
         Chief Constable Mr ANDERSON, South
         Yorkshire Police, acknowledging receipt
         of letter dated 30 November 1989,
         regarding complaint made by Mr Trevor
         HICKS, and accepting the responsibility
         for the investigation on behalf of
         Chief Constable Mr DEAR, West Midlands
         Police.

11       Letter dated 7 December 1989, from            13
         Captain E N TAYLOR, Police Complaints
         Authority, to Assistant Chief Constable
         ANDERSON, South Yorkshire Police,
         confirming his supervision of the
         complaint made by Mr Trevor HICKS.

12       Letter dated 7 November 1989, from          14 - 28
         Mrs McBRIEN, to Chief Constable Mr
         DEAR, West Midlands Police, lodging
         her complaint against South Yorkshire
         Police.

13       Letter dated 18 December 1989, from
         Assistant Chief Constable Mr JONES,
         West Midlands Police, to Assistant
         Chief Constable Mr ANDERSON, South
         Yorkshire Police, acknowledging
         receipt of letter dated 12 December
         1989, regarding complaint made by Mrs
         Joan McBRIEN and accepting responsibility
         for the investigation on behalf of
         Chief Constable Mr DEAR, West Midlands
         Police.
DESCRIPTION

Letter dated 21 December 1989, from
Captain E N TAYLOR, Police Complaints
Authority to Assistant Chief Constable
Mr ANDERSON, South Yorkshire Police,
confirming his supervision of the
complaint made by Mrs Joan McBRIEN.

Letter dated 13 December 1989, from
Mrs Joan McBRIEN, to Assistant
Chief Constable Mr JONES, West
Midlands Police, concerning her
complaint and enclosing a
newspaper cutting.

Letter dated 24 January 1990, from
Mrs Joan McBRIEN, to Assistant
Chief Constable JONES, West
Midlands Police, enclosing a
detailed account of the events
as she saw them on the 15 April
1989.

Photocopy of a newspaper cutting
contained in Mrs Joan McBRIEN’S
letter dated 13 December 1989.

Copy of Regulation 7 Notice
dated 7 November 1989.

Copy of Regulation 7 Notice
dated 3 August 1989.

Copy of Regulation 7 Notice
dated 5 September 1989.

Copy of Regulation 7 Notice
dated 15 December 1989.

Copy of Regulation 7 Notice
dated 15 December 1989.

Letter dated 17 July 1990,
from Mr Leslie SHARP, Chief
Constable, Cumbria Constabulary,
to Mr Richard WELLS, Chief Constable,
South Yorkshire Police, regarding
routing of papers for criminal
investigation.

Letter dated 24 July 1990,
from Mr Richard WELLS, Chief
Constable, South Yorkshire
Police, to Mr Leslie SHARP,
Chief Constable, Cumbria
Constabulary, agreeing with
routing procedure.
                                                         DOCUMENT No.


                                                                   LIVERPOOL



                                                                   19 October 1989

South Yorkshire Police Authority
Snig Hill
SHEFFIELD
S3 8LY

For the attention of Mr K S Anderson -
Assistant Chief Constable


Dear Mr Anderson

Re;   Hillsborough Disaster

It is my belief, for reasons stated on the attached schedule, that
the following officers are guilty of "neglect of duty":

1.    Chief Superintendent David Duckinfield
2.    Superintendent Roger Marshall
3.    Superintendent Roger Greenwood

Please cause my complaint to be recorded and investigated                      in
accordance with the "Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984".

Yours faithfully




                                \tL       —< . -1 c*   —/
Les Jb'nes
Enc

                                      SOUTH   YU



                                          230C,

                                      ni^r.iPl ijVb & COMPLAINTS
                                                                  DOCUMENT No.




  Chief Superintendent David Duckinfield

  1.    Failed  to  acquaint    himself   with      planning/problems
        (control of Cup Tie).

 2.    Failed to monitor crowd numbers packing into Pens 3 and
        4.
 3.    Failed to act when it became obvious that Pens 3 and 4
        were overfull as he had an excellent viewpoint from the
        police box above the Pens.

 4.    Failure to make provision for fans coming through gate
        'C' after he had given the order for the gate to be
        opened.

 5.    Failure to act when it was obvious that people were in
       distress.

 6.    Attempting to mislead the Assistant Chief Constable and
       others regarding the origin of the order for gate 'C' to
       be opened.



 Superintendent Roger Marshall - Ground Commander (External)

 1.    Failed to control and filter fans away from the immediate
       vicinity of the turnstiles even after 14.17 hours when
       it was obvious that he had lost control of the turnstile
       area.

"2.    No order was given to restrict the approach of further
       fans.



 Superintendent Roger Greenwood - Joint Ground Commander (Internal)

 1.    Failed to carry out his assigned duty by placing       himself
        in a position by players tunnel

       Having a radio and using his eyes he should have been
       aware of the dangerous situation and controlled his
       officers accordingly.

 2.    Lack of instructions to his officers to monitor        Pens.

 3.    Totally ineffective in mounting a rescue.

 4.    Failing to send officers   to   rear   of   Pens   3 and    4 to
        relieve pressure.
 TELEPHONE
 SHEFFIELD !0742) 768522


                                                             SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                                SNIG HILL
                                                                      SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


 K. S. ANDERSON                                             ACC/AF/
 ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                                 23 October 1989
 (Complaints/Discipline)




J Mervyn Jones Esq MSc
Assistant Chief Constable
West Midlands Police HQ
PO Box 52
Lloyd House
Colmore Circus Queensway
Birmingham B4 6NQ




Dear

LES JC__

I enclose copy of a letter dated 19 October 1989 relative to the above.

I have recorded the matter as a complaint against the police under the above
reference and would be grateful if Mr Dear would undertake the investigation.

Additionally, I have asked Mr E N Taylor to undertake supervision of the
enquiries.

Yours sincerely
                                                                                         C.a J
                                                                           DOCUMENT N o .:
  P olice                                                                   London SW1


"OMPLAINTS                                                             Telephone:
 AUTHORITY
                                                      Your reference
 K S Anderson Esq
 Assistant Chief Constable
                                                      Our reference
 South Yorkshire Police
 Snig Hill                                              INV/89 131/121 ENT
 SHEFFIELD                                            Date
 South Yorkshire                                        25 O ctober 1989
 S3 8LY




 Dear Mr Anderson

 COMPLAINT BY LES JONES
 I confirm th a t the Police Complaints Authority have decided to supervise the investi­
 gation and it will be incorporated in the investigation currently bejng undertaken by Mr
 Dear.
 I shall be writing to Mr Hones advising him th a t the Authority will be supervising the
 investigation of his complaint.


 Yours sincerely




 E N TAYLOR
 Authority Member

 ja




                                                                                            4
                                                                               DOCUMENT No. -
 J MERVYN J O N E S M S c                                       FURNIVAL HOUSE
 ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                      Furnival Gate
  H IL LSB O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y T E A M                      Sheffield S I 4QN
                                                                Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 3 1 5 4 6
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                         Fax:         0742 731483
PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                          I     Medico Legal Centre
Colmorf! Cirrus Q ueensw ay
                                                                Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
nnmint)hnm B4 6NQ
                                                                Fax:       0742 726247
r-'lpphone 021 2 3 6 5 000 , extn. 2 0 2 5

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                                   Your Ref:        ACC/AF/
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                               Our Ref:         JMJ /
Telephone: 021 3 59 3 3 3 2
                                                                Date:
                                                                                 27 October 1989



             K S Anderson Esq
             Assistant Chief Constable
             (Complaints/Discipline)
             South Yorkshire Police
             Snig Hill
             Sheffield
             S3 8LY




             Dear Mr Anderson

             HILLSBOROUGH COMPLAINT - LES JONES

            I acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 23 October 1989 in
            respect of a complaint against police made by the above-named.

            On behalf of Mr Dear, who will act as Investigating Officer, I
            formally accept responsibility for the investigation into this
            matter.

            I have noted the Police Complaints Authority interest in the
            complaint.

           Yours s i n r p p p l v




                                                                                                   5

PLEASE REPLY TO THF OFFICE AT                R i r m i nerbam
                                                                                                     DOCUMENT No.5
Tel:- 01- 428 -7313                                                                                  Trevor & Jenni Hicks


 Home Office,
 50 Queen Anne's Gate,
 London.                                                                                                               Middlesex.
 SW1.


 f.a.o:- The Right Honourable Douglas Hurd                                       M.P.                         7th       June 1989.


Dear Home Secretary


                                              re: Hillsborough Disaster


JL am       the     father       of    the     late    Sarah          and    Victoria          Hicks       who     unfortunately
* r e    among the 95 people so tragically killed a t Hillsborough.


You     will       require          little     reminder          of    the       increasingly             acrimonious         rounds
of      accusation         and        counter     accusation             that       abounded          in     the    media         until
you had the good sense to issue your instruction to the police and request
a general cessation.
Despite        acute       provocation           and       at    times       great       personal          anquish,          my    wife
and     I   have      resisted          numerous        opportunities               to     fuel       that    deplorable            and
unseemly          state        of     affairs,     preferring               to    a s s is t    the       Taylor       Inquiry       in
its difficult task - including being prepared                                           to await the outcome before
making detailed comment to the media.


     write     to    you       today     to    request          your    comment          and     intervention           following
  ye statement,            widely        reported          in    the media,          by    South Yorkshire's Deputy
Chief       Constable           Peter     Hayes       to    the       effect       that        "no    further        action         was
required"           in         connection        with           the     actions           and        behaviour          of        Chief
Superintendant David Duckenfield.
I was       under        the    impression        that      Lord       Justice          Taylor       on    the one hand and
the internal Police Investigation by the West Midlands force on the other,
would       draw     conclusions          when    and       only       when       they     had       concluded       their work
and     had       time    to     deliberate.           Despite         the       careful        wording,         the    issue       of
this statement by the Deputy Chief Constable pre-empts these findings!


Words fail me when I try to convey to you the h u r t and totally unneccessary
anguish       this       untimely        statement          has       given my       wife,          myself and presumably
the     other       families.          Apart     from       the       crass      n ature       of    this    action,         I find
the n eed to issue such a statement at this time beyond contempt.                                                                     6
                                                                                                         DOCUMENT No,           5

                                                                  2

 One can only conclude that this is yet a further attempt by South Yorkshire
Police        to    divert          public    opinion           away       from   their       appalling       performance
both on the fatal day and subsequent to it.


Apart       from        obvious      offence    to        the    bereaved,        how     are    the    public      to view
this premature ’'absolution" by the Deputy Chief Constable!
That a senior police officer - who by his own admission deliberately chose
to deceive his superiors                     (and others!)            should not be disciplined is totally
incredible.
Even    if one believes Chief                   Superintendent D u c k e n f i e l d ’s reasons for lying
tg the general public at the time,                              (and I am bound to say that I personally
^ jnot!)^ there could have been no credible reason to have misled the Deputy
Chief Constable.


Is     it    purely         coincidence        that        this       provided       an      excuse     for    the    Chief
Constables silence during                     the    lead-in /initial week of the                      Taylor Inquiry,
when the fans were able to give their views?
I    trust     that         under    the    circumstances             you    will     understand        my    fears    of   a
"whitewash"             at the      least and at           the worst adeliberate attempt                      to      "close
ranks" and distort the course of justice.


I regret that M r. H a y e s ’s insensitive and untimely public action has further
reduced my opinion of the South Yorkshire senior police.
      leaves me no alternative but to formally complain directly to yourself,
    .id to ask you as               the vanguard          of a    Government claiming                to be    "committed
to    law    and        order"      to make     an    unequivocal            statement          of   your    opinion    and
intended actions in the wake of this regrettable development.


I will       await your urgent response                     during         the course of today or tomorrow,
but    would       advise        that      should     I    fail       to    recieve     an    appropriate          response
I    reserve       the       right    to     follow       Mr.Hayes         example      and     release      this    letter
to the media tomorrow evening.


Yours . g a i n f u l l y ,




Trevor      h i c k s   .

                                                                                                                              7
Discipline & Conplaints                                 ACC/GDy
                                                                  25 July 1989




D J O'Dowd, Esq., QPM, BA, MSc, CBIM
Chief Constable
Northamptonshire Police
Wootton Hall
Northampton
NN4 OJQ




Dear

Hillsborough Disaster

A letter of complaint, directed through the Home Secretary, has been made
against Chief Superintendent Duckenfleld of this Force arising out of the
above.

I write to formally request that you allow Assistant Chief Constable ,
Mr K P D Cooper, of your Force to undertake this enquiry on my behalf.

For your information, my Chief Constable has asked the Police Complaints
Authority to supervise the investigation.

Yours sincerely




                                                                                 8
Sir Cecil Clothier RCB QC
Chairman
Police Complaints Authority

L ondon sw i




mb . lazvoa    HICKS.
MIDDLESEX

I enclose for your information copies of correspondence from the
above named in connection with a complaint he has locigea against
Mr Peter Hayes, Deputy Chief Constable of this Force.

In my view the correspondence also constitutes a complaint
against Chief Superintendent David Duclienfield. I have causc-d
the complaint to be recorded and would ask you formally to
consider exercising supervision of the conduct of the
Investigation under Section 87(l)(b) of the Act. Assistant Chief
Constable K D P Cooper of Northamptonshire Police has been
appointed tc investigate the complaint, subject of course to your
agreement should you decide to supervise the Investigation.
   t    O    U    C    E        _
                                                                                                                     DOCUMENT No.
                                                                                                                           L o n d o n SVVi

OMPLAINTS
                                                                                                                    Telephone:
 /AUTHORITY
J. A


 Mr T Hi ck s                                                                            Your re fere nce


                                                                                         O u r reference


 Middlesex                                                                               D ate               k A u g u s t 19S9




                                                                                                                       r




I arn w r i t i n g as a M e m b e r o f t h e P o l i c e C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y .

In his l e t t e r d a t e d 25 J u l y 1989, M r W r ig h t t h e C h i e f C o n s t a b l e o f t h e S ou th Y o r k s h i r e
P o l i c e , a d v i s e d you t h a t h e c o n s i d e r e d t h e l e t t e r you h a d w r i t t e n t o t h e H o m e S e c r e t a r y
on 7 J u n e c o n s t i t u e d a c o m p l a i n t a g a i n s t C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t D u c k e n f i e l d . Subse­
q u e n t l y he a p p o i n t e d K P D C o o p e r Esq , A s s i s t a n t C h i e f C o n s t a b l e N o r t h a m p t o n s h i r e
P olice, to in v estig ate the m a t t e r .

S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e h a v e n o w r e f e r r e d t h e m a t t e r to t h e A u t h o r i t y , who h a v e d e c i d e d
to s u p e r v i s e the i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f y o u r c o m p l a i n t . I sh al l b e t h e M e m b e r r e s p o n s i b l e fo r
your case.

I h a v e a s k e d Mr C o o p e r t o a r r a n g e a m e e t i n g to d i s c u s s v a r i o u s p o i n t s w i t h y ou .         I am
s u r e h e w il l b e in t o u c h v e r y s h o r t l y .




E N TAYLOR
A u th o rity Member




                                                                                                                                                 10
        1989-09-05
            1-09-05    13=24    POLICE COMPLAINTS
                                                                               DOCUMENT No.?
                                                                                        London SW1

C o m p l a in t s
  ^JTHORITY                                                                        Telephona




  D 3 O'Dowd Esq QPM J3A MSc CBIM                            Your reference
  Chief Constable
  Northamptonshire Policc                                    Our reference    IN V /89 1 31 /7 9
  Wootton Hall
  Northampton                                                Dale
  N N 4 OJQ                                                                               f*? .




                       iu


  I refer to today's telephone conversation regarding the Hillsbrough enquiry. As discussed
  I require Assistant Chief Constable Cooper, as the cu rren t Investigating O fficer, to
  serve Regulation 7 notices on the officers named by Mr Hicks in his statem ent of 2#
  August 1989. It is im portant that the notices a rc served without delay.

  I confirm th a t Mr Cooper is only required    to serve the notices and the enquiry will then
  be dealt with by another force. As soon       as the situation regarding the appointment of
  the new Investigating Officer is resolved,     I will inform both yourself and Mr Cooper in
  order th a t arrangem ents can be made for    the transfer of documents e tc .

  Again thank you for your assistance in this m a tte r.




  E N TAYLOR
  Authority Mcmbor




                                                                                                     1 1
J M E R V Y N JO N E S M S c
                                                                       FURNIVAL H OU S E
A SSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE
                                                                       Furnival Gate
  H IL LSB O R O U G H IN Q U IR Y T E A M                             Sheffield S I 4QN
                                                                       Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 3 1 5 4 6
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                                Fax:         0742 731483
T*0 Oox 52. Lloyd House
                                                                       Medico Legal Centra
Colmore Circus Q ueensw ay
                                                                      Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                                      Fax:       0742 726247
Telephone: 0 2 1 - 2 3 6 50 00, extn. 2 0 2 5

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                                         Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                                     Our Ref:                JMJ/
Telephone: 0 2 1 - 3 5 9 3 3 3 2
                                                                      Date:                   5 December 1989



         K S Anderson Esq
         Assistant Chief Constable
         (Complaints/Discipline)
         South Yorkshire Police
         Snig Hill
         Sheffield
         S3 8LY




         Dear Mr Anderson

         HILLSBOROUGH COMPLAINT - TREVOR HICKS

        I acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 30 November 1989 in respect
        of a complaint against police made by the above-named person.

        On behalf of Mr Dear, who will act as Investigating Officer, I formally
        accept responsibility for the investigation into this matter.

        I have noted the Police Complaints Authority interest in the complaint.

        Yours sincerely




                                                                                                           12

 PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T                 L1° y d .Housev Bi rmingham
•POUCE                                                                     D"             T
                                                                                  London SW

CflMPLAINTS
  AUTHORITY                                                                 Telephone:




      K S Anderson Esq                                   Your reference
      A s s is ta n t Chief C o n s t a b l e                KSA/rn>
      South Yorkshire P o l i c e                        O u r reference

   SHEFFIELD                                                 INV/S9 !31/1*5 ENT
               ~                                                December




  Dear Mr Anderson

  COMPLAINT BY TREVOR HICKS

  I confirm that the Police Complaints Authority have decided to supervise the investi-
  Dear!1     ^        incorporated in the investigation curren tly being undertaken by Mr


                                                him   ,he Au,h°r‘,y W ‘" be su»erWsi^     'he


 Yours sincerely




 E N ^AYLOK'
 Authority Member

 ja

 c c West Midlands




                                                                                                13
                                                      DOCUMENT No.
To 1 No:




                                                       Clwyd


                                                        .
                                                       7 11.89



West Midlands Police St
West Midlands




Dear Mr Dear


I do hope you don't mind my writing to you but I feel by being able to
do this will help me a great deal.____________________________________
                                                             DOCUMENT No.




I know the FA made a number of mistakes viz; holding the match at
Hillsborough instead of Manchester and allocating less tickets to
Liverpool fans.


But it was a real blunder for the police to insist on accommodating the
Liverpool fans at the Leppings Lane end and then not exercising strict
control at the main entrance.   Only ticket-holders should have been
allowed through those gates and only a manageable number at a given time
with proper queues at the turnstiles.   I feel the police gave the fans
far too much freedom to exert pressure which led to an uncontrollable
situation.   They allowed anyone, fans with or without tickets, to get far
too close to the scene of action and it seemed inevitable that certain
individuals would take advantage of such a position.
                                                              D O C U M E N T No.




                                     - 3 -




The situation should never have been allowed to develop to such an extent
that fans could actually gain access by climbing walls into the ground.
It was a grave error to open the large concertina Gate C to eject one fan
who had invaded the ground.    It would have been sensible to have kept
him inside and put him out later when the crowds had dispersed.


But of course the crucial mistake was the request and then the order to
open Gate C again and leave it open for anyone to walk in so close to
kick-off.


In my opinion, there was only one sensible decision to be made at
that time and that was to have the game delayed and use the turnstiles
only for entry.   That way people would move in at a much slower pace and
the crowd would be less dense.   That way they would be able to see for
themselves where to go.   It was the sheer volume of people coming in
through Gate C and then down the tunnel that caused the disaster.     It is
no wonder that on-one had admitted to doing this as it was indeed an
extremely foolish procedure.


I, myself, would certainly not have liked to have been faced with a
request from a senior officer to open the exit
                                                            DOCUMENT No.



                                    -   4   -




gates to aliow anyone in as that to me sounds a very unusual request
indeed and is undoubtedly a recipe for disaster.   If I had been faced
with such a request, I would have felt that I had no alternative to
having the game post-poned or even abandoned as that to me would seem the
only right decision to make.   The other decision was entirely wrong as
beyond that gate on the outside there was the space of the whole world
but within the stadium there was a limited space only and it was indeed a
very dangerous thing to exceed that capacity at any time.


I feel generally that the police in this country are doing a fine job on
all Saturdays throughout the football season as their job is indeed a
difficult one.   I also feel that the police operation adopted on the 15th
April was a well-thought out plan that had worked at Hillsborough
previously as John had attended the same match last year.   But it did
appear quite obviously from 2.30 pm that there were difficulties in the
Leppings Lane area and it was becoming increasingly difficult to maintain
control.   I think the situation then should have been assessed and some
positive action should
                                                               DOCUMENT!*).



                                      - 5 -




have been taken at that time.   Strict control was definitely needed at
the turnstiles from 2.30.


I cannot criticize the police for not having officers directing the fans
to various pens.   I feel many fans choose the standing area because they
feel less restricted there in some ways.      They are not tied to one
particular spot as with seating; in other words, they have free choice to
go to any pen where they see room and if need be can move from one pen to
another by means of the gates at the top of the pens.      I suppose this is
what usually happened.   I don't think the fans would actually want the
police to tell them where to go under normal circumstances.     But what
happened on the 15th April 1989 was a different set of circumstances
altogether.   People, who were legitimate ticket-holders were not coming
in as usual through the turnstiles and finding their positions in the
pens.   It appeared suddenly that anybody and everybody had been allowed
in, indiscriminately, without warning, in such large numbers to create
overcrowding on a very large scale.


It was noted by the police at 2.AO pm that there was room on the
cm                                                                DOCUMENT No. 12



                                        - 6 -




     terraces for another 3,000 fans only and at that time it appeared that a
     very similar number were waiting to come in, outside the turnstile area.
     However, within minutes, the 3,000 outside turned into about 5,000.     This
     was clearly seen so it was extremely foolish to think that 5,000 could
     fit into a place for 3,000 and throw the gates open.   It couldn't be done
     and it shouldn't have been done.


     It was wrong to allow ticketless fans in and it was posing a security
     risk, too, as a large mob like that could have missiles or the like.     In
     any case, no-one is allowed into any other place of entertainment without
     producing a ticket first and that is the purpose of the turnstiles.     No
     steward was told of the police decision to open the gates as I'm sure any
     steward would have objected because surely it was against Club Rules.


     I will now give you the information relating to our son, John.


     John left home on the 15th April 1989 just in time to catch the Deeside
     Liverpool Supporters' coach from outside the Victoria Hotel at Holywell,
     Clwyd.


     He travelled to the match with a ticket and consumed no alcohol on that
     day.




                                                                                    19
                                                        DOCUMENT No. 1




The coach arrived at Sheffield at approximately 2 pm and John and a
number of other young supporters made their way to the ground.


I was told that the organisation this year was totally different to that
of last year when there were a number of control points to check for
tickets before the fans arrived at the main gate and turnstiles.      In fact
on a number of occasions in the past, ticket less fans were taken to a
specified area where they listened to the match on a transistor radio and
so did not pose a problem.


This year there appeared to b<= no plan whatsoever operating at the
Leppings Lane end and widespread chaos developed when the road was
closed, following Mr Marshall's request, at 2.30.   It was a very foolish
move as fans were then able to spread out in all directions and checks on
them became impossible.   Fans with tickets were being pestered all the
time by fans without tickets asking if they had any spare tickets.     It
appeared that the police didn't understand what 'spares' meant!


By the time John and his friends managed to get through the maingate
there was utter confusion with fans
    m                                                                        DOCUMENT No. ^ ^



                                             -   8    -




         being helped over the turnstiles and walls by policemen and one
         policeman on the roof or the turnstiles.         Also, ticketless fans were
         attempting to bribe the turnstile operators and so were hindering the
         flow through the turnstiles.   Added to this was the fact that the tickets
         themselves were incorrectly numbered or lettered.


        John and his friends were being pushed and crushed at the turnstile area
        at about 2.45.   As one of his friends suffers with asthma and started to
        have an attack, they quickly moved out of the crush at the turnstiles and
^       went as far away as possible to stand outside the exit Gate C where there
        were not too many people at the time.        They went there because they felt
        safer and at that point they weren’t even bothered about seeing the
        beginning of the match.   They were concerned only with their own safety.


        To their amazement, Gate C suddenly opened to eject a fan and police
        officers there at the time mistakenly thought that the gate had been
        opened in response to Mr Marshall’s request and so they told John and his
        friends along with other fans, totalling about




                                                                                         21
                                                                     DOCUMENT No. 1




 r.OO    to go in.   John and his friends looked back and saw the gate closing
 behind them and felt safe so they went to the lavatories and then quickly
 made their way down the tunnel and took up their positions in Pen 3.


 No sooner had John and his friends got into their places in Pen 3, then
 thousands of people came following down the tunnel after Gate C was opened
again and left open.


We know nothing more about John and are still trying to find the
following information and should be grateful if you could help with this
matter.


1)       What time John was found dead or injured?


2)      Who found him?


3)      Was he taken to hospital?


4)       Did he receive any medical attention at anytime?


5)       Did anyone try to help him in any way?


It      may help you to know that John was wearing a red and white scarf.


The facts clearly indicate complete wrecklessness on the part of those
put in responsible positions on that day.         Power can indeed be a very
dangerous tool if put in the hands of
                                                                DOCUMENT




 irresponsible individuals!    John should never have died at 18 - this was
completely and easily avoidable!     We can all recover from mistakes made
connected with the Economy; we cannot recover from the mistakes made by
imcompetent people who were in a position of responsibility on the 15th
April 1989.     The price all the bereaved families have had to face is a
colossal one.    This is something that no-one can put right but we do hope
that at least justice is done!


If only Police Constable Buxton's request to have the kick-off post-posed
had not been rejected by Mr Duckenfield, I am sure there would not have
been that terrible tragedy.     Instead, Mr Marshall, in more authority,
requested that the exit gates should be opened to get rid of the crowd
surging around him.    That was not just a serious mistake, but a fatal one
where John was concerned!     I’m sure he would not expect that gate where
he was standing to suddenly open and allow him in - in to his death!       It
was utterly wreckless!


Mr Jack Stone, a gate-man at Gate A pleaded with the police not
                                                               DOCUMENT NO. 1 2



                                     - 11-




 to open the exit gates as it was against Club Rules and said, "all hell
will break loose if you open them," and it surely did!    He refused to
open his gate and stood firmly by it but was eventually compelled by the
police to do so.   I know he was just a gate-man but he knew his job - he
knew that exit gates were not to be opened until after the match; he knew
what the right decision was - if only the power would have been in his
hands instead of Mr Marshall's and Mr Duckenfield's.    He obviously cared
for the fans and knew the dangers.    It was such a short time after he
pleaded with the police not to open the exit gates, that people died
inside the stadium and that wonderful and intelligent son of ours was
changed from a healthy, happy and lively person into a dead body labelled
No 68.
                                                                      DOCUMENT Na 12



                                        -   1/   -




    I'm sure neither Mr Marshall nor Mr Duckenfield deliberately caused
    John's death, but by their irresponsible actions they certainly caused
    it.   It was clear to John and his friends that it was absolute
    pandemonium at the turnstiles with fans constantly being




#




                                                                               25
                                                              DOCUMENT No. I ?


                                     -   M   -




 nllow-<]     get over the wall and this is why John and his friends moved
 away to relative safety as they thought but instead were actually invited
 into that cage by the police; then John was allowed to be crushed by a
 terrific force with no police officer in the ground doing a thing about
 it.




Nothing can bring John back but 1 do wish that I could do something to
help to prevent further disasters.


First and foremost I would like to see all-seater stadiums.    I feel when
fans pay £6.00 to be spectators they should be entitled to both comfort
and safety.   They should be treated with the same respect as anyone else
who pays to be entertained.   They should be ushered safely to their
places and high safety standards should be maintained at all times.


They should be allowed refreshments including alcohol, as this is
available at most other places
                                                             DOCUMENT No. 1 2



                                    -   14   -




 of entertainment.   Fans should be treated as innocent and decent human
 beings and only if they misbehave should they have their photographs
 taken and be thrown out.


 I am totally against the ID card scheme and do wish that the Bill could
be stopped.   I know I would certainly not wish to attend a place of
entertainment if I had to produce a photo and details of myself first -
I believe the fact that I had paid for admission should surely be
sufficient.   These young people are already finding it difficult to
manage to pay the £6.00, especially if they are still at school.    Why
should further expense be imposed upon them to cater for the hooligans
once again?


I would like to see all perimeter fences removed.


I would like to see newspapers and magazines sold at the ground and maybe
even tapes.


I do, however, feel that ticketless fans should never, never be admitted
but most of all that exit gates remain closed until the end of the match.
                                                              docum ent No. 12



                                      -   I r>   -




 1 think it would be a good idea to have Rottweillers standing by the
 police to deal with any pitch invasions, maybe even teargas or the like.
 Photographs should be taken of any offenders and they should not be
 allowed to attend further matches.




                               Yours sincerely


                               Joan McBrien (Mrs)




P.S.   We have seen the 2 hour video but wish to see the 8 hour one if
       that can be arranged.




                                                                            28
 J MERVYN JONES MSc
                                                                                        DOCUMENT No.'
                                                                             FURNIVAL HOUSE
 ASSISI AN I C llltr CONSJAOLE
                                                                             rurnivol Gale
  HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM                                                  Sheffield S I 4QN
                                                                             Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 3 1 5 4 6
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ                                                      Fax:         0742 731483
PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                                             Medico Legal Centra
Colmore Circus Q ueensw ay
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                                            Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
                                                                             Fax:       0742 726247
Telephone: 0 2 1 - 2 3 6 5000, extn. 2 0 2 5

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                                                Your Ref: ACC/GD/
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA                                                            Our Ref:    JM J/
Telephone: 0 2 1 - 3 5 9 3 3 3 2
                                                                                         18 December 1989



        K S Anderson Esq
        Assistant Chief Constable
         (Complaints/Discipline)
        South Yorkshire Police
        Snig Hill
        Sheffield
        S3 8LY




        Dear Mr Anderson

        HILLSBOROUGH COMPLAINT - MRS JOAN McBRIEN

       I acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 12 December 1989 in respect
       of a complaint against police made by the above-named person.

       On behalf of Mr Dear, who will act as Investigating Officer, I formally
       accept responsibility for the investigation into this matter.

       I have noted the Police Complaints Authority interest in the complaint.

       Yours sincerely




      Assistant Chief Constable
      (Hillsborough Inquiry)




                                                                                                              29
PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T                 L lo y d .H.°.u.s e .>. Birmingham
                                                                     DOCUMENT No. <•
# P olice                                                                         -ondon SVV*

 C o m p l a in t s
   A u t h o r it y                                                         Telephone




   K 5 Anderson Esq                                        Your reference
   A s s i s t a n t C h ie f C o n s ta b le
   Sout h Yorkshire P o l i c e                           O u r reference
   Snig Hill                                                 INV/89 131/152 ENT
   SHEFFIELD
                                                          Date
   South Yorkshire                                          21 December 1939
   S3 8LY




   Dear Mr Anderson

   COMPLAINT BY JOAN McBRIEN

   I confirm that the Police Complaints Authority have decided to supervise the investi­
   gation and it will be incorporated in the investigation currently being undertaken by Mr
   Dear.
                           n   -

  I shall be writing to Mrs McBrien advising her th a t the Authority will be supervising the
  investigation of her complaint.


  Yours sincerely




  ETiN \ P Q U ^ r
  Authority Member

  ja

  cc West Midlands
                                                                                               DOCUMENT No.15



             r b ‘r




     f*rL+.C£_


     P.O. S o X         52         ijL & ty e i

                            d^~t-


 &-C-* »u-*- <v^. Art^vw                    g^         G         £L
                                                                                                    Chi'^ bufjcn.iiji.u jin
                                                                                                Complaints & Discipline Oepi
                                                   *                                                    21 DEC 1989
                                                   T U\^-XC\_Aj“              to                                        C^t

  ~J C?>. \ { c r v ^ ^ J o ^ s                  (*{        ^         sf)                                                <X-

                                   6^        cv.                                ^ y e w <x,             f-^-cjsl^ J —

 A-<-c^!~pp-a_y2j</~                fe                                                   Ju-v^

 hA^&JLs—              wA^-a^.                                   K/ocv/'           ^ ^ c L t iK^^Ln                                j

 <5*—                        *-/'~>•£ <-                   *^JL-         «*-*>_ ~ U ^ a.       b tiT^<je^y^Js_jtJ t


                                                                                                  Co

                  /-^w~       kA ^K - n ± J ~ * * J ! A          s                 L-^e^xt^ ^                                  f

^9      o^nr^s.    3                    ^sun_          h-$-x\JL^si\-£— i4~                             ^ — <S-/^o

C42r>yJ->-tA-~r~jj                •/©       lA ^ x t-t-r^ o J L            /2 -o -€ ^ .c e _    p -f^O C & J Lc*-r~£-          |

          f-t-rzr^Z-A.              -/o                     (X_v^ »-'K_£jxr_ J O J ^ J ^ ^ C J Z - J i

LAs*-* J [ 4 < ^        ~     '         X    ji^   -   c^    s       ,     ^Ci~       jf> tv c ^ k ^ v ^ f L i J L ^

                            ('\sZ>4~        -Vv_4?^jv£_              ^O. vAf2^v            Ma*      /()      ^ ta   dL
                              O^rJL                J        -4**JL                 h^JO^
                                                                                                                               DOCUMENT No.




    ^            ^                                          j l y 4-                                        i ^ -

 Sl^j-           -k*+-+.UL*-                                               '

             ^jksc                         cJi&-b^xJ- x X r ^                                        cLaJl&JLd^


( P e - f ^ i v_ ;                                    ^             ctc^-b-

IXOJ o o O                                                      /    cA o^         ^    lJ -       t k.c>-h TUe_



                                               *-                                              <’^ - e n ^          ji~

P ^ ^        jL j    + C   c-     ?            d f          Ct^.         fnJJ-UL.                   C&^J    l   L


 J U * _ J L y                  / L ^ - t t ^ J r ^                                             T     ^         U         £©


U _                                                                  ^     ^                          ^             * *
                                                   fe           fcjli/                 Ti^riJL                        &~ y T


^                                                               . J        i ^ J U e ^ e .                T ^ d ~

                                                                     cU ^ ^ k.                 ^ J ^ J U

^j u ^   T           k*-              c^   J   l   >k^ { 4 - ^ A         -/^

^        t*UL         ^ —         4                                                            j M - v ,             ^

                 £^.*>^^-zJL                            trK-/ C      A&Cso k * J L             ,




             ^             u u   & ^ J L A            X     u       ^          A>                            n ^         s

                                               *>           tK,wJc                                                   T ^ l

ivtrvj^C             (^Ot^            *^J2_             A   a   ^    u-^            (Jt^v          K * J L * J ' K^ y^


    b        r u ^                                                       *•^                   £ ^                       ^
 />UL <r-er~-K<. /W2^~t>                                                       ^                                *

                                                                         y^p* ^                                                   f®
                                                                                                                        DOCUMENT No. 6




                                                                                      C       ~        (   .


                                                                                  *2V     •       /•       ^
  ^ . A lt H r y T i                                 A1 • Sc .


W t-oJi~             <LL&*+*jL*9                               (4& j
?.0          &©>- 5 2 ,                    ir^^A.              ,
Golr^-*i^                         y {obu>a-t^&i*r+y ;

                                S l/~ ^ ^ &                                                         _          .   .    „   -


             R ef :      U J 2 ls L ^ & ^ y ^                      X x z s .^ U r - , r A ^                            W .


                                       X L   a   ^   u c   ,

  j      2             c L a d ira ^ J L         ((Os.                                  (^1        o       .
             '4-\»~4.J&. o f       £o        "t^JL                                C oN ^ycs-^A -tN vA d

t5       >-« ^ y f             cj/^Le^           th + -z ji          ijt^ x J h                    ^                   S>
<p - ^Lict, - ofo-x'Ce-f-o                        v-L$~iJ~e-J^                /*-*—   ©-*^ £ X «               ^

 h t ^ ~ h ^                   n » f                 O ^ U -        t ^ l c       *- % U h 2 ^ J -

Jr t ^           ^        y J> o_>^                   /m tw -                                                      G-           i
o L & J - a - ^. Q - ^ _ J L      C \ sC*^rx*~+Jr                      &v~&^~£r>              <*-*

                -fiu^            <rv^                      tS ( ^




                 .2       JvstiA^, ^ L a ^ j h                         C e r f ^
                                                                                                                                     "... /    - -iv   V.

                                                                                                                                    -T1'"'^-n.'"'           j
                                                                                                  ^feigaawi
                                                                                            DOCUMENT No. 1 6




                             ®            2 0 " ^ C C a ./ ♦ Z '        |/^4

 ^1<V^ p>       ^      t'U-to     firw ~^J*JL          / £»              ^ _*vc« *»

 tKfi^f-    U^«_-               A^orf- - J 2 ^ J - ^ J L o ^ J i       tJb

                a^jj- c-crw.       £^=>      Cr*-C_ <v^>J3_        >\~o'/-

               O^b      U    < J U c JcL^-xy-^syt^            .
                    ^ml_        /'UoA-      A j o c u n ^               qM   ^ J -

                                                cL o          l\JO^~                  c^_


j2«^v^     cLje^tjOL^


                      1— 3




                                                                               > u 0
SOCCER-MAD gatem an J a ck S lo w
                                                         HE GATEMAN
■ “ not » » f«*ot »a a fo o tb a ll ffrount         r      touW not face co in s in the                 Engineer Jack, w hose home is just
since pota 'e Ig n o re d h is w a rn in g s an<                                                     a stone's threw from the stadium , has
u n lo ck ed H ills b o r o u g h 's K a tes at                          v r ^ r r%r' — «           struggled to p at the tragedy behind
tragedy                                                                                              him.
 "I’ll never f o Ui 1 m ateh a m i . •
     JacK 50. w ho was (h e stew
                                                    ^pjaajM Sffesa
                                                    tragedy!               *«>tnid sin ce the
                                                                                                        “Tjme is a g rea t healer but I don’t
                                                                                                    th in k I ’l l e v e r g e t o v e r i t , ” h e
J™ !" charge o f secu rity a t tbt                                                                  says. "I still think aboat it - it’s
df«st"rs           *"** •“ the “ y °r th<                                                            Im possible to forget."
                                                    wanted it. m       Fm never Koinr hark
  H* foresaw a fatal rriu h o n thi                                                                     “I'm never, bothered anyone and
                                                                         g rm m A - * » * « * • *   did not seek any professional h elp a f­
P«*ked terraces, and begged pol>c<                                                                  terwards. I threw tayself in to m y
not U» ep fit th e gates.                                                                           work and found th at w as the on ly w ay
  * «t they forced him to band ove-i                                                                to take my m ind o ff things.
      eys ’ «*»>«eked the ga tes am                                                  2S2L?t             *‘l f it had not been for work I w ould
allowed hanrfreds o f late-arriving                                                                 have had a nervous breakdown.*'
                                                                          WM* I alw ays watch
                  \u topour               “ •*                                                          Jack has studied th e in qu iry in to
                                                    , “5 ? *               shocked by the           th e d isaster and has h is own th eory
                                                   .itV J *  .i****® f*** ‘hat I couldn’t           about the cause.
                       ***‘n>i"*iw ih*              4and on the terraces again.                        "It’s never been said b efore, but I
  Seven n o a th s later, he is still                                                               think the p o lice op en ed th e g a te s
            ? 4he harrow ing scene*                ^ 7 h fi..M V* ? y o,1 b o y s    ‘h e grea-
                                                                                                    b ecause they fearea th eir m en o u t­
   '?rt"cs*«* as help less fans were                                                                sid e w ere m d anger o f b ein g a t­
U T & 9              m v S m ‘he“erT^!                                                              t a c k e d ,” h e s a y s . “ I t w a s n ’t th e
                                                                                                    th in g to do."
                                                                                                                                                         C D
                                                                                                                                                         CZ>
                                                                                                                                                         CTD




                                                                                                                                                         CD
                                                                                                        DOCUMENT No.'             WP 666
                                                                                                                                  (S O 8 1 6 )
                                                                                                                                  I A m « n o «d 4 8 5 )
                                                                                                                C & D Rtf.
      West Midlands                           The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 Regulation 7
      Police                                 NOTICE OF REPORT, A LL E G A T IO N OR CO M PLAINT
                                                                                                               □ ate


      From                                                                To:
            Mr G.J. Dear, Chief Constable                                         Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield

      In accordance with the requirements of Regulation 7 of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1 9 8 5 , 1 hereby inform you of
      a•                    COMPLAINT                                                                        .. k . .        .
      8      ____ ______________________________          _   ______________________________________ which has been made against you.
      NATURE OF *             COMPLAINT

      On Saturday, 15 April 1989, at Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield, a
      disaster occurred in which 95 people died.

      Leslie Jones of                             Liverpool, the father of one of the
      deceased, Richard Jones, has made the following allegations relating to your duties
      at the ground on 15 April 1989;

      (a)        You failed to acquaint yourself with the planning and problems related to
                 the control of the Liverpool v Nottingham Forest Semi Final on Saturday
                 15 April 1989.

      (b)        You failed to monitor the crowd numbers packing into Pens 3 and 4.

      (c)        You failed to act when it became obvious that Pens 3 and 4 were over full
                 when you had an excellent viewpoint from the Police Box above the pens.

      (d)       You failed to make provision for fans coming through gate 'C' after you
                had given the order for the gate to be opened.

      (e)       You failed to act when it was obvious that people were in distress.

   (f)          You attempted to mislead the Assistant Chief Constable at the ground and
                others, namely, representatives of the Club, the F.A., and the fans
                themselves regarding the origin of the order for gate 'C' to be opened.
                That is by inferring supporters had forced open the gate when you had, in
                fact, given the order to open the gate.
   You have the right to consult a friend at all stages o f the investigation and service o f this form does not necessarily imply
   that disciplinary proceedings w ill follow . It is served to safeguard your interests.

   You are not as the Regulation explains, obliged to say anything concerning the m atter, but you may if you so desire, make
   a w ritten or oral statement concerning the m atter to me or to the Assistant Chief Constable. (The Chief Constable has
   delegated his authority under Regulation 15 o f the above Regulations to the Assistant Chief Constable).


   YOU ARE. HOWEVER. WARNED THAT IF YOU MAKE SUCH A STATEMENT TO M 6-9ft-TO THC A08l8T*fHF-
   OHIC f OONSTASfcfe, THE STATEMENT MAY BE USED IN ANY SUBSEOUENT>fllSCtPUNABY PROCEEDINGS.




                                                                                                  Investigatigflrffficer
  *       In ttrt the wort “rtporf’. "tntgttktn” or ~compl»int~ *t •ppropriatm.

                              I acknowledge having been served w ith the original o f this Notice.
ACKNOWLEDGE­
MENT
                                                                                                                                          lumbar
(co p y ta b * a ip M d )    Date    .   A         ,o .              Sian«tu

                                     y       //.   ft
                              1 served the origin^ o f this Notice upon t irc n i u m i fHHiivu
SERVICE                                                                                                                       R an t    nuom r
                             Tfrnt                 Data                                    Siam

                                                                                                                             k _ s .

                                                                                                                                               7 r
                              S O U T H   Y O R K S H I R   E   P O L I C E     DOCUMENT N o . ^
                               NOTICE OF REPORT, ALLEGATION OR COMPLAINT

                          POLICE (DISCIPLINE) REGULATIONS 1985, REGULATION 7

   RANK                          NUMBER                                  NAME



 lef Superlntende It                                            David Godfrey DUCKENPIBLD


   NATURE OF REPORT, ALLEGATION OR COMPLAINT


             A letter sent to the Hoi— Secretary on the 7 June 1989 by Trevor and Jenni
             Hick* of                                Pinner, Middlesex has been forwarded
             to the South Yorkshire Police for attention. Part of this letter addreeeea
             your aubaequent conduct following the PA Cup 8eal Pinal played at
             Hillsborough Football Ground on the 15 April I989 and your evidence to the
             enquiry conducted by Lord Juatlce Taylor.

             It la alleged by Nr and Mrs Hlcka that you were deceitful and Intentionally
             mialed senior police offlcera and menbers of the public regarding your
             conoand and control of police offlcera engaged on that duty.

             If eatabllahed these allegatlona could dlacloae poaslble offences against
             the Police Dlaclpllne Regulatlona 1985, Regulation 5, Schedule 1, Paragraph
             5 or 1.




                                                             (Continue overleaf as necessary)
You are not obliged to say anything concerning the above matter(s). You may if you wish
make a written or oral statement to the Investigating Officer or your chief officer. This
statement may be made now or later and may be used in any subsequent disciplinary proceedings.
You have the right to consult a friend at all stages of the investigation. This form is
served on you in accordance with Regulation 7, Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985. It
does not necessarily imply that disciplinary proceedings will be taken but is served to safe­
guard your interests.




         w n r . .............. 1 9 ??.                         ,|_________________                I
                                                                Signature of Investigating Officer       :
                                                                K P D Cooper Assistant Chief Constabli
I acknowledge that I have been served with the original of this document.            \




                                                                Signed

A D M /4 5
      Northamptonshire Police                                                                                     DOCUMENT No.
                     K P D COOPER, Assistant Chief Constable
          From:

                     Chief Superintendent D DUCKENFIELD                                                5   September                89
          To:                                                                                                  _________ 1 9 __

                                                                             Reference No.     C&D222'89

                                       The Police (Discipline) Regulations IM S Regulation 7


                                      N O TIC E O F R EPO RT, A LLE G A TIO N OR C O M P L A IN T


         In accordsnet w ith the requirements o fR e ^ la t|o fy7 or of the Police (Discipline) Regulations, 1985 I hereby

         inform you o f a *                                                                      which has been made against you.

                                                                complaint
                                          N A TU R E O F #

       Mr Trevor    Hicks of                            X- 1 1 u ie jL Pinner,j Middlesex
            ^ i   ,                                                              it mi |  has
                                                                                          XlflLS
       conplained that at the football match between Liverpool and Nottingham
       Forest op the 15th April 1989 at the Hillsborough Football Ground you
       neglected to discharge your duties in that you:-
        (a) failed to prevent a dangerous build 15 ) of supporters outside of the
             gates;
       (b) failed to control the movement of supporters subsequent to the openina
             of Gate 'C'; and                                                                 ^
       (c) failed to respond to the developing tragedy and were slow to effect a
             rescue operation.
       If established, these complaints could disclose possible offences against
       the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.

         You are not, as the Regulation explains, obliged to say anything concerning the m atter, but you may - if
         you so desire -      make a w ritten or oral statement concerning the m atter to me or to the Deputy Chief
         Constable. (The>Chief Constable has delegated his authority under Regulation 15 o f the above Regulations
         to the Deputy Chief Constable)


         Y O U A R E, HOW EVER, W A RN ED T H A T IF YOU M AKE SUCH A S TA T E M E N T TO ME OR TO THE
         D EPUTY C H IE F CONSTABLE, TH E S TA TEM EN T M A Y BE USED IN A N Y SUBSEQUENT D IS C IPLIN ­
         A R Y PROCEEDINGS.


         You have the right to consult a friend at all stages of the investigation and service of this form does not
         necessarily im ply that disciplinary proceedings w ill follow. It is servao to safeoueAi vour interest.




                                                                                                       Investigating Officer


      Acknowledgement: I acknowledge having been served with the original of this Notice
 1                     I * ' * ’ not wish to make w ritten/oral statement to the
                       Investigating Officer/Depu

I1
2 S                           Date.
                                      Vf/A          Signal                                                                N o..


      Service:                I served the original of this   im u u u ;   upun me w iu iiii


                              named a fsJ                                                      on


                              Signature                                                        Jlank

      * Insert the word "report", "allegation'
                                                                                                                                  300290
                                                                                                                                  Form 4A
                                                                                                                       DOCUMENT N >           WP666
                                                                                                                                                       0 .2

                                                                                                                                              (S.O. B id
                                                                                                                                                 (Am andad 4 M
                                                                                                                           C & 0 n»f.
    West Midlands                                       The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 Regulation        7
                                                                                                                          Oat*
    P° l,Ce                                          NOTICE OF REPORT, A LLE G A TIO N OR COM PLAINT

    From-              MR G J DEAR
                                                                                               To:   CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT DAVID DUCKENFIELD
                       CHIEF CONSTABLE


      In accordance with the requirements of Regulation 7 of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1 9 8 5 , 1 hereby inform you of
     a *               COMPLAINT
                                                                                                                       which has been made against you.
     NATURE OF *                  COMPLAINT



                      On Saturday 15 April 1989 at Hillsborough Football ground, Sheffield, a
                      disaster occurred in which 95 people died.

                     Trevor Hicks of
                     u      ,     .                                                     Pinner,f lllU
                                     |_______________________________________________ | 1        Middlesex,
                                                                                                      U iC O C A i
                     has made previous allegations in relation to your duties at the ground.
                     He has now made the following further allegation;
                    That he, Mr Hicks, with regard to his previous complaint against you
                    of making a false statement, in that you were deceitful and intentionally
                    misled senior police officers and the public, (SEE REGULATION 7 NOTICE
                    OF 3 AUGUST 1989 SERVED BY MR COOPER ACC NORTHAMPTONSHIRE) now further
                    alleges that he questions whether Mr Walter Jackson A.C.C. was unaware
                    of the real circumstances relating to the opening of the gate. Mr
                    Hicks can see no reason why you would not have told Mr Jackson the
                    truth and therefore considers there may have been collusion between
                    yourself and Mr Jackson concerning this point.




  You have the right to consult a friend at all stages o f the investigation and service o f this form does not                                  imply
  th at disciplinary proceedings w ill follow. It is served to safeguard your interests.


   You are not as the Regulation explains, obliged to say anything concerning the m atter, but you may if you so desire, make
  a written or oral statement concerning the m atter to me o r to the Assistant Chief Constable. (The Chief Constable has
  delegated his authority under Regulation 15 of the above Regulations to the Assistant Chief Constable).


  Y O U A R E . HO W EVER. W A RN ED T H A T IF YO U M AKE SUCH A STA TEM EN T TO ME OR TO TH E ASSISTANT
  C H IE F CONSTABLE, TH E STA TEM EN T M A Y BE USED IN A N Y SUBSEOUENTJM SCIPLINARY PROCEEDINGS.




                                                                                                            Investigati
  * In se rt the w o rd “ re p o rt'. “ itte g e tio n " o r “ c o m p le in t" a t eppropriete.


                                 I acknowledge having been served w ith the original of this Notice.
ACKNOW LEDGE­
M ENT

(copy to b* tiflnad)           Data
                                         n -L /h                                     Slgnatur

                                                                                                                                        w    .
                                 I served the original of this Notice upon the w itn in nameo y -
SER VIC E
                               Tim a                         D *t»
                                    a                                     Is
                                                                                                             BGCIMEHT Ho ?              WP 666
                                                                                                                                        (S.O.
                                                                                                                                        (Amended 4 M I
                                                                                                                     C & O Ref.

W est M id lan ds                               The Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 Regulation 7
                                                                                                                     Dete
P olice                                      NOTICE OF REPORT, A LLEG A TIO N OR CO M PLAINT


From          MS G J DEAR                                                             To:       CHIEF SUPERINTENDENT DUCKENFIELD
              CHIEF CONSTABLE

 In accordance with the requirements of Regulation 7 of the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1 9 8 5 . 1 hereby inform you of
 a.             COMPLAINT_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _                                   -_ _ _   which has been made against you.

 NATURE OF           *     COMPLAINT_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

              On Saturday 15 April 1989 at Hillsborough Football Ground a disaster
              occurred in which 95 people died.

                                                              Holywell, Clwyd, lost
              Joan McBrien of the
              her son John McBrien in the disaster and shehas made the following
              complaint with regard to your duty at the ground on the 15 April 989>

               (a)       You should not have opened the gates under any circumstances
                         giving unlimited and uncontrolled access into the football
                         ground by supporters.




  You have the right to consult a friend at all stages o f the investigation end service o f this form does not n ecessity imply
  that disciplinary proceedings w ill follow . It is served to safeguard your interests.

  You are not as the Regulation explains, obliged to say anything concerning the m a m r. but you m £ f yot
  a written or ora. statement concerning the matter to me or to the                                                                             ^
  delegated his authority under Regulation 15 of the above Regulations to the Assistant Chwf Constable).




                                                                                                           Investigating

  • Insert the w o rd “ r e p o r t “ a lle g a tion " o r “ c o m p la in t” as appropriate.

                                I acknowledge having been served w ith the original of this Notice.
 ac kn o w ledg e­

 m ent                                                                                                                                  Rank
                                                                                    Signetui
                               Dete
 (copy to be «igmd)

                                 I served the original of this Notice upon the within named                                            "Ksnr
 SERVICE                                                    Data
                               T im e                                                                                                     A C c.
                                                       DOCUMENT No.
 11 1 KP HON K:                                         > 0 1 TH \OKKSHIRK POI.ICK
 M I K K H K I I) (1(74:i 768522                         POI.lt K HKADQlARTKRS
 11 I I \ : 54 'W f.                                       S \l(, Hil l.
 I \ V iH7421 523243                                         SHKFHLI.I) S3 8LV


K li WKI.I.S QPM M \
CHIKK ( OSSTABl K                                                24 July 1990


L Sharp Esq QPM LLB FBIM
Chief Constable
Hillsborough Inquiry Team
c/o West Midlands Police
Nechells Green Police Station
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA




Many thanks for your letter of 17 July 1990 which concerns the routeing
of your report to the DPP.

I quite understand that there are exceptional circumstances which surround
your investigation and that the bulk of the material which accompanies
your report is considerable.    It is also relevant that the matter was
referred to the DPP by Peter Wright in the first instance, and the need
for expediency should require no argument.

Of course, I am directly concerned only with the matters which involve
officers of and below the rank of Chief Superintendent, so I cannot speak
for my Police Authority which is concerned with officers of ACPO rank.

I have no objection to    your submitting your   report to the DPPthrough
the PCA without sending a copy to me.

I understand that in due course I shall receive a statement from the
PCA in respect of your conduct of the investigation and that  I shall
receive all the reports and supporting evidence in good time forme to
consider any disciplinary aspects of the case.

I trust that this letter is sufficient for your purposes         and       that   it
will help to bring the matter to a swift conclusion.




Richard Wells
                                                           DOCUMENT No.


  ]




                                                              17 July 1990



 Mr Richard Wells Esq
 Chief Constable
 South Yorkshire Police
 Police Headquarters
 Snig Hill
 Sheffield S3 8LY




 Following our telephone conversation of recent date I write to you with a
 proposition in connection with the routeing of the papers arising from the
 crime investigation into the Hillsborough disaster.

You will know that my investigation into the criminal and disciplinary aspects
is being supervised by the Police Complaints Authority. At the end of my
investigation, which is not far off, the PCA must make a statement that it is
satisfied with the conduct of the investigation. That statement will be sent
to you, the complainants and to the officers whose conduct has been called into
question. The only exception to that will be the PCA statement in respect of
your Assistant Chief Constable Mr Walter JACKSON. In his case the PCA
statement will go to your Police Authority.

In strict accord with the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, the way for
this to be achieved is for me to submit my original report to the PCA, and at
the same time send a copy to you (or your Police Authority). Once the PCA is
satisfied with my investigation it sends the forementioned statement to that
effect, to you (or to your Police Authority).

You (or your Police Authority) are then required first to consider matters
related to any criminal offences revealed in the report and refer them to the
Director of Public Prosecutions. Thereafter you are required to submit a
report to the PCA setting out your opinions as to the merits of the complaints
against police officers; any disciplinary charges preferred or proposed; the
merits or otherwise of convening a disciplinary tribunal; and any reasons for
not preferring disciplinary charges.

My proposition is that for various reasons; including the referral of the
matter by Peter Wright to the DPP in the first place; the complex circumstances
of the investigation; the bulk of the documentary and other evidence; and the


                                                     Continued.
                                                               DOCUMENT NO.




                                       2.




need for expediency; you allow me to deal direct with the DPP in so far as the
crime aspects are concerned. Of course, you will receive the PCA statement at
the appropriate time and you will receive all of the evidence and reports in
time for your consideration of the disciplinary aspects with the PCA. The
matters relating to your Assistant Chief Constable would not be affected.

I hope that this letter is comprehensible and that you will agree to my
proposal, in which case a short letter of reply would be appreciated.




CHIEF CONSTABLE
CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY
INVESTIGATING OFFICER
                        Part VII
                      Appendix C




  WEST MIDLANDS POLICE




      TRANSCRIPT
           OF
       INTERVIEW

    Chief Superintendent
David Godfrey DUCKENFIELD
                                                                                STATION

NAME:             DAVID GODFREY
                  DUCKENFIELD

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION: POL CS




                                          WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

                                  RECORD OF TAPE RECORDED INTERVIEW



           Person Interviewed                           REGINA -v-

           David Godfrey DUCKENFIELD                    David Godfrey DUCKENFIELD

           Place & Date of Interview                    Signed                 Date

           Fumival House, Sheffield                     (Justice of the Peace)

           Tuesday 3 July 1990 (030790)

           Time

           Commenced    1037       Conducted   1047     Court.

           Tape Reference Number(s)                     EXH Ref.

           LS2    1/1 & 2/1

           Interviewing Officer                         Other Person(s) Present

           Chief Constable Leslie SHARP                 Christopher COUGLIN,

           Det Chief Inspector Kevin TOPE               Solicitor



           DECLARATION: This record consisting of         pages is the exhibit

           referred to in the Statement made and signed by me.

                              SIGNATURE

                              Officer's Name                         Rank      No.

           SIGNATURE of Officer preparing record

           (If different to above)
DUCKENFIELD           DAVID   GODFREY


               Officer's Name                         Rank        No.



Tape    Direct Speech Rank

Times   & No or Inititals                       Record

        of Accused



00.10    CC SHARP               This interview is being audio recorded

                                and is being conducted in an interview

                                roan at Fumival House, Furnival Gate,

                                Sheffield.   I am Leslie SHARP, Chief

                                Constable of the Cumbria Constabulary,

                                the appointed Investigating Officer in

                                this case and I am being assisted by

                                officers of the West Midlands Police.

                                Will the West Midlands Police

                                Officers present now identify them­

                                selves .

         DCI 2514               Detective Chief Inspector Kevin TOPE

                                of the West Midlands Police.

         CC SHARP               There are no other police officers

                                from the West Midlands present.     The

                                time is 10.37 (1037) on the 3rd of

                                July 1990 (030790).   What is your

                                full name please?

         DGD                    David Godfrey DUCKENFIELD.

         CC SHARP               And what is your date of birth?

         DGD                    30th of August 1944 (30081944).

         CC SHARP               And I think Mr COUQiLIN you are the

                                Solicitor.   Would you announce
DUCKENFIELD           DAVID   GODFREY


                               yourself just for the tape please?

         C COUGHLIN            Yes my name is Christopher COUGHLIN,

                               Solicitor with HepwDrth & Chadwick

                               Solicitors or Leeds.

         CC SHARP              Thank you.     New at the conclusion of

                               this interview I will give you a

                               notice explaining what will happen to

                               the tapes.     Do you understand.

                                (No reply)

01.16     CC SHARP              On the 15th of April 1989 (150489) a

                               disaster occurred at Hillsborough

                               Football Stadium and 95 people died.

                               Following a Public Inquiry and report

                               the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire

                               Police consulted with the Director of

                               Public Prosections and as a result

                               West Midlands Police Officers were

                               requested to do a criminal investiga­

                               tion.    This investigation came at the

                               same time that certain members of the

                               public decided to make specific

                               allegations against named police

                               officers.     You are ore of those

                               officers Mr D U C K E N F I E L D and you've

01.50                          already been served with Regulation 7

                               Notices detailing those specific

                               complaints.     The nature of those

                               complaints and the particular duty you

                               were performing at Hillsborough on the
                                                                              ro
DUCKENFIELD         DAVID   GODFREY                                        4


                              15th of April 1989 (150489) suggest

                             that you may have contributed to the

                             deaths of sane of those that died.

                             Also that you may have failed to

                             perform your lawful duty as a police

                             officer on the 15th of April 1989

                              (150489) at Hillsborough.    New I will

                             explain the specific allegations to

                             you in interview, but they raise

                             matters of both a criminal and

                             disciplinary nature so before you

                             answer I need to formally caution you.

02.27                        You do not need to say anything unless

                             you wish to do so but what you say may

                             be given, given in evidence.        Do you

                             understand the caution?

         DGD                 I do,

         CC SHARP            Thank you.    I will remind you that you

                             are not under arrest and that youneed

                             not remain here.     In addition, you are

                             entitled to legal representation and

                             I'm aware that your solicitor is

                             present.     You gave in evidence

                             initially at the Inquiry held by Lord

                             Justice TAYLOR - I have here a

                             transcript of your evidence which it

                             may be necesary to refer to.        Are you

                             content that the transcript which I

                             have a copy is a transcript of the,
DUCKENFIEUD           DAVID   GODFREY


                               the evidence?     Have you got the

                               transcript please?

03.16    C COUGHLIN             I think for the avoidance of doubt,

                               Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and

                               certainly myself, giving him advice,

                               would not wish to become involved and

                               sit here beneath such a transcript at

                               this time.

         CC SHARP              Thank you.   You also submitted a

                               written statement or recollection

                               concerning the duties in relation to

                               the Semi-Final match on the 15th of

                               April (150489).    I have here that

                               document which it may be necessary to

                               refer to.

03.41    C COUGHLIN            Well again I I, we would reserve our

                               position and we don't wish to consider

                               any documents at this time.

         CC SHARP              Thank you.   I have cautioned you.    It

                               is my wish to ask you certain

                               questions which arise fran that

                               transcript of evidence, from the other

                               evidence which has been massed during

                               this inquiry and from your statement

                               of recollection.    Are you willing to

                               answer any of my questions?

04.09    C COUGHLIN            Well on the advice of both myself as

                               his solicitor and, and other legal

                               advisers, Chief Superintendent
DUCKENFIELD           DAVID   GODFREY


                                DUCKENFIELD will not be answering the

                               questions today.

         CC SHARP               In that case fran what you've just

                               said, there doesn't seem to be any

                               point in me putting any further

                               questions to you.

         C COUGHLIN            I think that's correct.

04.32    CC SHARP              New is there a notice about the tapes?

                               This is the notice which I told you

                               about at the start of this interview.

                               A file of evidence is with the

                               Director of Public Prosecutions and a

                               copy of this interview will be

                               forwarded to his office.   The Director

                               of Public Prosecutions will consider

                               if the evidence justifies any criminal

                               proceedings against you for the

                               offences I outlined at the start, that

                               is for Manslaughter or for Culpable

                               Malfeasance, which is for failing to

                               do your duty.   Do you understand?

         DGD                   Yes.

         CC SHARP              I'm now switching off the recorder and

                               this interview is terminated at 10.4]

                               (1041) and 30 seconds on the 3rd of

05.17                          July 1990 (030790).
                          Part VII
                        Appendix C




  WEST MIDLAND POLICE




      TRANSCRIPT
           OF
       INTERVIEW

    Chief Superintendent
David Godfrey DUCKENFIELD

       ( Discipline)
DUCKENFIELD           DAVID   GODFREY




00.12    CC SHARP              This interview is being audio recorded

                                and is being conducted in an interview

                               roan at Fumival House, Fumival Gate,

                               Sheffield.    I am Leslie SHARP, the

                               Chief Constable of the Cumbria

                               Constabulary, the appointed Investig­

                               ating Officer and I am being assisted

                               by officers of the West Midlands

                               Police.    Will the West Midlands Police

                               Officers present now announce them­

                               selves .

         DCI 2514              Detective Chief Inspector Kevin TOPE,

                               West Midlands Police.

         CC SHARP              There are no other West Midlands

00.41                          Police Officers present.     The time is

                               10.44 (1044) and 45 seconds.     The date

                               is the 3rd of July 1990 (030790).

                               What is your full name please?

         DGD                   David Godfrey DUCKENFIELD.

         CC SHARP              And what is your date of birth?

         EXD                   The 30th of August 1944 (30081944).

         CC SHARP              And for the tape Mr COUGHLIN would you

                               just announce yourself again.

         C COUGHLIN            Yes it's Christopher COUGHLIN,

                               Solicitor with Hepworth & Chadwick

                               Solicitors of Leeds.

01.00    CC SHARP              Now these tapes are dealt with in

                               exactly the same way as the notice
    DUCKENFIELD          DAVID   GODFREY                                        8


                                   I've previously given to you refers

                                   to.     On the 15th of April 1989 (150489)

                                   a disaster occurred at Hillsborough

                                   Football Stadium and 95 people died.

                                   Following a Public Inquiry and report

                                   the Chief Constable of South

                                  Yorkshire Police consulted with the

                                   Director of Public Prosections and as

                                   a result West Midlands Police were

                                   requested to do a criminal investiga­

                                   tion.     This investigation came at the

                                   same time that certain members of the

                                  public decided to make specific

                                   allegations against named police

                                   officers.     You are one of those

                                   officers Mr DUCKENFIELD.     And I now

                                   intend to deal with the discipline

                                   aspects of this inquiry and I know

                                   that Mr COUGHLIN your solicitor is

#                                  present.     You will recall that you

    01.45                         were served with Regulation 7 Notices

                                   under the Police Discipline Regula­

                                   tions 1985 (000085).     These are the

                                   notices.     Would you just cast your

                                   eyes over them and let me know if you

                                   recall them.

    01.58                          (Pause). (Background talk)

    02.50     CC SHARP             Do you wish me to read out those

                                   notices in full.     I notice that you
DUCKENFIELD           DAVID   GODFREY


                               have sane copies there and before you

                                say anything can I just draw your

                               attention to the formal caution which

                                is at the bottcm of the form, which

                               says you're not obliged to say

                               anything unless you wish to do so but

                               anything you say may be used in any

                               disciplinary proceedings.

         DGD                   I understand that.

         CC SHARP              You understand that.     New it is my

                               intention to ask you sane questions

                               about those forms.     Have you any

                               objection to answering any questions

                               on the form?

03.21    C COUGHLIN            Well I think the position on the

                               discipline aspects of the case were

                               made clear in our letter to you Mr

                               SHARP of the 25th of June 1990

                               (250690), which essentially is that

                               David has been advised by myself and

                               his legal advisers that whilst there's

                               any possibility of prosecution for any

                               criminal matters then he would wish to

                               reserve his position in relation to

                               the discipline notices.    However, once

                               the discipline, the criminal aspects

                               have been dealt with then Chief Sup...

                               Superintendent DUCKENFIELD would wish

                               to, to assist as far as he can with
DUCKENFIELD         DAVID   GODFREY


                             regard to the discipline natters.

04.05    CC SHARP             In that case if you don't intend to

                             answer any of my questions I don't

                              intend to put any further questions to

                             you.     The facts will be reported to

                             your Chief Constable and it will be

                              for your Force, in consult         in

                             consultation with the Police

                             Complaints Authority to determine if

                             you should face any discipline

                             offences.     Do you understand?

                              (No reply)

         CC SHARP            I'm now terminating the interview at

                             10.47 (1047) and 30 seconds.       Please

04.34                        switch off the recorder.
     WEST MIDLANDS POLICE




      Superintendent
   Bernard Dean MURRAY




COMPLAINTS and DISCIPLINE
          FILE
                                                                                                                                        WP 665
                                                                                                                                        (S.O. B16)
                                                                                                                                        ( 1. 8 6 )

                                                                                                            R ef. No.

West Midlands                          COMPLAINT AGAINST POLICE .                                                           1 /89
                                                                                                             D a te
Police                                         Enquiry Summary                                                              30 J u l y 1990
                                                                                                             • F O R M A L IN V E S T IG A T IO N
N AM E & ADDRESS             Mr T r e v o r HTCKS
         OF
                                                                                                                IN F O R M A L IN V E S T IG A T IO N
C O M P LA IN A N T(S )
                             Kei t h l e y
                             Managing Director

                             (a)    Failed to prevent a dangerous build up of supporters outside of
n a tu r e of                       the gates.
C O M P L A IN T             (b)    Failed to control the movement of supporters subsequent to the
                                    opening of Gate C and
                             (c)    Failed to respond to the developing tragedy and were slow to
                                    effect a rescue operation.




B R IE F D E T A IL S
                             On 15 April 1989, a disaster occurred at the F/A Cup Semi-Final
                             between Liverpool and Nottingham Forrest held at Hillsborough
OF E VE N TS
                             Football Stadium, Sheffield which resulted in death and injuries
L E A D IN G TO
                             to a large number of the Liverpool supporters. The Complaints
C O M P L A IN T
                             set out in this file emanate from events preceding, during and
                             immediately f ollowing that disaster.




O F F IC E R S
SUBJECT TO                   Superintendent Bernard MURRAY
C O M P L A IN T             South Yorkshire Police
(Rank, Number
 and Name)

                                                                                                                         Rhone
                          Mam. CHIEF CON ST A BL E MR L SHARP                        swtion   p o l ICE    HQ                     021 359 1742
 IN V E S T IG A T IN G                                                                       CUMBRIA
 O F F IC E R     _____
                             These complaints have been supervised by Captain E N Taylor of the
 B R IE F D E T A IL S       Police Complaints Authority. Following extensive enquiries
 OF                          Superintendent M U R RA Y was interviewed and denied the allegations.
 IN V E S T IG A T IO N
                             Files in respect of the criminal culpability of Superintendent
                             MURRAY (and o ther officers) in respect of these complaints are
                             currently with the D irector of Public Prosecutions and the Police
                             Complaints Authority.




                                                                                                     Y E S /P * & *
                                                    Section 8 9 (1) PACE Act 19S4
   IN V E S T IG A T IO N SUPERVi                                                                    X g f/N O *
                                                    S ection 8 9 (2! PACE Act 1984
   P O LIC E C O M P LA IN TS AUT
                 FOREWORD



 This report is submitted in the normal and accepted

 complaint format.        However, some explanation is

 required to assist the reader in identifying where to

 find certain statements and documents.



 In the margin of the report it will be seen that

 Document numbers. Statement pages. Appendices and on

 occasions Lord Justice Taylor’s interim and final

 report are referred to as well as to extracts from the

transcripts of his Public Inquiry.



Where a document number or statement is prefixed with a

part number this can be found within the seven volumes

(parts) of evidence submitted to the Director of Public

Prosecutions.



eg:         PART IV            or          PART IV

            Document No 6                  Statement

            Pages 44-52                    Pages 2331-2356



If a document number or statement is not prefixed with

a part number that particular item can be found within

this file.



Where reference is made to a video then each VHS tape

has been given a separate, Part III, document number.

Not only that but within the same Part III is a written

description/schedule of what the video contains.         For

exam ple;
                    Part III (Documents)

                    Document No 115

                    (Video)

                    Pages 757



 identifies the VHS tape number as 115 and the schedule

page in the documents where the description can be

found.



A similar system is used to identify photographs which

also feature in Part III.     For example;



                   Part III (Documents)

                   Document No 150

                   Photo No 14



This easily identifies that this photograph can be

found in the Album marked Document Number 150 and

within each album the photographs are numbered

consecutively.



A reference to one of Lord Justice Taylor’s reports

will be shown as follows;



                   LJT (interim) or (final)

                   Page

                   Paragraph
A reference to a transcript from the Public Inquiry

will be shown as follows;



                   e.g.

                   Transcript 26 .5.89

                   Day 9

                   Pages 74-75




L SHARP QPM, LLB

CHIEF CONSTABLE

CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY
SHARP6 MURRAY     CIRCOMSTANCES SURROUNDING COMPLAINTS



                  R1    On 15 April 1989 a Football Association Cup Semi

                  Final match was played between Liverpool and Nottingham

                  Forest Football Clubs at the neutral Sheffield

                  Wednesday ground at Hillsborough.   It is well

                  documented that shortly after ’kick-off* the match was

                  abandoned due to crushing in pens 3 and A of the

                  Leppings Lane/West Stand terraces, which resulted in

                  the death of 95 Liverpool Supporters and injuries to

                  many others.



                  R2    As a result of the tragedy Mr G J DEAR, QPM,

                  Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police was

                  appointed to investigate the disaster and to collate

                  evidence for H M Coroner and for a Judicial Inquiry

                  which was carried out by Lord Justice TAYLOR.     On 27

                  September 1989 following submission of the TAYLOR

                  Interim Report into the disaster to the Director of

                  Public Prosecutions Mr DEAR agreed to accept additional

                  responsibility for the criminal and disciplinary

                  aspects of the investigation.   On 1 April 1990, with

                  the retirement of Mr DEAR, these responsibilities were

                  transferred to Mr L SHARP, QPM, Chief Constable of

                  Cumbria.



Part IV           R3    Trevor HICKS was the father of Sara Louise HICKS

Statement Pages   (19 years - deceased) and Victoria Jane HICKS (15 years

2331-2356         - deceased) and attended the match with his wife

                  Jennifer HICKS and the two daughters.   Whilst he went
             and stood on the West Terraces forming pens 1 and 2 and

             his wife went to a seat in the North Stand, both girls

             went into pen 3.      Hr HICKS makes a number of

             complaints which relate to the lack of planning,

             control and management of Liverpool supporters both

             prior to and during the match as well as the police

             response to the tragedy.     These complaints are against

             Superintendent Bernard HURRAY and other officers.



             DETAILS OF COMPLAINTS



             R4    Dealing with the complaints by Hr HICKS involving

             Superintendent HURRAY, on 7 June 1989 Hr HICKS sent a

Document 1   letter to the Home Secretary Douglas HURD complaining

Pages 1-:2   about another senior officer in the South Yorkshire

             Police.     The complaint was initially allocated to Hr

             Kenneth Philip Douglas COOPER, Assistant Chief

             Constable Northamptonshire Constabulary for

Document 2   investigation bv letter dated 25 July 1989, with the

Page 3       Police Complaints Authority being formally requested to

Document 3   supervise the investigation in a further letter the

Page 4       same day.



Document 4   R5    In a letter dated 4 August 1989 Hr SKITT, Deputy

Page 5       Chief Constable, Northamptonshire Constabulary agreed

             to the appointment of Hr COOPER as the Senior

             Investigating Officer on behalf of his Chief

             Constable.     This appointment was ratified in a further
Document 5   letter dated 4 August from Captain TAYLOR of the Police

Page 6       Complaints Authority in which he confirms his

             supervision on behalf of the Authority to Mr HICKS.



             R6    Following his appointment, Mr COOPER saw Mr HICKS

             on 24 August 1989 and he made a formal statement of

             complaint outlining a series of complaints against a

             number of other officers including Superintendent

             MURRAY.



             R7    Subsequent to this interview Mr COOPER received a

Document 6   letter dated 5 September 1989 from Captain TAYLOR

Page 7       informing him that, the enquiry would be dealt with by

             another force.   On 27 September following protracted

             negotiations, responsibility for all criminal and

             disciplinary aspects of the investigation into the

             Hillsborough disaster, were passed to Mr DEAR for

             enquiries by West Midlands Police.



             R8    These complaints raise allegations of both

             criminal and disciplinary offences.   The file on the

             criminal aspect of the investigation is already with

             the Director of Public Prosecutions and the Police

             Complaints authority.   This report deals solely with

             the disciplinary aspects.
DETAILS OF THE INVESTIGATION



R9     The complaints against Superintendent MURRAY

are made solely by Mr HICKS who levels the same

complaints against Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD,

Superintendent MARSHALL and Superintendent

GREENWOOD.   They are:-




1.     NEGLECT OF DUTY



        Failed to prevent a dangerous build up of

        supporters outside of the gates.



       Without good and sufficient cause he

       neglected or omitted to attend to or carry

        out with due promptitude and diligence

       anything which it was his duty as a member of

       a police force to attend to or carry out,

       viz, he failed to control the build up of

        supporters outside Leppings Lane gates on 15

       April 1989.



       Contrary to Police (Discipline) Regulations

       1985 Schedule 1. Regulation 4 (i). Paragraph
                  RIO    Mr HICKS can have no personal eyewitness

                  knowledge of what occurred outside Leppings Lane

                  turnstiles other than at about 2 pm when he entered

                  the ground and the scene was calm.   Thus the evidence

                  to consider centres on many of the statements from

                  supporters who actually found themselves in the build

                  up and eventually the crush outside the turnstiles.



                  Rll     Also of particular relevance here is the

                  position of Superintendent MURRAY in the command

                  structure at Hillsborough on the day.     Effectively he

Part VII          was in command of the Police Control room within the

Appendix C        Hillsborough Stadium.   In interview he explains his

Pages 965-970     understanding of this role.



Part V            R12    Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD the match

Statement Pages   day Commander elected to police the event from the

2457-2469         same Control Room in the ground but according to Mr

Statement Pages   MURRAY there was no confusion in roles.    However, the

2470-2488         adoption of this style of command must, to an extent,

                  reduce the overall responsibility held by Mr MURRAY

                  because decisions are always likely to be made with

                  the consent of the present Chief Superintendent.

                  That consent may be verbal by direct or by tacit

                  agreement if he makes no comment to a decision made

                  by Mr MURRAY or any other control room officer.
R13    Although by the very nature of his    rank

Superintendent MURRAY would accept the responsibility

upon him, the very presence of Chief Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD in the control room must, to an extent,

diminish any responsibility for the events that took

place on 15 April 1989.    Having said that there is a

duty on every police officer to act promptly if the

situation requires it and the presence of a more

senior officer should not hinder or excuse that

requirement.



R14    In consideration of this complaint    some

account will be taken therefore of the role played by

Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and the file in

respect of that officer should be considered

alongside this one.



R15    By 1400 hours it was evident to

Superintendent MURRAY and Chief Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD that far fewer Liverpool supporters had

entered the stadium than Nottingham Forest

supporters.    The Kop and South Stand were filling up

steadily but the North Stand and the West Terraces in

particular were relatively empty.
                         R16       On those West Terraces where Liverpool

                         supporters were gathering in pens 3 and 4, the

                         central pens were filling up but the outer pens were

                         quite empty by comparison.



                         R17       After 1400 hours the build up of Liverpool

                         supporters in Leppings Lane increased to the extent

Part V                   that at about 1417 hours Superintendent MARSHALL

Statement Pages          radioed the police control inside the ground for the

2527-2547                motorised traffic to be stopped.    The request was

                         granted, although not actually implemented, until

Part V                   about 1430 hours.    The time 1417 is identified from

Document 207             a written log kept by Superintendent MURRAY but the

Pages 1445-1447          time has, in fairness, been questioned by

                         Superintendent MARSHALL.



Part III                 R18       By 1430 hours the video of the turnstiles

Document No 109          area shows how heavily congested the place had

Schedule Pages 740 741   become.    This is in contrast to the same view when

Part III                 the video for 1988 is viewed.

Document 146

Schedule Pages 809 812

                         R19       In 1988 there had been three special trains

                         from Liverpool to Sheffield and the passengers on

                         those trains had been met by police and either bused

                         to the stadium or escorted in crocodile fashion along

                         Leppings Lane to the turnstiles.
                  R20     In 1989 there was only one special train from

                  Liverpool, it arrived by 1400 hours and the 350 or so

Part V            Liverpool supporters who had travelled on it were met

Statement Pages   by police, escorted in crocodile fashion down

2633-2647         Leppings Lane and gained access to the ground easily

2648-2654         and safely by 1420 hours.     The escorting officers

                  were then deployed on other duties in accordance with

                  the Operation Order.     The increasing crowd which

                  followed them came along Leppings Lane unescorted and

                  although police officers mounted and on foot were

                  deployed to keep them on the pavements, the numbers

                  were such that the crowd overspilled onto the roadway

                  hence Superintendent MARSHALL’S request to close the

                  road to traffic.



                  R21    There is an argument which runs to the effect

                  that traffic flow is one way of keeping crowds

                  confined to a pavement or similar controllable safe

                  space, but in the circumstances prevailing at the

                  time I have no doubt that the request and the

                  decision were correct.



                  R22    But in 1989 the iron perimeter gates outside

                  the Leppings Lane turnstiles were not closed early as

                  they had been in 1988.    Consequently, the previous

                  year’s filtering effect of those gates was not
                      possible in 1989 and the crowd became swiftly a

                      single seething mass of people filling the whole area

                      between the iron perimeter gates and the turnstiles

                      including the area of the South Road near to the

                      outside of Gate C.   This effect can be seen clearly

Part III              from a comparison of the relevant 1988 and 1989 CCTV

Document 143A        videos from camera 1.    This may go some way to

Schedule Page 803a   explain the various arguments which emerged during

                     the Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry, about filtering the

                     crowd in Leppings Lane with barriers or otherwise.

                     The fact is that when the iron gates were eventually

                     closed just before the opening of Gate C at 1452

Part IV              hours, they were broken open by the Liverpool

Statement Pages      supporters in Leppings Lane but it must be remembered

1678-1679            that the forcing of the iron perimeter gates did not

1680-1686            occur until Gate C was opened.   The fans still in

1687-1697            Leppings Lane saw the gate open and made a "bee-line"

Part V               for it knowing that the kick off was imminent and

Document 190         there had been no indication that the start of the

Pages 987-990        game would be delayed.



                     R23     It may be pertinent that for Sheffield

                     Wednesday Football Club league matches, which of

                     course occur almost fortnightly throughout the

                     football season, spectators with tickets for the West

                     Stand, the West Terraces and the South Stand, all use
                  the Leppings Lane entrance.    Those for the South

                  Stand enter the ground through turnstiles 19-22 and

                  23-28 and reach them along the private road at the

                  rear of the South Stand (called South Road).    To

                  achieve this, the iron perimeter gates outside and

                  across the mouth of the Leppings Lane turnstiles, are

                  kept open.   No such considerations are necessary for

                  a FA Cup semi-final.



                  R24 '   Up to the time that Leppings Lane was closed

                  to traffic, although there was a large mass of people

                  outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles, and there were

                  large numbers   of Liverpool fans still approaching the

                  turnstiles along Leppings Lane, there was nothing

                  either inside   or outside of the ground which was

                  recognised by   the Police Control Box staff as a cause

                  for alarm.   It was about this time that

Part V            Superintendent MURRAY advised Chief Superintendent

Statement Pages   DUCKENFIELD that everyone would get into the stadium

2470-2488         by kick-off time, and he rehearsed his policy for

2457-2469         delaying the kick-off.   This specific aspect is

                  considered elsewhere in this report.



                  R25     Between 1430 hours and 1444 hours the crowd

                  in pens 3 and 4 continued to increase to the
                  detriment of pens 1 and 2; and 6 and 7.     The crowd

Part IV           outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles continued to
Statement Pages
1731-1741         grow and spread both along Leppings Lane and over the
1742-1750
1751-1757         River Don bridge faster than the trickle of fans
1758-1763
1805-1808         coming through the turnstiles could disperse it.        The
1809-1816
1817-1820         police officers deployed on foot and on horses were

                  no longer able to carry out their appointed duties
Part V
Statement Pages   because of the crush of the crowd.   The foot officers
2821-2829
2890-2895         at ohe stage were forced to retreat through the
2912-2916
                  turnstiles and then emerge again through Gate C.




                  R26       The mood of the crowd rapidly changed and

                  any attempt to control them was resented.    Officers

                  and horses were attacked and there is some evidence

                  that a significant proportion of the crowd, mostly

Part V            young men, who had been drinking, tried to push their

                  wav forward through the crowd.   There were some signs

2843-2848         of panic, mainly at the turnstiles themselves, as

2849-2857         people were pressed against the turnstile walls.      In

                  the crowd young people and women were fainting and

Part V            some fans climbed over the turnstile building and the
Statement Pages
2527-2547         dividing fence.   Only some of this could be seen on
2947-2955
2964-2970         the CCTV monitor in the Police Control Box, but
3043-3048
3184-3190         Superintendent MARSHALL on the spot had gained a
3368-3371
Part II           vantage point on the parapet of the River Don
Statement Pages
1123-1128         bridge.   He radioed to the Police Control Box at 1444

                  hours for reinforcements, for a Tannoy message to be

                  broadcast to urge the crowd to stop pushing, and for
                  this to be reinforced by a police vehicle equipped

                  with a public address system.     Because of police

                  radio failure at about that time only the requests

Part V            for the tannoy and the reinforcements were received

Statement Pages   and acceded to, but Police Constable BUXTON in a

2830-2835         police landrover equipped with a public address

                  system, arrived at the scene by 1446 hours and

                  started to broadcast to the crowd to stop pushing

                  forward towards the turnstiles.     By this time the

                  crowd outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles had grown

                  to some 5,000 strong.     Police Constable

Part V            BUXTON radioed from his police vehicle requesting

Statement Pages   that the kick-off be delayed.     From the Police

3368-3371         Control Box the request was refused.



Part V            R27        The mounted police officers, now reinforced,

Statement Pages   formed a cordon across the mouth of the Leppings Lane

2836-2842         turnstile area, and the iron perimeter gates were

2843-2848         shut.   This reduced the pressure within the iron

2849-2857         perimeter gates which gave a few minutes respite

2858-2863         during which the area outside the turnstiles could be

2864-2867         cleared.    However, times was of the essence and

2868-2873         clearly because of non-ticket holders; tickets with

2874-2878         confusing directions printed thereon; supporters

                  getting stuck in the turnstiles; the turnstiles were

                  not functioning quickly enough to achieve this, so at
Part V            1447 hours Superintendent MARSHALL asked the Police

Statement Pages   Control Box for permission to open the exit gates, an

2527-2547         extraordinary action but one well justified given the

                  circumstances prevailing at that time.



Part V            R28     At 1448 hours while Chief Superintendent

Statement Pages   DUCKENFIELD was considering the request, Gate C was

2457-2469         opened so that police could eject a youth who had

                  climbed into the ground without a ticket.     As the

                  gate' opened some of the fans outside took advantage

                  and about 150 of them forced their way through it

                  into the ground.   The gate was quickly closed with

                  the assistance of a mounted officer who blocked off

Part III          the entrance.   This 'illegal' entry was seen on the

Document 110      CCTV monitors in the Police Control Box where

Schedule Pages    Superintendent MURRAY was in position.

742-747           Superintendent MARSHALL made a second and then a

                  third request for the gates to be opened.     At this

                  point Superintendent MURRAY addressed Chief

                  Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, saying words to the

                  effect, "Are we going to open those gates".



                  R29     This perhaps is a good example of

                  Superintendent MURRAY, although the junior officer,

                  making his mark in a situation and a time he felt it
                  R30       There is little doubt the Police Control Box

                  inside the ground became extremely busy, a fact shown

                  in the abandoning of the written log by

                  Superintendent HURRAY at about 1421 hours.



                  R31       Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD’s approval

                  was for the "gates" to be opened so he was surprised

Part V            very shortly afterwards when Police Sergeant HIGGINS

Statement Pages   radioed for Gate A to be opened.   Approval was given

3043-3048         and Gate A was opened despite protests from the

                  stewards employed at that location.   Gate B was also

                  opened for a short while.



                  R32        Gate C was opened for about five minutes and

                  during that time about 2,000 fans passed through it

                  at no more than a fast walk but the sight of this

                  gateway to the match was too much for the Liverpool

Part IV           fans outside the iron perimeter gates.    They pushed

Statement Pages   towards Gate C . broke through the iron perimeter

1821-1831         gates and joined onto the rear of the fans going

1832-1841         Gate C.    From the video pictures available from

1842-1847         the CCTV camera 1, there was a third group of

Part III          fans who went through Gate C on that occasion - these

Document 110      fans who had been standing about for a considerable

Schedule Pages    time without attempting to enter the ground through

742-747           the turnstiles.
Part V            R33        Of those who entered through Gate C, either

Statement Pages   at 1448 hours, or at 1452 hours, there can be little

3006-3012         doubt that some had tickets for the North and West

3013-3019         Stands, some had tickets for the West Terrace, some

                  had no tickets at all.



                  R34        Some made their way to the wing pens 1 and 2,

Part III          some went through the opening in the dividing wall

Document 110      making their way to the West Stand or to the pens

Schedule Pages    6 and 7.     But from the CCTV pictures from camera 1.

742-747           that the majority of them went straight and unchecked

                  to the tunnel leading to pens 3 and 4.



                  R35        It must be remembered that the Police Control

                  Box had limited views of the Leppings Lane problem.

                  Superintendent MURRAY was reliant to some extent on

                  Superintendent MARSHALL, the man on the ground, to

                  give precise updates.    The CCTV is simply an aide

                  that cannot give the full picture.



                  R36     Further the fact is there are three other

                  sides to the stadium being policed and even if a

                  problem is building up at one end the normal policing

                  problems at the other ends have still to be dealt

                  with and those responsibilities rested to a great
Part VII          extent on the shoulder of Superintendent MURRAY. In

Appendix C        interview this area is explored and he gives

Pages 1014-1017   explanation and reasons for his actions.



                  R37     This particular allegation made by Mr HICKS

                  forms part of the evidence submitted to the Director

                  of Public Prosecutions who is considering criminal

                  offences against Superintendent MURRAY of

                  Manslaughter and Culpable Malfeasance.



                  R38    The evidence required to consider

                  Manslaughter requires a high degree of gross

                  negligence or recklessness and there is no comparable

                  discipline offence to consider.



                  R39    However, the offence of Culpable Malfeasance

                  is an alternative offence to Manslaughter, and

                  although it is based upon the same evidence, it

                  requires a lesser degree of negligence or

                  recklessness and embraces neglect of a duty.



                  R40    Should the Director of Public Prosecutions

                  decide there is insufficient evidence to prove

                  offences of Manslaughter or Culpable Malfeasance, no

                  further action can be taken in respect of this

                  disciplinary offence of Neglect of Duty.
                  R41     The next complaint made by Mr HICKS is as

                  follows:-



                  2.     NEGLECT OF DUTY



                          Failed to control the movement of supporters

                          subsequent to the opening of Gate C.



                          Without good and sufficient cause he

                          neglected or omitted to attend to or carry

                          out with due promptitude and diligence

                          anything which it was his duty as a member of

                          a police force to attend to or carry out,

                          viz, he failed to control the movement of

                          supporters subsequent to the opening of Gate

                          C at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.



                          Contrary to Police (Discipline) Regulations

                          1985 Schedule 1. Regulation 4 (i). Paragraph

                          4 a.



Part IV           R42    Mr HICKS explains that although he was not a

Statement Pages   witness to the influx of supporters into the stadium,

2331-2356         once Gate C had been opened and once through the

                  turnstiles the only sign visible was above the tunnel

                  which led to pens 3 and 4.   The natural inclination
                  of the crowd would be to make for the tunnel and

                  should have been controlled.



Part V            R43     The decision to open Gate C was made by

Statement Pages   Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and passed to

2457-2469         Superintendent MARSHALL by Superintendent MURRAY

2527-2547         over the police personal radio which was on

2470-2488         "talk-through".   That means all officers in

                  possession of a personal radio, on duty at

                  Hillsborough that day should have heard the message.

                  Of course, the din within the stadium, preoccupation

                  with other matters, and fallibility of personal

                  radios, would all create difficulties in this

                  respect.



                  R44     However, the decision to open the gates was

                  not followed by any direct or indirect orders to deal

                  with the 2,000 or so fans who, for a period of five

Part IV           minutes, entered the ground in this way.   On

Statement Pages   entering the ground there were no stewards or police

1863-1869         officers checking or directing them so the majority

1870-1878         of them made for the tunnel leading to pens 3 and 4.

1879-1883         either following those in front, or making for the

1884-1889         only sign clearly visible to them, above the tunnel.

1890-1897         Once inside the ill-fated pens the crowd pressure was

Part II           such that lateral movement through the gates in the

Statement Pages   radial fences into other less crowded pens was not

941-949           possible.
Part VII           R45       In interview Superintendent MURRAY said that

Appendix C         even the earlier opening of Gate C when several

Page 1030-1035     hundred supporters got in did not alert him to

                   consider how to cope with a deliberate opening of the

                   gate.



                   R46     Additionally nothing that was happening made

                   him consider providing more police officers or

                   stewards to receive the supporters albeit the time

Part VII           span may not have made this a feasible option in any

Appendix C         event. Superintendent MURRAY says that there was

Pages 1030-1035   nothing that was said to him or gave an indication to

                   him to direct the supporters in one direction.     Not

                   only that but in terms of a reception to meet the

                   influx of supporters which has just been referred, to

                   the confusion of the situation is evident more so

Part VII          when it is seen that the action to open the gates

Appendix C        was directed not to specific police officers but in

Pages 1043 1044   general.



                  R47      This was a life and death situation in the

Part VII          mind of Superintendent MURRAY and according to his

Appendix C        explanation he thought they would be absorbed into

Page 1049         the "concourse" area, "the stands" and all over the
                         R48     Superintendent MURRAY did not give thought

Part III                 to the capacity on the terraces except confirming

Document 128             that there was space and that space is evident in

Schedule Pages 774-775   the video available, as well as on some

Document 162             photographs.

Photo 28-29

                         R49     Although he has not answered questions to

                         this investigation, Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

                         told the Public Inquiry that he did not give

                         consideration to blocking the tunnel to pens 3 and 4.



                         R50     Superintendent MURRAY has said he had no

                         knowledge that this action was taken in 1988.

Part II                  Although some supporters have said this happened

Statement Pages          and one retired police officer confirms it. the

1128 - A-B               issue is in doubt and in any event was not featured

                         at any de-briefings after the 1988 match.



                         R51     It should also be remembered that the policy

                         of South Yorkshire Police was that crowd monitoring

                         and packing were the responsibility of Sheffield

                         Wednesday Football Club and it seems that may be one

                         reason why Superintendent MURRAY did not consider the

                         possibility of overcrowding or crowd distribution at

                         the crucial time.   Another was the South Yorkshire

                         Police general view that the crowd could be left to

                         "find its own level".
             R52       The crux of this complaint is the failure to

             control the movement of supporters who came through

             Gate C.    That control should also include the

             thoughts of the senior officers in the control room

             as to when to close that gate, and the others for

             that matter.



             R53 •     The question is whether on releasing the

             crush of people outside the turnstiles thought should

             have been given to closing the gates earlier than

             they were closed.    This is even more important when

             considering the incident of the iron perimeter gate

             nearest the River Don bursting open.    The fact is

             that more supporters actually went in through Gate C

             than perhaps was intended by Chief Superintendent

Part VII     DUCKENFIELD.    Because he has not answered questions

Appendix C   we do not know his view.    However, Superintendent

Page 1059    HURRAY did say that he did not at the time realise

             the iron perimeter gates were closed and could not

             recall discussing it.



             R54       In any event Superintendent HURRAY gave no

             thought to closing Gate C and presumably neither did

             Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD so the result was

             that the flow of supporters through that gate lasted

             several minutes.
R55     There could be criticism of this failure but

that would have to have gone hand in hand with

recognition of the overcrowding that later happened.

The fact was Superintendent MURRAY and Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD dealt with a situation,

saved life, and no doubt felt relief that they had

succeeded.   Hindsight dictates the thought that they

could have regained control, closed the gates, formed

queues, used the turnstiles again and resorted to

normal entry, but at the time they saw no

reason to do that at such a very late stage with

kick-off approaching.



R56    Clearly the opening of Gate C, and other

gates, was the right decision given the circumstances

prevailing at the time.   It was intended to relieve

the crowd pressure outside the Leppings Lane

turnstiles so as to prevent injury or even death

there. The opening of Gate C achieved that.



R57    Clearly, no orders or directions were given

for police, or stewards, to control the influx of

supporters through Gate C, and to that extent Mr

HICK’s complaint is correct.
                  R58     It is evident, therefore, that Superintendent

                  MURRAY did fail to control the movement of supporters

                  once Gate C had been opened but the direct

                  responsibility for this action rested with Chief

                  Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and within his file this

                  issue is further considered.



Part VII

Appendix C        R59     The interview with Superintendent MURRAY

Pages 1028-1045   explores further his view on this complaint.



                  R60    The evidence required to consider

                  Manslaughter requires a high degree of gross

                  negligence or recklessness and there is no comparable

                  discipline offence to consider.



                  R61    However, the offence of Culpable Malfeasance

                  is an alternative offence to Manslaughter, and

                  although it is based upon the same evidence, it

                  requires a lesser degree of negligence or

                  recklessness and embraces neglect of a duty.



                  R62    Should the Director of Public Prosecutions

                  decide there is insufficient evidence to prove

                  offences of Manslaughter or Culpable Malfeasance, no

                  further action can be taken in respect of this

                  disciplinary offence of Neglect of Duty.
 R63    The final complaint by Mr HICKS against

 Superintendent MURRAY is:-



 3.     NEGLECT OF DUTY



        He failed to respond to the developing

        tragedy and was slow to effect a rescue

        operation.



        Without good and sufficient cause he

        neglected or omitted to attend to or carry

        out with due promptitude and diligence

        anything which it was his duty as a member of

        a police force to attend to or carry out,

        viz, he failed to respond to the crushing by

        overcrowding of spectators in the pens 3 and

        4 of the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April

        1989 and was slow to effect a rescue

        operation.



        Contrary to Police (Discipline) Regulations

        1985 Schedule 1. Regulation 4 (i). Paragraph

        4_a.



R64     In this instance Mr HICKS was an eye-witness

but there are a number of discrepancies in his
                   statements.    However, he is also Chairman of the

                  Hillsborough Family Support Group so his complaint

                  goes wider than his own personal experience.



                  R65        The first difficulty with his personal

                  recollection is one of timing.     On the day of the

                  disaster when he was under extreme emotional shock,

Part IV           he saw nothing untoward until the game had been in

Statement PaRes   progress for four or five minutes.    At that time he

2331-2333         saw people pushing and shoving in pens 3 and 4, and

                  people being pushed up against the perimeter and

                  radial fences.    One of these people was an old man in

                  a grey suit, and his tongue protruded from his

                  mouth.    Mr HICKS shouted to a senior police officer

                  who ran onto the pitch and stopped the game.     There

                  is no criticism of any police officer in that

                  recollection statement.



                  R66        In a detailed prepared statement which was

                  sent     to police on or about 18 May 1989 he describes a

Part IV           similar    series of incidents but says they occurred "a

Statement Pages   little before kick off (approximately 1450 pm)."

2336-2348         This change of timing is important because it

                  suggests Mr HICKS was witnessing crushing in pens 3

                  and 4 as early as 1450 hours.    Still before kick-off

                  he describes people being hoisted out of pens 3 and 4
                         into the West Stand, and an increasing number of fans

                         climbing over the perimeter and radial fences of pens

                         3 and 4.



                         R67     Having noted that the teams then kicked off

                         he describes a police cordon two to three officers

                         deep placed in an arc around pens 3 and 4 "and it was

                         obvious that their purpose was to prevent anybody

                         climbing over the barrier".



                         R68 '   While the game was still in progress he

                         believes that several fans were trying to climb the

                         perimeter fence and were pushed back into the pens by

                         police officers.   The officers in the arc, or cordon,

                         were standing watching with their arms folded.



                         R69     This continued for some five to ten minutes

                         and during that period the game was stopped.     He

                         believes incorrectly that the game was stopped at

                         1500 hours.

Part III

Document 128             R70     From a study of the photographic and other

Schedule Page 774        evidence it is clear that his estimated timings for

Video Ref 15.05.33       the incidents he recounts are incorrect.

Part III                 Consequently because timing is a crucial factor in

Document 162             this particular complaint, and incorrect timings can

Schedule Pages 841-842   only mislead, it is to the complaints made by Mr

Photo 1.18.28.29
                  HICKS as Chairman of the Hillsborough Family Support

                  Group, that this report will be directed.



                  R71     In the Police Control Box no-one recognised

                  the overcrowding or anything amiss in pens 3 and 4

                  until the first fans spilt out onto the perimeter
Part VII          track just before kick-off.   Superintendent MURRAY in
Appendix C        interview was clear that although he felt the

Pages 1066-1070   monitoring of fans was a joint police and stewards

                  responsibility he did not specifically view that to

                  include overcrowding.   He had no experience of such

                  happening and referred to monitoring really in

                  relation to problems of disorder, supporters fainting

                  and the like.



                  R72     From the Police Control Box the reserve

                  serials on standby in the gymnasium were directed to

                  go to the pitch and a request was made to Police

                  Headquarters for more dog-handlers, again indicative

                  that it was a disorder situation which was perceived.

                  Although Superintendent MURRAY was aware of a problem

                  on the track at Leppings Lane it is evident he did

                  not recognise what the problem was.



Part V            R73     Police Constable ILLINGWORTH on the track

Statement Pages   serial at pen 4, prior to the kick-off, had

3324-3328
                            recognised crowd discomfort, had opened the perimeter

                           gate to allow some of the crowd onto the perimeter

                           track and tried to relocate those released into pen

Part III                   5.    That action is visible on a video recording and

Document 109               if it was observed by the Control Box staff, although

Schedule Pages 740-741     it would have alerted them to the fact that something

                           was amiss it would have seemed that it was being

                           dealt with by the officer on the spot.



                           R74     According to Superintendent MURRAY efforts

                           were made to contact Police Constables SMITH and

                           ILLINGWORTH on the radio but without success.

                           However, Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD sent Chief

                           Inspector McROBBIE from the Police Control Box onto

                           the track to facilitate the relocation of fans from

                           the central to the wing pens.



Part V                     R75     By 1504 hours police officers were hauling
Statement Pages
3383-3386                  fans out of the pens over the perimeter fence and
3387-3391
3392-3400                  this must have been seen by the staff in the Police
3401-3410
3411-3418                  Control Box.



Part III                   R76     By this time an increasing number of police
Document   155
Schedule   Pages 827-828   officers and others were congregating on the pitch
Document   128
Schedule   Page 774        side of the perimeter fence of pens 3 and 4 making it
Document   136
Schedule   Page 791        increasingly difficult for a clear view from the

                           Police Control Box.
Part V            R77     Superintendent GREENWOOD was at the players

Statement Pages   tunnel as the teams kicked off.   Shortly afterwards

22515-2526        he noticed the fans on the track and went to the West

                  Terraces end of the ground to investigate.    It was

                  not until he was close to pens 3 and 4 that he

                  recognised the overcrowding problem.    He climbed on

                  the wall below the perimeter fence and signalled with

                  his hands for the crowd to move back.   This action

                  was seen in the Control Box, but in the absence of

                  information over the personal radio, again the matter

                  was seen as being dealt with by the senior officer on

                  the ground.



Part VII          R78    Superintendent MURRAY saw Superintendent

Appendix C        GREENWOOD signalling and says he recognised that Mr

Page 1088         GREENWOOD was signalling to stop the match.



Part V            R79    At this point Chief Superintendent

Statement Pages   DUCKENFIELD sent Superintendent MURRAY from the

2457-2469         Control Box to stop the match via the linesman in

Part V            accordance with the agreed procedure, but before he

Statement Pages   could do this Superintendent GREENWOOD had run onto

2515-2526         the pitch to the referee and stopped the game.
 Fart Vll         R80        On this brief visit to the pitch it is

Appendix C         evident Superintendent MURRAY did not recognise what

Pages 1088-1090   was happening on the terraces.    He quickly returned

                  to the Control Box.



                  R81       Almost at once Chief Superintendent

                  DUCKENFIELD asked him to return to the pitch to clear

                  the supporters from the goal area.    On the pitch

                  Superintendent MURRAY recognised the problem and saw

                  supporters jammed against the perimeter fencing.     He

                  at once found a police officer with a radio, spoke to

                  Sergeant GODDARD and requested a fleet of ambulances,

                  for tannoy messages to tell people to move back and

                  he believes at some stage he asked for bolt croppers.



                  R82       Superintendent MURRAY saw that Superintendent

                  GREENWOOD was on the scene and that other police

                  officers were in abundance at the perimeter gates.

                  He made the decision therefore to go to the back of

                  the tunnel leading to the rear of the central pens 3

                  and 4.    He saw number of police officers in

Part VII          the pens and eventually went back to the pitch

Appendix C        area.    At this time Superintendent MURRAY

PaRes 1098-1105   states how he went around the stadium identifying

                  senior officers to act as contact points for Chief

                  Superintendent DUCKENFIELD
                  R83         Shortly after this he went back to the

                  control box arriving at about 1535 hours at which

                  time Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD and Mr JACKSON

                  went to the board room.



                  R84       With regard to this complaint it is clear

                  that Superintendent MURRAY made every effort to deal

                  with the situation at the first recognition by him of

                  its seriousness.



Part V            R85         The awful truth of the dying, dead and

Statement Pages   injured     was recognised at various times by individual

3315-3323         officers in different locations.      Even those police

3324-3328         police officers closest to the front of pens 3 and 4

3329-3336         of the Western Terraces did not immediately recognise

3337-3340         the problem.     Even when they did recognise a problem,

                  they thought it could be resolved by a relocation of

                  fans from one pen to another.

Part IV

Statement Pages   R86         The lack of instructions as to overcrowding

1916-1923         and a formidable deterrent to opening perimeter gates

1924-1929         inevitably led to slow recognition by police of

2145-2147         crushing in the pens.     Certainly there can be no

2148-2151         doubt that the seriousness of the overcrowding in

2311-2313         pens 3 and 4 between 1450 hours and 1459 hours was

2314-2316         not recognised and therefore was not effectively

2320-2322         remedied.
                  R87     It should not be too surprising therefore,

                  that the staff in the Police Control Box were the

                  last to know.



                  R88     However, the delay in police recognition of

                  the problem was not as great as some witnesses

Part V             believe.   Although the immediate assumption in the
Statement Pages
2566-2577         Police Control Box was that a pitch invasion was
2578-2588
2589-2596         starting, and that assumption persisted until the

Statement Pages   request for ambulances was received at about 1507,
2554-2565
3315-3323         action was being taken at pens 3 and 4.    Before 1500
3324-3328
3329-3336         hours fans were being relocated from pens 3 and 4.
3337-3340
                  From 1500 hours gates 3 and 4 were open and remained

                  so.


Part IV
Statement Pages   R89     At some point the barrier in pen 3 broke and
1965-1971
1972-1975         then many supporters became trapped and crushed in
1976-1981
1982-1984         the well of the terrace towards the right corner near
1985-1992
1993-2000         to the radial fence dividing pens 2 and 3.
2001-2003


                  R90     Police officers, supporters and others tried

                  frantically to remove the dead and injured through

                  the small perimeter gates which became blocked by the

                  mass of bodies.    In the confines of the disaster site

                  it is not surprising that there were many officers,

                  willing and able, who could do nothing other than

                  stand and watch.   That at least some of these
                  officers were effectively directed is clear.      It is

                  also not surprising that hostility and aggression

                  mounted in some of the fans to such an extent that

                  positive action had to be taken by police officers.



Part V            R91     The morbid press photographers had to be
Statement Pages   dealt with not only in terms of control but also
2628-2632         for their own protection   Other officers, on their

2633-2647         own initiative went to the rear of the pens to

2555-2668         persuade reluctant fans to leave the pens through

2671-2677         the tunnel.   Ambulances were sent for at about

Part VI           1507. The temporary mortuary was set up and

Document 216      running effectively by 1535 hours.

Page 1507



Part V            R92     Sometime between 1506 hours and 1510 hours

Statement Pages   Police Constable SMITH radioed from the pitch to the

3315-3323         Police Control Box for bolt croppers to cut the

Part V            perimeter fence.   Although he did not know it,

Statement Pages   Police Sergeant GODDARD had received his request and

2566-2577         tried to locate the necessary equipment at a nearby

                  police garage without success.   It was not until

Part V            1513 hours that Police Constable BICHARD, in the

Statement Pages   Control Box, requested Police Headquarters Control

2578-2588         Room to call the Fire Brigade to bring hydraulic

                  cutting equipment to the Leppings Lane entrance.
                      R93      Fire appliances with the necessary equipment
Part VI               arrived at the stadium at 1522 hours.   Station

Statement Pages       Officer FLETCHER rushed the equipment to the front
3664-3670             of the West Terraces but by then the last of the dead

                      and injured were being removed from pens 3 and 4.



Lord Justice Taylor   R94    Clearly the Fire Brigade could have been

Interim Report        called earlier but it is extremely doubtful that

Paragraph 301         would have saved more lives.



Part VI               R95     On the day two South Yorkshire Metropolitan

Statement Pages       Ambulance Service Officers were on the ground with

3529-3540             one ambulance, and another ambulance on standby.

3541-3551             As soon as the ambulance officers noticed the fans

3552-3559             on the track, and while the game was still in

                      progress, they went to them and began to render

                      assistance to the injured.



Part V                R96    Chief Inspector EDMUNDSON in Police

Statement Pages       Headquarters Control Room, had been monitoring the

2600-2605             police radio traffic at Hillsborough and both he

Statement Pages       and Police Constable WAUGH heard sufficient for

2608-2610             them to make enquiry of the Police Control Box at

                      1459 hours as to whether ambulances were required.

                      The response at that time was in the negative but

                      "standby".   It was not until 1507 hours that the
Ground Control notified the Headquarters Control Room

that injuries were possible, and the call went to

SYMAS that ambulances might be required.     This was

confirmed into a positive request during the same

telephone conversation.    The first ambulance arrived

at the stadium at 1513 hours and in all, 42

ambulances arrived.



R97     It is correct to say that the distress of

those in the front of pens 3 and 4 was recognised by

those officers closest to them at about 1500 hours.

It is also correct that the Major Incident Plan was

not implemented until 1507 hours when the ambulance

service was called.    It is also correct that for

various reasons no cutting gear was located until the

request was made to the fire brigade at 1513 hours.

But there is no evidence to show that if these

shortcomings had not occurred then lives would have

been saved.    Given the poor radio   transmissions and

reception and the chaos of the moment from the

vantage point of the Control Box it is difficult to

see how these complaints can be substantiated.    Once

the real problem was identified in the Control Box

the Major Incident Plan was implemented effectively

and swiftly.    The fact that the injured were safely

cleared by 1545 hours, the dead were being dealt with
in the gymnasium under the supervision of HM Coroner

by 1615 hours, and that all dead had been identified

by 0430 hours on 16 April 1989 is some evidence to

support that view.   That it could have been done

better and perhaps quicker is not the real, issue

that it was done to the best of the officer’s ability

given the information available and the circumstances

prevailing at the time, is.



R98     This particular allegation made by Hr HICKS

forms part of the evidence submitted to the Director

of Public Prosecutions who is considering criminal

offences against Superintendent MURRAY of

Manslaughter and Culpable Malfeasance.



R99     The evidence required to consider

Manslaughter requires a high degree of gross

negligence or recklessness and there is no comparable

discipline offence to consider.



R100    However, the offence of Culpable Malfeasance

is an alternative offence to Manslaughter, and

although it is based upon the same evidence, it

requires a lesser degree of negligence or

recklessness and embraces neglect of a duty.
                 R101       Should the Director of Public Prosecutions

                 decide there is insufficient evidence to prove

                 offences of Manslaughter or Culpable Malfeasance, no

                 further action can be taken in respect of this

                 disciplinary offence of Neglect of Duty.



Part VII         R102       Superintendent MURRAY was interviewed

Appendix C       at Furnival House, Sheffield on 25 June 1990.      He

Pages 916-1128   agreed that the question and answers given for the

                 criminal investigation, be used for the discipline

                 inquiry.



Document 7       R103       A Regulation 7 Notice is included showing the

Page 8           date of service.



                 R104       There are no unrelated discipline aspects to

                 consider.



                 ANTECEDENTS



                 R105       Superintendent Bernard Dean MURRAY is almost

                 49 years of age having been born on 28 August 1941.

                 He is a married man with two adult children and

                 owner/occupier of his home at

                 Barnsley.



                 R106    He served as a Merchant Navy Officer for 7

                 years prior to his appointment as Constable in the
Yorkshire West Riding Constabulary on 11 November

1965, serving as a patrol constable at Pontefract and

Huddersfield prior to promotion to Sergeant and

posting to Barnsley in November 1972.     He transferred

to the South Yorkshire Police on amalgamation in

April 1984 and remained on patrol duty in Barnsley

until transfer to Communications Department in August

1977 where he remained until his promotion to

Inspector and transfer to traffic patrol duties in

June 1978.     In the rank of Inspector he then

experience training duties until promotion to Chief

Inspector in June 1984 when he was posted to

Complaints and Discipline Department.    In September

1986 he transferred to duties as Deputy Sub

Divisional Commander of B1 (Barnsley) Sub Division

until 14 March when he was promoted to Superintendent

and took command of FI "(Hammerton Road, Sheffield)

Sub Division.    He was transferred to C2 (Rawmarsh)

Sub Division on 10 July 1989.



R107'   He has no disciplinary matters recorded

against him.




M J Foster

Detective Chief Superintendent
CONCLUSION



R108    Superintendent MURRAY is the Sub-Divisional

Commander of the FI Sub-Division which includes

within its boundary, Hillsborough Stadium.   At the

time of the Hillsborough disaster on 15 April 1989 he

had held that post for just over one year.   During

that time he has regularly performed duty there in

the Police Control Box, including the occasion of the

1988' FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool FC and

Nottingham Forest FC.   He has considerable experience

of policing football matches elsewhere during his 24

years police service.   He was involved in the police

planning for the 1989 event and was party to the

decision to base it on the successful previous year’s

semi-final.   Because of his experience in 1988 he

believed there were a number of areas where police

arrangements could be improved, including a reduction

in manpower overall with reinforcements deployed in

areas where problems were likely to arise.   There was

to be no reduction in the manpower to be deployed at

the Leppings Lane turnstiles, additional manpower at

Leppings Lane where it joined Penistone Road, and by

extra resources on the perimeter track at the end of

the game to prevent a repetition of the pitch

invasion experienced in 1988.   There were a number
of other changes made with the agreement of

Superintendent MURRAY but the only one which requires

to be mentioned here is the provision for mobile

serials of officers to locate supporters without

tickets and remove them to Hillsborough Park

(Nottingham Forest supporters) and Cole Road

(Liverpool supporters).   From his involvement at the

planning meetings he was aware that Liverpool

supporters were dissatisfied with the allocation of

tickets between the two competing clubs, and with

their allocation to the Leppings Lane terraces and

stand, and the North Stand.   He considered these

points at an early stage with Chief Superintendent

MOLE, who prepared the initial draft Operation Order,

and for good reasons agreed that the arrangements

should not be changed in this respect.



R109   He attended various other planning meetings,

including visits to Hillsborough Stadium, at one of

which he discussed the arrangements with the

Sheffield Wednesday Club Secretary, Mr Graham

MACKRELL, and made a full inspection of the ground.



R110   On the day and before, he was personally

involved in the briefings and there is evidence which

suggests that because of his eye for detail he took
action to deal with matters which had the potential

for later problems, for example, distributing check

lists and the removal of rubble.    He took up his

position in the Police Control Box at about 1030

hours.



Rill     At this point it is pertinent to recall that

the operational commander in previous years had been

Chief Superintendent MOLE, a man with a style of

management and leadership which was different from

Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD.    Chief

Superintendent MOLE adopted a roving style of

command, frequently on the ground moving about from

place to place, relying on his personal radio for

contact with the Control Box.   Chief Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD was much more like a Captain on the

bridge of his ship, who remained in the Control Box

throughout relying upon the visual and audio aids for

information and control.   Both styles are quite

acceptable and both have their disadvantages and

advantages, but the effect on Superintendent MURRAY’S

role would be quite significant.    To have the "boss"

at his shoulder would likely lead to much more

referral of matters up to him for decision or

confirmation than where the fallibility of police

personal radios to a certain extent makes that more
difficult if the "boss" is absent.    Additionally, the

 "boss" on the spot can only see what you can see,

either by direct line of sight or by CCTV, whereas

the absent "boss" has his own personal viewpoint but

cannot see the CCTV pictures.



R112      At Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD’s

suggestion, Superintendent MURRAY started to keep a

manual log of events to aid any debrief after the

event.



R113     Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD joined him

in the Police Control Box at about 1350 hours and

apart from a period 5 or 10 minutes after the game

had been stopped, when he went to the Boardroom,

Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD remained in the

Police Control Box until some time around 1700 hours.



R114     By 1415 hours Superintendent MURRAY

recognised that the Liverpool fans were not coming

into the stadium as fast as the Nottingham Forest

supporters



R115     At 1417 hours he received the request from

Superintendent MARSHALL for Leppings Lane to be

closed to traffic.   He looked at the CCTV pictures
and although he claims that he did not then identify

any particular problem in Leppings Lane, he made

arrangements for the road to be closed.      When this

had not been achieved by about 1422 hours he made

alternative arrangements and the road was closed,

probably at about 1430 hours.



R116       It is interesting to note that although

Superintendent MURRAY claims that he did not perceive

any particular problem in Leppings Lane at that time,

his manual log terminated at 1421 hours.



R117       At 1430 hours, although he could see the West

Stand and pens 3 and 4 filling, he noticed that there

were "large clear sections" in pens 1 and 2, and 6

and 7.     He saw that there was a "large crowd” outside

the Leppings Lane turnstiles, and he remarked to

Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD that although "there

was a good crowd outside there was still half an hour

to kick-off and we would get them in by three o’clock

(1500)."    It was at that time that Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD rehearsed with him the

previously agreed policing for delaying the

kick-off.    It does seem that there was at least some

concern in the minds of Chief Superintendent

DUCKENFIELD and Superintendent MURRAY at that time.
R118       By 1435 hours the Control Room was busy and

Superintendent MURRAY was engaged with radio reports

of incidents of disorder, arrests, ejections from the

ground and an elusive ticket tout who had to be

located.    He was also trying to make arrangements for

the accommodation of some Liverpool supporters who

had tickets for the Spion Kop, the Nottingham Forest

end of the ground, and for a breath test to be given

to a driver who was alleged to be drunk.



R119    At about 1440 hours, although he claims that

the "crowd around the turnstiles in Leppings Lane

appeared to be the same as five minutes earlier" it

was about that time that a request was received from

that location for reinforcements to be sent there.

All available mounted officers were deployed on

instructions from the Police Control Box in addition

to one serial of reserve foot officers from the

ground gymnasium.



R120    Again, at about that time, requests were

being received in the Control Box, from police

officers at the Leppings Lane turnstiles for tannoy

messages to be broadcast asking ’people outside the

turnstiles to stop pushing forward as people were

going to be injured".    On Superintendent MURRAY’S
instructions these broadcasts were made from the

Police Control Box.



R121       At about 1442 hours the police radio was

becoming unintelligible and Superintendent MURRAY

took positive steps to restore radio communication

suggesting that "at least give us talk-through and we

will use a personal radio."     This was done and

although radio communication was restored, it meant

that the Police Control Box could not override other

transmissions.     There does not appear to have been

any alternative.    Although messages were being heard,

often only partially, in the Control Box,

Superintendent MURRAY found it very difficult to

acknowledge messages, or to send directions.



R122       By 1445 hours he could see on the CCTV

monitor that the crowd outside the Leppings Lane

turnstiles was compacting and ’there appeared to be a

crush".    He estimated the crowd to be between 2,000

and 2,500 strong as he heard Superintendent

MARSliALL’s first request for the exit gates to be

opened.    There is no question that Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD was not aware of this

request.    Mr MARSHALL was told to standby.   Inspector
Part V            John Joseph BENNETT radioed for assistance at

Statement Page;   Leppings Lane turnstiles so Superintendent MURRAY

2947-2955         despatched 5 sergeants and 50 constables from the

                  club gymnasium.    A similar request was radioed

Part V            by Inspector Steven Robert SEWELL but the

Statement Pages   message was not acknowledged.    A second request

2502-2514         for assistance was radioed by Inspector BENNETT but

                  the message was not acknowledged.    He did not know

                  that officers had been sent from the gymnasium in

                  answer to his first request.    At about the same time

                  a second request was heard from Superintendent

                  MARSHALL for the exit gates to be opened, more urgent

                  this time.    While Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD

                  was still considering the matter Superintendent

                  MURRAY tried to contact Mr Douglas John LOCK, the

                  Club Security Officer, using the stewards’ radio

                  system, but without success.



                  R123    At about 1447 hours, as Superintendent

                  MARSHALL was making his third radioed request for the

                  exit gates to be opened, Superintendent MURRAY’S

                  attention was drawn to the CCTV monitor for camera 1,

Part V            by Police Constable Trevor BICHARD, who shouted out

Statement Pages   that a gate had been forced.    Superintendent MURRAY

2578-2588         could see Gate C open and fans flowing through it

                  into the stadium from outside the Leppings Lane

                  turnstiles.   He saw a mounted officer block off the
                  gateway with his horse and Gate C closed again.

                  Almost immediately Superintendent MARSHALL was heard

                  again on the radio asking for the exit gates to be

                  opened because of injuries and possible fatalities in

                  the crush outside of the turnstiles.      Superintendent

                  MURRAY pressed Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD for a

                  decision which he then made and Gate C was opened.

                  Superintendent MURRAY took no action to receive the

                  influx of people through Gate C, and gave no advice

                  in that respect.     He explains that he thought the

                  crowd would be absorbed inside the stadium.



Part V            R124       After Gate C had been opened and just before

Statement Pages   kick-off time (1500 hours) Superintendent MURRAY

2470-2488         noticed that Police Constable Peter Edward SMITH or

3315-3323         Police Constable David Alfred ILLINGWORTH had opened

3324-3328         the perimeter gateto pens 3 or 4 and a "handful" of

Part V            fans had     come through the gate onto the track.     Chief

Statement Pages   Inspector Robert Ian McROBBIE left the Control Box

2554-2565         and went     down ontothe track to assist the relocation

                  of these     fans intoother pens.   Again, some time

                  around kick-off time, Superintendent MURRAY saw

                  supporters climbing over the perimeter fence onto the

                  perimeter track from pens 3 and 4, and others coming

                  through the open perimeter gates.     No radio traffic

                  was being received in the Control Box although
 Part V             Police Constables SMITH. ILLINGWORTH and HELLIWELL.
 Statement Pages    all recount messages being radioed from the track to
 3315-3323          the effect that crushing was occurring in pens 3 and
 3324-3328          4.   These messages were not acknowledged.   Although
 3329-3336          Superintendent MURRAY was unable to see what the

                    problem was he thought that there may have been 'some

                   pushing and crushing" at the front of the pens and

                   that people were being relocated by the officers on

                   the track.     Superintendent MURRAY heard Chief

                   Superintendent DUCKENFIELD direct Superintendent

                   Roger GREENWOOD to the Leppings Lane end of the

                   ground to investigate.    He heard the radio messages

                   being received in the Control Box but shortly

                   afterwards he saw Superintendent GREENWOOD standing

                   head and shoulders above the crowd waving his arms to

                   signal that the game should be stopped.     With Chief

                   Superintendent DUCKENFIELD’s approval he left the

                   Control Box and approached the linesman in order to

                   stop the match, the agreed procedure.     The linesman

                   ignored him.    Having seen Superintendent GREENWOOD

                   run onto the pitch and stopping the game,

                   Superintendent MURRAY returned to the Control Box.

                   He could see increasing numbers of people coming onto
Part   V           the playing area and could hear Police Constable

Statement Pages    Michael Vincent RYAN using the tannoy in an attempt

2589-2596          to clear the pitch.
•
                              He could see that some of the fans were injured.

                              Chief Superintendent DUCKENFIELD directed

                              Superintendent MURRAY back to the pitch to try to

                              clear it and as he left the Control Box he heard

                              Police Constable RYAN asking for the ambulance

                              service to standby.



                              R125     On reaching the playing area Superintendent

                              MURRAY learned of the full nature of the disaster.

                              He had no radio with him so he took one from a

                              sergeant and radioed the Control Box for a "fleet of

                              ambulances".   That message was acknowledged and acted

                              upon.   He then assisted with the rescue activities

                              and radioed for tannoy messages to be broadcast to

                              try to get the people on the Leppings Lane terraces

                              to move back and ease the pressure at the front of

                              the pens. He then went to    the      rear of pens 3 and4

                              through the central   tunnel and      found police officers

                              there moving people   out of the      pens.



                              R126    He returned   to the pitch and        apart from

                              assisting with the rescue activities, he used police

                              officers to clear a gangway in the South Stand to aid

    Part V                    the removal of casualties, gave direction to

    Statement PaRes 2488A-H   Superintendent David Christopher CHAPMAN and

                   2677A-H    Inspector Brian Thomas WALLACE.    By 1530 hours he was
back in the Police Control Box briefing Chief

Superintendent DUCKENFIELD, just before he left to go

to the Boardroom.   Superintendent MURRAY remained in

the Police Control Box playing a full part in the

Major Incident Plan as it unfolded until about 2100

hours when he went to the temporary mortuary in the

gymnasium counselling police officers and liaising

with welfare and clerical workers.   At about 2240

hours he continued his counselling duties at the

Police Niagra Sports Club, eventually reaching

Hammerton Road Police Station at 2330 hours where he

stayed until about 0100 hours, checking arrangements

for VIP visits and other duties.



R127    Given that Superintendent MURRAY was not in

overall command of operations that day and that the

Police Commander was at his side almost throughout,

it is difficult to find evidence which is sufficient

to prove Neglect of Duty.   The poor police radio

performance on the day and the undoubted chaos of the

moment from Superintendent MURRAY’S vantage point in

the Police Control Box are both factors which made

difficult the recognition of the real nature of the

disaster as it unfolded in its early stages.    The

evidence shows that with the information available to

Superintendent MURRAY from police radio, CCTV and

his own eyesight, he acted to the best of his ability
                before, during and after the moment of disaster.

                That his general philosophy of policing football

                matches with its emphasis on segregation, pitch

                invasions and crowd disorder, played some part in his

                actions on the day, is quite likely, but once he

                recognised the real problem he did all that was asked

                and expected of him.    The evidence in respect of all

                three complaints is currently being considered by the

                Director of Public Prosecutions to decide on

                Superintendent MURRAY’S culpability for Manslaughter

                or Culpable Malfeasance.    Should the Director decide

                that there is insufficient evidence to prosecute

                those offences then the same must be said for the

                disciplinary offence of Neglect of Duty.    In which

                case the complaints are unsubstantiated.



Documents 8-9   R128      In consultation with Mr WELLS. Chief

Pages 9-11      Constable, South Yorkshire Police, agreement has been

                reached to forward all files direct to the Director

                of Public Prosecutions and to the Police Complaints

                Authority.   Once a final decision is

                made by the Director the full main file and the

                separate discipline files will be forwarded to South

                Yorkshire Police following the certificate of

                satisfaction from the Police Complaints Authority.




                L SHARP

                CHIEF CONSTABLE

                CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY
           West Midlands Police




DOCUMENT SECTION




Reference N o .       1/—L


I nvestigating L SHARP, CHIEF
O fficer
    SHARP6/4

                                 DOCUMENT LIST


NUMBER         DESCRIPTION                              PAGES

1              Letter dated 7 June 1989, from           1-2
               Mr Trevor HICKS, to the Right
               Honourable Douglas HURD MP,
               regarding complaints involving
               South Yorkshire Police.

2              Letter dated 25 July 1989, confirming     3
               Assistant Chief Constable Mr K P D
               COOPER, Northamptonshire Police, as
               the investigating officer in the
               complaint against South Yorkshire
               Police.

3              Letter dated 25 July 1989, from           4
                South Yorkshire Police to Sir
                Cecil CLOTHIER, Police Complaints
                Authority, formally requesting
                the Police Complaints Authority
                to supervise the investigation.

4              Letter dated 4 August 1990, from          5
                Deputy Chief Constable SKITT,
                Northamptonshire Police to
                Assistant Chief Constable Mr
                ANDERSON, South Yorkshire Police,
                agreeing to request that Assistant
                Chief Constable Mr COOPER,
                Northamptonshire Police, should
                undertake the enquiry into the
                complaints.

5              Letter dated 4 August 1989,               6
                from Captain E N TAYLOR, Police
                Complaints Authority, confirming
               his supervision of the complaint
                on behalf of the Authority.

6              Letter dated 5 September 1989, from
               Captain E N TAYLOR, Police Complaints
               Authority, to Assistant Chief
               Constable Mr COOPER, Northamptonshire
               Police, informing him that the enquiry
               will be dealt with by another force.

7              Regulation 7 Notice dated                 8
               5 September 1989.
DOCUMENT   DESCRIPTION                        PAGES

8          Letter dated 17 July 1990,         9-10
           from Mr Leslie SHARP, Chief
           Constable, Cumbria Constabulary,
           to Mr Richard WELLS, Chief
           Constable, South Yorkshire
           Police, regarding routing
           of papers for criminal
           investigation.

9          Letter dated 24 July 1990,          11
           from Mr Richard WELLS,
           Chief Constable, South
           Yorkshire Police, to Mr
           Leslie SHARP, Chief
           Constable, Cumbria
           Constabulary, agreeing with
           routing procedure.
     •        '
T e l : - 01- 428 -7313
                                                                                                       DOCUMENT No.'
                                                                                                             Trevor & Jenni Hicks


 Home Office,
 50 Queen A n n e ’s Gate,
 London.                                                                                                                       Middlesex.
 SW1.


 f.a.o:- The Right Honourable Douglas Hurd                                             M.P                            "^th June 1989.


 Dear Home Secretary,                                                                                                                 I



                                                     re: Hillsborough Disaster


 I am        the        father          of    the    late     Sarah         and     Victoria           Hicks       who     unfortunately
 £re     among the 95 people so tragically killed at Hillsborough.


 You     will         require           little       reminder          of     the      increasingly            acrimonious                rounds
of     accusation               and          counter    accusation             that         abounded          in     the    media          until
you had           the good sense to issue your instruction to the police and request
a general cessation.
Despite           acute        provocation             and       at    times        great        personal           anquish,          my    wife
and      I    have        resisted             numerous       opportunities                 to     fuel      that     deplorable             and
u ns ee m ly        state          of    affairs,        preferring               to    assist          the    Taylor          Inquiry        in
its difficult task                       - including being prepared                          to await the outcome before
making detailed comment to the media.


I^Trite            to    y°u       today       to    request          your     comment           and     intervention            following
 ^     statement,              widely          reported          in    the    media,         by    South Y o r k s h i r e ’s Deputy
Chief        Constable             Peter        Hayes       to    the        effect         that       ”no    further        action          was
required”               in      connection             with           the     actions            and      behaviour              of        Chief
Superintendant David Duckenfield.
I was        under        the      impression           that      Lord       Justice         Taylor on the                 one    hand and
the    internal Police Investigation by the West Midlands force on the other,
would        d ra w     conclusions             when    and       only       when       they       had    concluded            their       work
and    had         time       to    deliberate.              Despite          the      careful         wording,          the     issue       of
this statement by the Deputy Chief Constable pre-empts these findings!


Words fail me when I try to convey to you the hurt and totally unneccessary
anguish           this       untimely          statement         has        given      my    wife,       myself       and presumably
the    other          families.              Apart     from      the        crass      nature       of       this    action,          I find
the need to issue such a statement at this time beyond contempt.
                                                                                                       DOCUMENT No. 1




    One can only conclude that this is yet a further attempt by South Yorkshire
    Police      to     divert       public       opinion          away    from   their       appalling          performance
    both on the fatal day and subsequent to it.


 Apart         from    obvious       offence       to       the    bereaved,     how       are    the
                                                                                                         7
                                                                                                         public       to view
    this premature '’absolution" by the Deputy Chief Constable!
 That a senior police officer - who by his own admission deliberately chose
 to deceive his superiors (and others!) should not be disciplined is totally
 incredible.
Even       if one        believes         Chief Superintendant D u c k e n f i e l d ’s reasons                  for lying
 to the general public at the time,                               (and I am bound to say that I personally
    ^ n o t ! ) _ there could have been no credible reason to have misled the Deputy
Chief Constable.


Is       it     purely       coincidence          that       this     provided        an    excuse       for     the    Chief
Constables silence during the lead-in /initial                                      week of the Taylor Inquiry,
when the fans were able to give their views?
I       trust     that      under    the       circumstances          you    will     understand         my     fears    of   a
"whitewash"            at    the    least and          at    the worst       a deliberate             attempt    to     "close
ranks" and distort the course of justice.


I regret that rlr. Hayes's insensitive and untimely public action has further
reduced my opinion of the South Yorkshire senior police.
It: leaves me no alternative but to formally complain directly to yourself,
    *     to ask      you    as    the vanguard             of a Government claiming to be                      ’’committed
to       law    and    order”       to    make    an    unequivocal          statement           of   your    opinion     and
intended actions in the wake of this regrettable development.


I will         await     your urgent response during                      the course of today or tomorrow,
but       would       advise       that       should    I    fail    to     recieve    an    appropriate          response
I       reserve       the   right        to    follow       Mr.Hayes      example      and       release      this     letter
to the media tomorrow evening.


Yours >gai/t^hfully.




Trevor Hicks.
                                                        DOCUMENT No.


Discipline & Complaints                                 ACC/GD/
                                                                  25 July 1989




D J O'Dowd, Esq., QPM, BA, MSc, CBIM
Chief Constable
Northamptonshire Police
Wootton Hall
Northampton
NN4 OJQ




Dear

Hillsborough Disaster

A letter of conplaint, directed through the Home Secretary, has been made
against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield of this Force arising out of the
above.

I write to formally request that you allow Assistant Chief Constable,
Mr X P D Cooper, of your Force to undertake this enquiry on my behalf.

For your information, ny Chief Constable has asked the Police Complaints
Authority to supervise the investigation.

Yours sincerely
                                                 DOCUMENT No.


                                                    25 July 19S9




Sir Cecil Clothier KCB QC
Chairman
Police Complaints Authority
8/10 Great George Street
London SV1P 3AZ




Mi IH2VCR 111CKS.
MIDDLESEX

I enclose for your information copies of correspondence from the
above named in connection with a complaint he has Icacea against
Hr Peter Hayes, Deputy Chief Constable of this Force.

In my view the correspondence also constitutes a complaint
against Chief Superintendent David L'uckecfield. I have cauoc-u
the complaint to be recorded and would ask you formally to
consider exercising supervision of the conduct of the
investigation under Section 37(l)(b) of the Act. Assistant Chief
Constable K h P Cooper of Northamptonshire Police has teen
appointed tc investigate the complaint, subject of course to ycur
agreement should you decide to supervise the investigation.
                                                       DOCUMENT No.


 Your Ref:   ACC/GD/

 4 August 1989


K S Anderson Esq
Assistant Chief Constable
Discipline & Complaints
South Yorkshire Police
Snig Hill
SiiEFFIELD
S3 8LY




HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

Thank you for your letter dated 25 July 1989 to the Chief Constable which
has been passed to me for reply in his absence.

I   ,fni_)ll?pPy t0 a8ree t0 y°ur request that our Assistant Chief Constable,
Mr fv P D Cooper, undertakes the enquiry in connection with a complaint made
against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield of your Force arising out of the
Hillsborough disaster. This letter is confirmation of what I understand
has already been agreed informally.




B H SKITT
Deputy Chief Constable
                                                                                                      DOCUMENT No.




                                                                                                                                                  in
     J. U L . '            i'                                                                                       -l'. -1/ i.lilT inn      ii

   OjV(PLA.ij\ri )
                "V
    A.l J i H O R V i




                                                                                           O u r refviviiLV

   Midd l es ex
                                                                                           L \iie              4 A u g u s t 19S9




 I arii w i i t i n g as a M e m b e r o f tiio P o l i c e C o m p l a i n t s A u t h o r i t y .

 In hi s l e t t e r d a t e d 25 J ul y 1989, Mr W r ig h t t h e C h i e f C o n s t a b l e of the So ut h Y o r k s h i r e
 i o l i c e . a d v i s e d you t h a t he c o n s i d e r e d t h e l e t t e r you had w r i t t e n to t h e H o m e S e c r e t a r y
 on / J u n e c o n s u t u e d a c o m p l a i n t a g a i n s t C h i e f S u p e r i n t e n d e n t D u c k e n f i e l d . Subse­
 q u e n t l y he a p p o i n t e d K P D C o o p e r Esq, A s s i s t a n t C h i e f C o n s t a b l e N o r t h a m p t o n s h i r e
 P o l i c e , to i n v e s t i g a t e t h e m a t t e r .

 S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e n a v e n o w r e f e r r e d t h e m a t t e r to t h e A u t h o r i t y , who h a v e d e c i d c d
 t o s u p e r v i s e the i n v e s t i g a t i o n o f y ou r c o m p l a i n t .  1 shal l b e t h e M e m b e r r es Don si bl e fo r
 your c a se.

I h a v e a s k e d Mr C o o p e r t o a r r a n g e a m e e t i n g to d i s c u s s v a r i o u s p o i n t s w i t h you.              f am
s u r e lie will be in t o u c h v e r y s h o r t l y .



                     Vv3. ~ X


E N TAYLOR
A u t h o r i t y M em b
•      r^OLICC                                                          DOCUMENT No. « London i>W]

C q m p l a in t s
  AUTHORITY                                                                       Telephone:01-273




     D J O’Dowd Esq QPM BA MSc CBIM                          Your reference
     Chief Constable
     Northamptonshire Policc                                 O ur reference   INV/&9   131/79
     Wootton HaiJ
     Northampton                                             D«e
     NN4 OJQ




    I refer to today's telephone conversation regarding the Hillsbrough enquiry. As discussed
      require Assistant Chief Constable Cooper, as the current Investigating Officer, to
    serve Regulation 7 notices on the officers named by Mr Hicks in his statem ent of 2 4
    August 9S9. It js im portant that the notices are served without delay.

    I confirm that Mr Cooper is only required to serve the notices and the enquiry will then
    t>c dealt with by another force. As soon as the situation regarding the appointment of
    the new Investigating Officer is resolved, I will inform both yourself and Mr Cooper in
    order th a t arrangements can be made for the transfer of documents etc*

    Again thank you for your assistance in this m a tte r.




    E N TAYLu k
    Authority Mcmbor
                Northamptonshire Police                                                                                                               7

                                  K P D COOPER, Assistant Chief Constable
                    From :.

                                 Superintendent B MURRAY                                                           5    September             89
                    To:                                                                                                                 19

                                                                                        Reference No.        C&E

                                                     Th« Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985 Regulation 7


                                                   NOTICE OF REPORT, A LL E G A T IO N OR C O M PLA IN T


                   In accordance with the requirements of Regulation 7 or of the Police (Discipline) Regulations, 1985 I hereby
                                        #                          complaint
                   inform you of a _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _                                                         which has been made against you.

                                                                              COMPLAINT
                                                         NATURE OF *


                          n . , ,, ,
                Mr Trevor Hicks of
                                                                    ii          _____________ ____
                                                                             Middlesex
                                                                            AixvAi i tjsxsx. has
                carplained that at the football match between Liverpool and Nottingham
                Forest on the 15th April 1989 at the Hillsborough Football Ground you
                neglected to discharge your duties in that yous-
                 (a) failed to prevent a dangerous build up of supporters outside of the
                     gates;
                (b) failed to control the movement of supporters subsequent to the openinq
                     of Gate 'C'; and                                                          ^
                (c) failed to respond to the developing tragedy and were slow to effect a
                     rescue operation.
                If established, these complaints could disclose possible offences aqainst
                the Police (Discipline) Regulations 1985.

                   You are not, as the Regulation explains, obliged to say anything concerning the matter, but you may - if
                   you so desire -        make a written or oral statement concerning the matter to me or to the Deputy Chief
                   Constable. (The* Chief Constable has delegated his authority under Regulation 15 o f the above Regulations
                   to the Deputy Chief Constable)


                   Y O U A R E , HOW EVER, W ARNED T H A T IF Y O U MAKE SUCH A S TA TEM EN T TO ME OR TO THE
                   DEPUTY C H IEF CONSTABLE, THE STA TEM EN T M A Y BE USED IN A N Y SUBSEQUENT D ISC IPLIN ­
                   A R Y PROCEEDINGS.


                   You have the right to consult a friend at all stages of the investigation and service o f this form does not




                                                                                                                     Investigating   icer



                Acknowledgement: I acknowledge having been served vyftJTthe original of this Notice.
(Carbon Copy
to b« signed)




                                                    not wish to make w ritte n /o ra statement to the
                                            Investigating pfficer/D eputy Chief;CAnstahle._______

                                            Date                    Signature,


                Service:                    I served the original of this Notice upon the within

                                                      V
                                            named at_»_

                                            Signature_                                                         ank         A < . C_ ,
                                                                                                _    _
                * Insert the word "re p o rt" , "a lle g a tio n ” or " c o m p la in t " as appr dpriate.
                                                                                                                                             300290
                                                            D O C U M E N T       H o .




  j




                                                              17 July 1990



 Mr Richard Wells Esq
 Chief Constable
 South Yorkshire Police
 Police Headquarters
 Snig Hill
 Sheffield S3 8LY




Following our telephone conversation of recent date I write to you with a
proposition in connection with the routeing of the papers arising from the
crime investigation into the Hillsborough disaster.

You will know that my investigation into the criminal and disciplinary aspects
is being supervised by the Police Complaints Authority. At the end of my
investigation, which is not far off, the PCA must make a statement that it is
satisfied with the conduct of the investigation.That statement will be sent
to you, the complainants and to the officers whose conduct has been called into
question. The only exception to that will be the PCA statement in respect of
your Assistant Chief Constable Mr Walter JACKSON. In his case the PCA
statement will go to your Police Authority.

In strict accord with the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, the way for
this to be achieved is for me to submit my original report to the PCA, and at
the same time send a copy to you (or your Police Authority). Once the PCA is
satisfied with my investigation it sends the forementioned statement to that
effect, to you (or to your Police Authority).

You (or your Police Authority) are then required first to consider matters
related to any criminal offences revealed in the report and refer them to the
Director of Public Prosecutions. Thereafter you are required to submit a
report to the PCA setting out your opinions as to the merits of the complaints
against police officers; any disciplinary charges preferred or proposed; the
merits or otherwise of convening a disciplinary tribunal; and any reasons for
not preferring disciplinary charges.

My proposition is that for various reasons; including the referral of the
matter by Peter Wright to the DPP in the first place; the complex circumstances
of the investigation; the bulk of the documentary and other evidence; and the


                                                      Continued.
                                                                  OOCUMENTN o .




                                        2.




need for expediency; you allow me to deal direct with the DPP in so far as the
crime aspects are concerned. Of course, you will receive the PCA statement at
the appropriate time and you will receive all of the evidence and reports in
time for your consideration of the disciplinary aspects with the PCA. The
matters relating to your Assistant Chief Constable would not be affected.

I hope that this letter is comprehensible and that you will agree to my
proposal, in which case a short letter of reply would be appreciated.




CHIEF CONSTABLE
CUMBRIA CONSTABULARY
INVESTIGATING OFFICER
                                                            DOCUMENT No.
  I I I I IMIONK:                                      S O I I N YORKMHRK I’OI 1( K
 M il U ll.I I)         'M522                           P OI . K' K H h A D Q l \ R F K R *
  I hi I \ : 54'Wf.                                       > \ l ( , Mil I.

                                                             s H h m t i . D >3     sly



 r is             gp\i m \
 ( Hi l t ( O W T A K L L                                         24 July 1990


 L Sharp Esq QPM LLB FBIM
 Chief Constable
 Hillsborough Inquiry Team
 c/o West Midlands Police
 Nechells Green Police Station
 Fowler Street
 Birmingham B7 5DA




Many thanks for your letter of 17 July 1990 which concerns the routeing
of your report to the DPP.

I quite understand that there are exceptional circumstances which surround
your investigation and that the bulk of the material which accompanies
your report isconsiderable.    It is also relevant    that the matter was
referred to the    DPP by Peter Wright in the first instance, and the need
for expediency should require no argument.

Of course, I am directly concerned only with the matters which involve
officers of and below the rank of Chief Superintendent, so I cannot speak
for my Police Authority which is concerned with officers of ACPO rank.

I have no objection to your submitting your   report   to the DPP through
the PCA without sending a copy to me.

I understand that in due course I shall receive a statement from the
PCA in respect of your conduct of the investigation and that I shall
receive all the    reports and supporting evidence in good time for me to
consider any disciplinary aspects of the case.

I trust that this letter is sufficient for your purposes         and         that    it
will help to bring the matter to a swift conclusion.




Richard Wells
                        Part Vll
                      Appendix C




WEST MIDLANDS POLICE




   TRANSCRIPT
        OF
    INTERVIEW

    Superintendent
Bernard Dean MURRAY
                                                                           STATION

NAME:           BERNARD   D
                MURRAY

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION: POL SUPT



         TEXT



                                     West Midlands Police

                              RECORD OF TAPE RECORDED INTERVIEW



        Person Interviewed                          REGINA -v-

        Bemard Dean MURRAY                         MURRAY



        Place & Date of Interview                  Signed             Date

        Interview Rm, Fumival House

        Fumival Road, Sheffield 250690

        Time

        Commenced    1028      Concluded   1457    Court




        Tape Reference Number(s) MJF4-            EXH Ref.

        1/1, 2/1, 3/1, 4/1, 5/1, 6/1



        Interviewing Officer                      Other Person(s) Present

        DCS6930 FOSTER                            Richard MANNING, Solicitor

        DCI2514 TOPE                              PC9032 BROWN

        DECLARATION: This record consisting of      pages is the exhibit

        referred to in the Statement made and signed by me.
MURRAY                BERNARD D


               SIGNATURE

               Officer's Name                        Rank         No.




SIGNATURE of Officer preparing record

(If different to above)

               Officer's Name                        Rank         No.




Tape     Direct Speech Rank

Times    & No or Inititals                       Record

         of Accused

00.10    DCS6930                Okay then, this interview is being

                                video and audio taped and is being

                                conducted in an interview at

                                interview rocm at Fumival House,

                                Fumival Gate, Sheffield.      I

                                am Detective Chief Superintendent

                                FOSTER, of the West Midlands Police

                                the time new is 10.28 (1028) and

                                it's the 25th of June 1990 (250690)

                                Mr MURRAY vrould you introduce

                                yourself with your date of birth

                                please?

         BDM                    Yes, my name is Bernard Dean

                                MURRRAY, my date of birth is

                                28th of August 1941 (28081941) and

                                I'm a Superintendent with the South

                                Yorkshire Police, currently
    #    MURRAY             BERNARD    D                                    3


                                       stationed at Rawmarsh.

                  DCI2514             Detective Chief Inspector Kevin

                                       TOPE of the West Midlands Police.

                  RM                  Yes I'm Richard MANNING, a

                                       Solicitor with Walker Morris

                                       Scott Turnbull Solicitors and

                                      Bees representing Mr MURRAY.

                  PC9032              Police Constable Stephen BROWN

                                       for the West Midlands Police.

£       01.01     DCS6930             Thank you.   At the conclusion of

                                      the interview Mr MURRAY I will

                                      give you a notice explaining

                                      exactly what will happen to the

                                      both the audio and the video tapes.

                                      On the 15th of April 1989 (150489)

                                      a disaster occurred at Hillsborough

                                      Football Stadium and 95 people

                                      died.   Following a public inquiry

                                      and report the Chief Constable of

                                      South Yorkshire Police consulted

                                      with the Director of Public

                                      Prosecutions and as a result

                                      West Midlands Police ware, were

                                      requested to do a criminal

                                      investigation.   This investigation

                                      came at the same time that certain

                                      manbers of the public decided to

        01.37                         make specific allegations against

                                      named police officers.    You are
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D


                               one of those officers and you

                               have already been served with

                               the Regulation 7 Notice dealing

                               with specific complaints.     Hie

                               nature of those complaints and

                               the particular duty you were

                               performing at Hillsborough on

                               the 15th of April 1989 (150489)

                               suggests that you m y have

                              contributed to the deaths of seme

                              of those that died.     Also that

                              you m y have failed to perform

                              your lawful duty as a Police

                              Officer on the 15th of April 1989

02.09                         (150489) at Hillsborough.     I

                              will explain the specific

                              allegations to you in the interview

                              but before       go any further it is

02.16                         right that I caution you and say

                              that you do not have to say

                              anything unless you wish to do

                              so but what you say m y be given

                              in evidence.     Do you understand

                              what I've just said?

          BOM                 Yes.

02.27     DCS6930             Thank you.     I would remind you

                              that you are not under arrest,

                              and you need not remain here.

                              In addition you are entitled to
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                    5


                             the legal representation and

                             Mr MANNING your solicitor is

                             present.     If you did require

                             it, there is the legal aid

                             notice available for you, do

                             you understand what I've just

                             said?

         BDM                 Yes.

         DCS6930             Perhaps to start with, can we

                             agree that you, shortly after and

                             I think for the purpose of the

                             public inquiry, you submitted

                             a statement which actually came

                             to the West Midlands Police?

         BDM                 Yes I did.

         DCS6930             Thank you.    You also gave

                             evidence at the public inquiry

                             and a transcript of the evidence

                             that you gave was produced?

         BDM                 That's correct yes.

         DCS6930             Have you seen that transcript

                             and you agree with it?

         BDM                 Yes I have.

         DCS6930             And you agree with it?

         BDM                 Yes sir.

         DCS6930             Thank you.    Also I have here a

                             an incident log that was commenced

                             by yourself and again referred to

                             at the public inquiry and handed
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D                                       6


                                to the West Midland Police.    That's

                                your incident log which finishes

                                at 1421 (1421)?

           BDM                  Yes, that's correct.

           DCS6930              Okay.   And I think also a set of

                                briefing notes that you actually

                                used for the purposes of the

                               match on the 15th of April 1989

                                (150489)?

          BDM                  Yes, those are my notes.

          DCS6930              Thank you.   I I think you

                               mentioned actually at the start

                               your present posting but could

                               you just tell me exactly what

                               your present role is with

                               South Yorkshire Police?

04.03     BDM                  My present role is I am a

                               Sub-Divisional Ccnmander at

                               Rawmarsh Sub-Division, in

                               Rotherham Division.

          DCS6930              And what service, Police

                               Service have you now got?

04.13     BDM                  I joined the Police Service on the

                               15th of November 1965 (151165) so

                               I shall have completed 25 years

                               on the 15th of November 1990

                               (151190).

          DCS6930              You, you do mention in your

                               statement your experience of
MURRAY         BERNARD    D                                     7


                          policing football matches and I

                          think it's relatively extensive

                          over a period of time.    Could you

                          perhaps analyse it a little

                          bit closer in terms, specifically

                          in relation to Hillsborough as to

                          shall we say your role there fran

                          about 1980 (000080) onwards?
04.48    BDM              I've checked in my sort of pocket

                          books and records and prior to

                          1982 (000082) I can only find one

                         occasion when I worked at

                         Hillsborough, which was in 1977

                          (000077), and that was a semi­

                         final tie between Leeds United

                         and Manchester United.     At that

                         time I was a Sergeant.     On, in

                         September 1982 (000982) I worked

                         at Hillsborough for the occasion

                         of the football match between

                         Sheffield Wednesday and Leeds

                         United and on that occasion I was

                         an Inspector and I've not worked

                         at Hillsborough again until the

                         19th of March 1988 (190388), that

                         was the first occasion that I

                         worked as a Superintendent

                         following the posting to FI

                         Sub-Division.   (Pause).
 MURRAY              BERNARD D


 05.44                       I work out that I've worked

                            nineteen matches between the 19th

                            of March 1988 (190388) to the

                            5th of April 1989 (050489), and

                            then the semi-final on the 15th

                            of April 1989 (150489) and three

                            further football matches following

                            that.

           DCS6930          Thank you.     So to summarize that

                            particulary in terms, shall we

                            say of semi-finals, that will

                            feature later on when I talk to

                            you.    You would not have been

                            present during the 1981 (000081)

                            semi-final when there was some

                           problem with crushing at Leppings

                           Lane?

          BDM              No.

06.18     DCS6930          And you wouldn't have been present

                           at the 1987 (000087) Semi-Final

                           which I think was Coventry against

                           Leeds?

                           No I wasn't.

          DCS6930          But you were there for the 1988

                           (000088) one?

          ra               Yes I was.

          DCS6930          In fact in the same role?

          ra               Yes.

          DCS6930          Thank you.    Out of those other
 MURRAY             BERNARD D                                     9


                           matches that you, you particularly

                           refer to there, would any of those

                           have been specific local derbys

                           or alternatively shall we say

                           capacity crowd situations?

06.47      BDM             The only capacity crcwd situation

                           I know at Hillsborough has been a

                           semi-final.   There have been larger

                           crowds for occasions such as

                           Liverpool, Manchester United, but

                           nowhere near reaching capacity.

          DCS6930          Nowhere near reaching capacity.

                           Okay.   We know that in 1988

                           (000088) you were in the same role

                           as, as 1989 (000089), in the

                           Control, the Police Control Box.

07.13                      fed you had experience prior to

                           that of the Control Box and its

                          running or operation?

07.23     BDM              I worked two football matches prior

                          to that semi-final, within the

                          preceeding three weeks.   One

                          against Portsmouth and one against

                          West Ham United.

          DCS6930         And what sort of crowd would you

                          have had for those two?

          BDM             I can't recall what the crowds

                          were but they, I can't recall.

          DCS6930         Well would it be true to say I
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D                                    10
                                mean my knowledge of Sheffield

                                Wednesday for that particular

                                season was they were perhaps not

                                doing too well and, are we

                                talking, we're not talking about

                                capacity crowd?

           BDM                  Certainly nowhere near capacity,

                               no, but I can't recall the exact

                                figures without referring to...
           DCS6930             And certainly with visiting

                               supporters nothing that would, that

                               you can recall that would have

                               caused you a problem?
           BDM                 No.

          DCS6930              No, okay.    Each of those you

                               say to me was in the Control Box

                               situation.
08.11     BDM                  Yes, the the first match was on

                               the 19th of March 1988 (190388)

                               against Portsmouth which was the

                               first match I vrorked at at

                           Hillsborough, in that role, and

                           the second one was on the 2nd of

                           April (190388) against West Ham

                           United.

          DCS6930          Shortly before the 88 (000088)

                           semi-final?

          BDM              Semi-finals on the 9th of April

                           (090488).
fvB

      MURRAY              BERNARD    D                                     11
                DCS6930              Any otter experience of that

                                     Control Box over preceeding eras?

      08.33     BDM                  No I've never been in a Control Box

                                     before I joined that Sub-Division.
      08.41     DCS6930              Thank you.    Would you explain to

                                     me any specific training in terms

                                     of football training that you've

                                     had in the Police Service that you

                                     you would be able to recall or

                                     particularly pin point?

               BDM                   I don't recall of any training

                                    whatsoever apart frcm on the job

                                    training.     There may have been

                                    input on football matches at

                                    on training courses that I've

                                    been on but I can't recall.

               DCS6930              Have you ever had any training

                                    in terms of the recognition of

#                                   crowd behaviour or crcwd capacities,

                                    anything on that line?

               BDM                  No sir.

               DCS6930              You've obviously been involved in

                                    various public order situations

                                    over the years which have featured

                                    crowds and perhaps even to the

                                    extent of being associated to

                                    football events, but has any of

                                    that been of value to you or has

                                    given you any sort of training to
    MURRAY             BERNARD D


                               look at a normal crowd, the build

                              up of a crowd, capacity crowds,

                              monitoring of crowds?

              KM              Not that I can recall.    We

                              semetimes try and assess numbers

                              so far as crowds are concerned

                              but with no sort of, with no

                              specific expertise at all.      It's

                              just a, purely and simply an

                              estimate.

    10.12    DCS6930          An estimate.   Has anything taken

                              place in your experience at

                              Hillsborough or indeed any other

                              football experience, whereby

                              injuries or overcrowding or any

                              type of disaster has occurred

                              that would have given you seme

                              experience in dealing with those


#                             sort of matters?

             KM              Not that I can recall, no sir.

             DCS6930         Nothing thats...

             KM              Nothing I can recall.

             DCS6930         Thank you.   You went to the F

                             Division on promotion to

                             Superintendent ?

             KM              Yes I did.

             DCS6930         As the Sub-Divisional Superintendent?

             BDM             Yes.

             DCS6930         And took up your duties and
MURRAY             BERNARD    D                                      13


                             particularly shall we say to do

                             with Hillsborough and as you've

                             said on a few occasions, the

                             policing of football matches.

11.04                        There is an F Division Policy File

                             on football, would you have had

                             access to that file?

11.13    BDM                 I could have had access to the file

                             I don't recall seeing the file,

                             the, when I joined the Division,

                             the football matches were commanded

                             by the Divisional Commander or

                             his Deputy.   It wasn't the role

                             of the Sub-Divisional Superintendent

                             to ccmnand football matches.

         DCS6930             Not to command them, would you have

                             had a role in them though?

         BDM                 I was told the, the Superintendent

                             from the Sub-Division traditionally

                             worked in the Control Room

                             environment and that was where I

                             would work.

         DCS6930             That's where you would work.     That

                             Policy File, F Division Policy

                             File, did you, did you think at any

                             time at the start when you first

                             went there, with the view that you

                             may be doing football matches, did

                             you think it important to read
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D                                    14


                               that file or go through it?

           BDM                 Well the Sub-Division I'd cane

                               fran was also had a football

                               ground, and I was vrell aware of

                               the, the files that vrere in

                               relation to that football ground

                               and so I was aware of instructions

                               that eminated fran ACPO level,

                               down to football match Ccnmanders.

          DCS6930              Yes and presumably that would

                               include your force policy file

                              which would, if it did distribute

                              matters on football, would

                              distribute them both to your

                              previous appointment and to the

                              present one?

          BDM                 Yes.

          DCS6930             So, what you're saying to me is

                              you felt you would have been up

                              to date and there was no...

12.40     BDM                 I would have been up to date,

                              I had a copy of the Force

                              Standing Orders in relation to

                              football in my office and that

                              was all.

          DCS6930             Okay.   Within that particular

                              policy file of, of the F Division

                              is a document that related and

                              was referred to the Public Inquiry
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D


                                concerning the incident which

                                took place in 1981 (000081) at

                                Hillsborough which was the over­

                                crowding, crushing at the Leppings

                                Lane end?

           BDM                  I don't know.     I I haven't seen

                                it.

           DCS6930              You haven't.     Well would you

                                take it fran me that it is in

                                there having, I've actually

                                seen it?

          BDM                  Well yes if you've seen it.

                               Yes.

13.15     DCS6930              What I wanted to know was did,

                               did you have any knowledge prior

                               to the disaster that took place

                               of a problem at the Leppings

                               Lane end in the early 1980's

                               (000080).

          BDM                  No.

          DCS6930              Never mentioned to you by anyone?

          BDM                  No.

          DCS6930              No.    The first time that you did

                               find out about it?

13.34     BDM                  Well I knew that the ground had

                               been rearranged.     The Leppings

                               Lane end had been rearranged,

                               but I didn't know the, the

                               reasons for it.     I was told it
MURRAY             BERNARD    D                                    16


                              was to prevent swaying along the

                              terraces, the lateral swaying,

                              and that it was also incorporating

                              division of hone and away

                              supporters.

         DCS6930              Your Chief Superintendent at the

                              time that you went there was Mr

                             MDLE?

         BDM                 He was yes.

14.03    DCS6930             Did he give you any sort of

                             briefing or otherwise on your

                             role as a Superintendent in the

                             Control Room and past problems if

                             any that the ground had had to

                             bring you up to date?

         BCM                 As I recall he told me that

                             football was a very successful

                             venture in F Division, they were

                             very proud of their performance

                             in relation to football matches,

                             that they felt that they were

                             one of the leading outfits in

                             the country in dealing with

                             football and it was a very

                             successful operation, that he

                             would take ccmnand of football

                             matches, in his absence his

                             deputy, and I would be as the

                             FI Superintendent always had
MURRAY              BERNARD    D                                    17


                               been, in the Control Roan

                               environment, where I would over­

                               see the match under his catmand.

          DCS6930              Just, just going back to that

                               document that I mentioned to

                               you, this...

          BDM                  Yes.

                               debrief minute document, I think

                               you're now aware of, through the

                               public inquiry...

         BDM                   Yes.

         DCS6930              and probably since, you know the

                              document that I'm talking about?

         BDM                  Yes.

15.16    DCS6930              Had you of seen the document, do

                              you think it would have made any

                              difference whatsoever to, to, to

                              the way you thought or, or

                              considered events on a particular

                              match day at that ground in the

                              time to cane.   Say you vrould have

                              picked it up on your first day

                              as a Sub-Divisional Superintendent

                              and gone through it?

         BCM                  I don't know, I, I probably think

                              not because like I say my

                              information was the whole of the

                              Leppings Lane end had been

                              redesigned sane three or four
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D                                       18


                                years ago and we're talking of

                                an incident nine years previous.

           DCS6930              Sometime.   I mean were you aware

                                for example, and I think you've

                                actually answered this by saying

                                you weren't, but were you aware

                                that those changes really resulted

                                from the problems of 1981 (000081)?

          BDM                   Not...

          DCS6930              Was it that apparent at the tine?

          BDM                  Not entirely no.

16.06     DCS6930              Okay, thank you.   We, you mention

                               that you weren't actually there in

                               1987 (000087), there has been a

                               suggestion and it is only a, it's

                               not, it's not well documented, but

                               there is a suggestion that there

                               was a problem at the semi-final in

                               1987 (000087) whereby there was the

                               suggestion of overcrowding.    Did

                               you have any knowledge of that?

          BCM                  No.

          DCS6930              Going on to 1988 (000088) when you

                               were there as the, in the Control

16.40                          Room situation with Mr MOLE, again

                               there is sane evidence that people

                               were injured on those terraces in

                               an overcrowding situation.    Was that

                               ever bought to your attention?
MURRAY             BERNARD    D                                      19


         BDM                  No.

         DCS6930              Not at all?

         BDM                  Not at all.

         DCS6930              No.If it, if that situation had

                              occurred, if people had been injured

                              on those terraces, what normally

                             would happen at Hillsborough Football

                             Ground, shall we say that somebody

                              suffers sprained wrist, broken arm

                             and he's taken out.     Would you

                             expect to know about it?

         BDM                 We, Red Cross Tent or...

         DCS6930             St Johns?

         BDM                 St Johns is immediately next to the

                             Police Holding Room at the back of

17-25                        the gymnasium.    Obviously one

                             expects sane people to be injured

                             through either fainting or or a

                             multitude of different things when

                             you've got a large crowd of over

                             50,000 people and the odd person

                             being taken away for treatment is

                             is really no cause for concern

                             at all.     If there had been several

                             people injured, particularly in

                             one location, then I, yes, I would

                             have expected to have known about

                             it, I would have wanted to know

                             about it.
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


17.59    DCS6930             Would they keep a record to your

                             knowledge of that?

         BCM                 Em.

         DCS6930             Of injuries?

         BDM                 Not that I know of, the different

                             serials do may veil content on it

                             on their debriefing sheets.

         DCS6930             Yes.   If, is there any instruction

                             for than for any injuries to

                             actually inform the Police.    Is

                             there anything that you knew of

                             that exists for the St Johns

                             to actually have a duty to, to

                             inform the Police there.

         BCM                 Not that I'm aware of, but of course

                             if if there was serious injuries

                             I would think they would get in

                             touch with us straight away for

                             warning relatives etc.

18.38    DCS6930             Okay thank you.   You obviously were

                             present at the debrief, for the 1988

                             (000088) game.

         BCM                 Yes.

         DCS6930             And I think from what you've said

                             it's evident that nothing actually

                             came up to suggest that there was

                             an overcrowding problem?

18.50    BCM                 There was no suggestion of an

                             overcrowding, I'd noticed several
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D                                   21




                               areas myself where I thought we

                               could improve, but there was no

                               suggestion of overcrowding or

                               people being injured through

                               overcrowding.

          DCS6930              But when you say that you noticed

                              yourself, was that to do with?

          BCM                 That was nothing to do with

                              overcrowding.

          DCS6930             No.    Does that relate, if we, we

                              ask you new, I that in your

                              statement and I'll ccme to it

                              later on, you actually refer to

                              a number things that you actually

                              put into operation to change from

                              the year, was that what you were

                              referring to?

          BCM                 Yes.

          DCS6930             Okay well can w e ...

          BDM                 Yes.

          DCS6930             come onto that a bit later on.

19.24                         Additionally in 1988 (000088)

                              there was the suggestion as you

                              know, which is you know that

                              has been well documented, or

                              talked about, that the tunnel,

                              the central tunnel to pens 3

                              and 4 was closed at sane stage

                              by one form or another and I
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D


                                I think you you may have already

                                said that you had no knowledge

                                of that.   Is that correct?

19.45      BDM                  That's absolutely correct.     I've

                                never know the tunnel be closed

                                under any circumstances.

           DCS6930              You, you again probably answered

                                the next question but, through

                                various enquiries that have been

                               made and shall we say through

                                talking to particularly to the

                                trackside officers, PC'S

                                ILLINGWORTH and PC SMTIH, do

                               you know both of those?

          BDM                  Yes I do.

20.08     DCS6930              There has been a slight suggestion

                               that the tunnel is closed for

                               example, according to PC

                               ILLINGWORTH, he he thought he,

                               that the tunnel had been closed

                               when he's done concourse

                               duties and his reason behind

                               it was he always felt and not

                               through anybody told him, but

                               he felt that the reason must

                               have been because the centre

                               pens were full.   Would you suggest

                               that that's probably mistaken then?

          BDM                  I don't know, I I, it's never cane
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D                                     23


                                to   my   attention, the, that the

                                tunnel's been closed, at any of

                                the matches I went to, particularly

                                the 1988 (000088) semi-final.

           DCS6930              And if we go away from semi-finals,

                                is there any occasion on a league

                                game when it would be closed?

           BDM                  Not that I know of, I I've never

                                known it closed.     I've known

                               access to the terraces on one

                               particular occasion to be difficult

                               from anywhere at the back and the

                               officer in charge hoi to bring

                               people through the gates at the

                               front, but I've never known the

                               tunnel be consciously closed.

          DCS6930              The incident you've just referred

                               to, can you tell me when that was?

          BDM                  It was the Manchester United

                               football match on the 11th of

                               February 1989 (110289).

          DCS6930              In 89 (000089)?

          BDM                  Yeah.

          DCS6930              And that's when officers...

          BDM                  That was when...

          DCS6930              You stopped people caning down

                               the tunnel?

21.36     BDM                  It was nothing to do with closing

                               the tunnel it was the fact that
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D


                               as occasionally happens at football

                               matches, people stood at the back

                               and there was lots of roan at the

                               front and it was impossible to

                               get anyone into any part of the

                               Leppings Lane terraces on the

                               perception that the officer was

                               in charge of that end of the ground

                              and he actually brought people

                              through the North Stand along the

                              track and fed them into the, into

                              the front, through the gates.

          DCS6930             You're not saying there was any

                              actual blocking of the tunnel?

          BDM                 No, no there was no blocking

                              by the Police, it was just by by

                              the number of people presumably

                              who were there, the fans could

                              not get in and so they turned

                              round and went elsewhere, could

                              not get in, and couldn't get

                              onto the terraces.

22.24     DCS6930             Did that raise it's head that

                              there was a capacity problem of

                              of any kind?

          BDM                 It didn't raise it's head to me,

                              I think on that occasion there was

                              several thousand places still

                              available on the terrace.   I   don't
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D                                   25


                               think it was a capacity problem

                               more on a packing problem, that

                               there was tranendous space at

                               the front but there wasn't at the

                               back.

          DCS6930             Did anyone pick that up in terms

                              of perhaps talking to the Club

                              about it or?

          BDM                 The Club actually spoke about it

                              and were not in favour of the

                              tactic that had been employed

                              and it was something that we

                              were to bear in mind in the

                              future that we made sure that

                              people, whenever possible, moved

                              dcwn to the front of terraces to

                              make room at the back.

23.24     DCS6930             I pursue it because I I knew that

                              the view has always been held

                              by, and I think you've said it and

                              if not please correct me, that

                              people find their own level on

                              the terraces.

          BDM                 Yes.

          DCS6930             What you seem to be saying is

                              that that wasn't possible, you've

                              got capacity there but for seme

                              reason the the level wasn't

                              finding itself.
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D


           BDM                 it was, it was an occasion where

                               people stood back I think it was

                               unexpected that the numbers of

                               people who attended on that

                              occasion were far more than the

                               intelligence suggested and we we

                              we had, we expected x number of

                              thousand visitors and we got a

                              lot more.

24.07     DCS6930             But there was no injury problem,

                              no overcrowding problem, nothing

                              that you are saying that really

                              should have perhaps alerted you

                              to the fact that there was a

                              problem with a big crowd there?

          BDM                 There, there were no injuries.

                              There were no injuries and

                              there, and there was no real

                              problem.

          DCS6930             Can I just confirm the date of

                              that, you said it was Manchester

                              United on the?

          BDM                 I I've got it as the only

                              Manchester United game I attended

                              and I think that was on the 11th of

                              February 1989 (110289).

24.41     DCS6930             Thank you.   Can we move on to

                              1989 (000089) and your role at the

                              1989 (000089) game.   You have said
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D


                               that you attended a number of

                               briefings and I think actually

                               went to a number of briefings,

                               sorry actually did a number of

                               briefings yourself.   The first one

                               that I think you referred to was

                               in fact on the 14th of April

                               (140489)?

          BDM                  The two briefings yes.

          DCS6930              One on the 14th of April (140489)

                              and then one on the 15th (150489)

                              on the day of the game.

          BDM                 Yes.

25.31     DCS6930             Now the 14th of April (140489)

                              briefing which was given by Mr

                              DUCKENFIELD firstly to Inspectors

                              and above?

          BDM                 Yes.

          DCS6930             Can you tell me how that related

                              in terms of the issue of safety.

                              Can you tell me what content on

                              safety was in that briefing?

25.58     BDM                 I can't remember, I can't remember

                              but certainly Mr DUCKENFIELD did

                              his briefing from a typed sheet

                              I think, he mentioned safety,

                              he definitely mentioned safety

                              and I think he finished his

                              briefing by saying to, that
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D                                     28


                                safety was important, but I can't

                                remember the exart content of it.

           DCS6930              Would there have been anything

                                specific in that briefing to do

                                with the packing of the crowd, the

                                monitoring of the crowd or over­

                                crowding purposes?

           BDM                  No.

           DCS6930             No.     You're definite that that

                               wouldn't have been talked about?
          BDM                  Well I feel, I feel that it

                               wouldn't have been talked about

                               yes.

          DCS6930              Okay.     Core back to that in a

                               minute.     Perhaps if we can

                               refer to the statement that you

                               actually gave to us, your own

                               statement.

          BDM                  Yes.

          DCS6930              And go back on the the area that you

                               spoke about where you made seme

                               changes.

          BDM                  Yes.

26.58     DCS6930              You actually talked in terms of a

                           manpower reduction for 1989 (000089)

                           based on what you've learnt from

                               1988 (000088), and I think

                           actually the reduction, or a lot

                           of the reduction was done by
      MURRAY              BERNARD     D                                       29


                                     reducing the serials from one

                                     and ten to one and eight?

                BDM                  The outside serials.

     27.17      DCS6930              The outside serials.     Now the other

                                     thing that you actually mention

                                     is the refreshments and providing

                                     a hot meal.    Was that new?

                BDM                  Yes the, the previous year there

                                     had been two cold meals, two packed


#                                   meals, which really is insufficient

                                     for officers who may be working up

                                    to twelve hours and I I wanted to

                                    be able to provide the officers

                                    with a hot meal, because the event

                                    was being held in April and what

                                    the weather was going to be like

                                    was, was totally unknown of course.

               DCS6930              Yes.     In terms of that how were they



♦
                                    designated times to go for those

                                    refreshments?

               BDM                  The times were written into the

                                    order.

               DCS6930              Into the Order?

               BDM                  Yes.

    28.03      DCS6930              I mean for example, the the track

                                side officers, and again I've talked,

                                let's talk particularly of PC SMITH

                                and ILLINGW3RTH who were if, if you

                                like on the trackside closer to the
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D


                               pens 3 and 4.     They actually didn't

                               go for their refreshment 'til about

                               2 o'clock (1400).      Was that, if you

                               want to refer to the order, I've got

                               a copy here.    Was, was that the time

                               that they were allocated fran what

                               you can recall?

 28.30     BDM                 I think, I think that was down to

                               the, the Inspector on the track to

                              or the Sergeant in charge of the

                              serial to stagger the meal breaks of

                              of the trackside officers, fran what

                              I can recall.

          DCS6930             Do you want to have a look at the

                              order...

          BDM                 Yes.

          DCS6930             to refresh yourself?

          BDM                 Yes in fact I've got my own copy

                              here.

          DCS6930             Okay, fine.     I think this is

29.00                         Document 192, I don't think it's

                              in there actually, Document 194

                              for the benefit of the audio.

                              (Pause).

29.21     ra                  It does say meals staggered before

                              the match in the gym.

          DCS6930             Thats, where you actually now

                              looking for serial?

          BDM             Appendix B, Serial 1.
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D


                                 (Pause).

 29.43     DCS6930              And where are you actually finding

                                that.    Meal staggered before gym

                                match in gym.

           BDM                  Yes.

           DCS6930              Right.    So there are no actual

                                allocated times?
 29.57     BDM                  No that is down to the, the Track

                                Inspector and, and Serial Sergeant

                                to, to designate when the officers

                               will take their meals.

          DCS6930              Would that have been the same in

                               previous, say in the 1988 (000088)

                               semi-final?

          BDM                  I would think so.

          DCS6930              Was it the same for most matches?

          BDM                  I I would think so.

          DCS6930              Okay.

          BDM                  Sorry not for most matches, for

                               for most of the league games they

                               would take their meal before they

                               went onto the track, where the duty

                               is not as lengthy as, as a semi-final.

30.37     DCS6930              I see.    The reason I ask is because

                               the, the two officers shall we say

                           with those trackside duties are

                               away fran about 2 o'clock (1400)

                           til about 2.50 (1450) which, which

                            is obviously a, appears to be an
MURRAY             BERNARD    D                                    32


                              important time and I, I wondered

                             whether any consideration was

                             given to that aspect, in the

                             planning or in the briefing?

30.57    BDM                 Not unless it was given by the

                             the Inspector in charge of that

                             serial, because the the briefings

                             that were given to all officers

                             were obviously of a very general

                             nature and it was down to the

                             Sector Superintendents and Serial

                             Sergeants to brief their officers

                             to their specific duties.

         DCS6930             If I, hindsight's been used a

                             great deal here, but and perhaps

                             I'm going to assume later on that

                             you, in your briefing side, that

                             perhaps the, from what you've said

                             Mr DUCKENFIELD that overcrowding

                             or monitoring of packing of pens

                             was not perhaps an issue that was

                             talked about. If it is now a matter

                             that is talked about, at football

                             matches, if it is now something

                             that's briefed, would you give any

                             reconsideration to trackside

                             officers having meals betvreen

                             those times?

32.00    KM                  Absolutely.    I I think now at
MURRAY              BERNARD    D


                               certain grounds it's necessary

                               to keep the gates open all the

                               time and obviously to keep the

                               police officer presence there

                               all the time that there are

                               people on the terraces.    So

                               that would have to be looked at,

                              with hindsight yes.

32.14     DCS6930             Thank you.    Moving away fran that

                              you you also talk about, and can

                              you confirm that this was one of

                              your changes, you talk about non

                              ticket holders, I think in page

                              3 of your statement. You actually

                              say something like, just past half

32.37                         way.   We're now looking at a

                              statenent presented by Mr MURRAY.

                              (Pause).

32.53     DCS6930             It's about page 3, can you see

                              where it says if large, if large

                              numbers of supporters without

                              tickets, mobile serials to attempt

                              to locate and remove?

         BDM                  Yes.

         DCS6930              Is that    part of your changes for

                              1989                        (000089) from 1988 (000088)?

         KM                   I don't    know, I think, I think

                              the situation was similar in 1988

                              (000088) but we obviously had to
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D                                      34


                               wait and see hew many there were.

                               There were a small number of

                               people who were entertained I think

                               at the, at the rear of the South

                               Stand, with a radio listening to the

                               match in 1988 (000088).   It's very

                               much a question of how many you're

                               going to get, if if it's a very

                              managable number you can keep them

                              outside the ground in irrmediate

                              confines.   If it's going to be a

                               large number, it wasn't an

                              expected large number it was just

                              something in case.

33.47     DCS6930             Do I take it then you were in

                              1988 (000088) it happened and you

                              did something at the time without

                              a contingency for it, but in 1989

                              (000089) you were making a

                              contingency for it?

34.00     DBM                 in 1989 (000089) we were looking

                              at the possibility of fans turning

                              up without tickets and keeping

                              separated and the contingency was

                              there, although it wasn't officially

                              written into the order.

          DCS6930             No.   I think you talk about it in

                              your briefing in any event at some

                              stage?
MURRAY              BERNARD    D


          DBM                  Quite possibly.

34.25     DCS6930              Yeah, if, where were they actually

                               going to go, I can't, it says

                               locate, remove to and you've got

                              Nottingham Forest to Hillsborough

                              Park, Liverpool to Coal Road.     Can

                              you explain where Coal Road is?

         BDM                  Well Coal Road is a little cul-de-

                              sac next to Wads ley Bridge Railway

                              Station, people coming off the train

                              who arrived at the railway station

                              and go down this short stretch

                              of road, and then make their way

                              to the ground.     It's on the

                              Liverpool side, if you like, the

                              Liverpool arrival side of the

                              ground and with it being a cul-

34.57                         de-sac, it is an area where

                              we can keep our eyes on other

                              people without them causing any

                              problems.

         DCS6930              Can you say how many you had in

                              1988 (000088)?

         ra                   I can't, I don't think, I don't

                              know.

         DCS6930              Were they, I mean if they went

                              behind that South Stand, I

                              presume that they were easily

                              managed and were willing to go?
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D                                      36


           BDM                  Yes I think it was just one of

                                the Inspectors who, who found the

                                radio from somewhere and, and

                                that and listened to the ratch.

                                This is only hearsay, and hearsay

                                fairly recent.

           DCS6930              Hew far shall we say is Coal

                                Road and that place you've just

                               mentioned from the Lappings Lane

                                gates?

          BDM                  Coal Road will be getting on for

                               half a mile.

35.41     DCS6930              Hew would you expect to get them

                               there?

          BDM                  Not easily.    By sort of using the

                               Tango vehicles, using officers,

                               foot officers and just trying to

                               persuade them to go there.    There's

                               no suggestion that we, we could

                               try and force them there.

          DCS6930              Is there any...

          BUM                  It is by persuasion and by sort

                               of by hope as much as anything.

          DCS6930              To your knowledge is there any law

                               or anything that gives you the power

                               to do something with them?

36.10     BDM                  We've no powers whatsoever, like

                               I say it's by persuasion.    The

                               only, the only power that we could



                                                                            95
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D                                     37


                                use of course is, if we expected

                                an inmediate breach of the peace,

                                but that very much depends upon

                                the behaviour of the people that

                                we've...

           DCS6930              But the ordinary non ticket holder

                                that's doing nothing wrong other

                                than looking for tickets?

           BDM                  No.

          DCS6930              You really are saying that you

                               were hoping to persuade them

                               to, or move them at half a mile,

                               and con, contain them and presumably

                               set up sane sort of communication

                               so that they could listen...

          BOI                  That's right,

          DCS6930              or otherwise.

          BDM                  That is what we would have liked

                               to have done.

36.45     DCS6930              Did that result fran 1988 (000088)

                               on its own or did you have any

                               additional intelligence that non

                               ticket holders were going to be

                               a problem that made you think

                               differently?

          BDM                  There was no intelligence, I mean

                               obviously we expect some people

                               to cone without tickets, there

                           was no intelligence to suggest
MURRAY             BERNARD    D


                              that there would be large numbers

                              or small numbers it was purely

                              a contingency if it occurred.

37.18    DCS6930              Okay.   Can I just go to a meeting

                              that you had new, moving away from

                              that, on the 13th of April (130489)

                              with Mr MACKRELL the Club Secretary

         BDM                  Yes.

         DCS6930             And you went to that meeting with

                             one of the Inspectors I think?

         BDM                 Yes I did.

         DCS6930             Can you briefly tell me what that

                             meeting was for?

37.40    BDM                 Well the meeting was just to, just

                             to to sort of exchange information

                             and to find out several matters

                             that I wanted to bring to the

                             attention of the Club and probably

                             sane matters that they wanted to

                             bring to my attention.   I was

                             concerned about the, the gantry

                             that the television cameras were

                             being mounted on over the West

                             Stand, and whether it was safe.

                             I was concerned about where

                             exactly Mr CLOUGH was going to

                             sit because I think he'd been

                             banned fran the touch line and

                             there was several matters that
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D


                               I wanted to discuss with the

                               Club where they were going

                               to site betting booths, what

                               vulnerable property they had, who

                               the referee was and and matters

                               in general.

          DCS6930              It's a sort of final mop up, make

                               sure everything's right before

                               the day?

          BDM                 Yes.

          DCS6930             And the Club man from your, your

                              point of view.

          BDM                 Yes, yes that's the way I look

                              at it.

38.47     DCS6930             Did the, did you actually have

                              anything to do with the, the

                              tickets that were produced or

                              printed for the game?

          BDM                 No, no I didn't I knew that

                              Chief Superintendent M3LE had

                              asked them to be slightly bolder

                              colour than they were the year

                              before, but that, I had no

                              involvement with the tickets.

          DCS6930             Do you know why Mr MOLE asked that?

39.12     BDM                 I think they were sort of pastel

                              shades which it was difficult to

                              decide which was brown, which was

                              red and he asked then to be a
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D


                                darker shade, and I think they

                                were made a darker shade for the

                                89 (000089) final.

 39.28     DCS6930              Is that because there was a problem

                               with 88 (000088) in terms of

                               people knowing where they've been

                               going?

          BDM                  I think it was generally a problem

                               that it wasn't clear from the

                               tickets yeah, which was the brown

                               queue, which was the burgandy queue,

                               which was the red queue, whatever

                               the colours were.

          DCS6930              Do you know where that related to

                               was it, was it in general throughout

                               the ground or specifically Leppings

                               Lane?

          BDM                  I don't know whether it was anywhere

                               specific, my irrpression was that it

                               was generally throughout the ground

                               that the colours were similar.

          DCS6930              But you had no cause yourself to

                               take any part in the, the colouring

                               of those tickets or the...

          KM                   No.

40.06     DCS6930              Or the, what about the inspection

                               of them, to see that you were

                               happy with than that they in

                               fact accorded with the turnstile
MURRAY             BERNARD    D


                              numbers or lettering?

         BDM                  I think, I think we received

                              copies of the tickets.   I I don't

                              I didn't inspect them personally.

40.24    DCS6930              It, I mean it has been suggested

                              that the tickets either by colour

                              or lettering caused confusion in

                              the 1988 (000088) 1989 (000089) semi­

                              final.   Would you agree with that?

         BDM                  I would agree with having read and

                             heard what I 've heard since the

                             event.

         DCS6930             Mm.

         BDM                 At the time I didn't know.

40.47    DCS6930             You didn't know.   I mean would

                             you give any opinion on whether

                             you think it was a considerable

                             factor or a factor of any kind

                             in the problems that occurred

                             outside the turnstiles in 89

                             (000089)?

         HM                  I don't know the extent of it

                             but I I I feel sure it must have

                             been a factor, if someone turned

                             up at a wrong turnstile and was

                             turned away, then obviously

                             it's impairing the efficiency

                             of the turnstiles and it was very

                             important that those turnstiles
  MURRAY              BERNARD    D


                                 kept turning, putting people into

                                 the ground.

  41.20     DCS6930              So what you're actually saying

                                 really is it would appear at

                                 88 (000088) there was a, seme

                                 sort of problem because Mr MOLE

                                acted on it and asked them to

                                to use bolder colours?
            KM                  Yes.

            DCS6930             Which suggests that there was a

                                slight problem of sane sort.
            KM                  Yes.

           DCS6930              And that the Police actually did

                                sanething about it and tried to

                                rectify that problem?

           KM                   Yes, yes.

41.41      DCS6930              But to your knowledge there was

                                nothing wrong with the or nothing

                                suggested that there was anything

                            wrong with the the printing or the

                            numbers to cause confusion other

                            than the colouring?
           KM               No.

41.56      DCS6930          Thank you.      Moving back now to

                            the actual briefing on the

                            14th of April (140489).      You've

                            mentioned Mr DUCKENFIELDS and we've

                            been through that and I think on page

                            5 of your statement you refer to
      MURRAY              BERNARD    D


                                     to your briefing that you did to

                                     the Inspectors and above?
                KM                   Yes.

     42.21      DCS6930              Would you be able to tell me

                                     whether anything was specifically

                                     said from you in terms of safety

                                     of any kind?

                BDM                  I don't think there was, I think the

                                    safety aspect was covered by the

#                                   Match Corrmander and I concentrated

                                    on specifics.   I have a copy of the

                                    briefing notes here.

                DCS6930             Would you just like to look through

                                    your briefing notes and see if

                                    there's anything that?

               BDM                  The, the main one is and the one

                                    that I always emphasise at any
    42.59                           football matches is the emergency

                                    evacuation procedure which is

                                    of course a safety measure, the

                                major safety measure, as far as

                                we're concerned, and that would be,

                                that was something I would never

                                leave out at my, my briefing notes.

    43.19      DCS6930          So in fact there was a safety

                                input from yourself in that

                                briefing on the 14 of April

                                (140489)?

               KM               Yes.
MURRAY              BERNARD    D                                    44


          DCS6930              And that would have been

                               specifically to do with the

                               evacuation of the ground in an

                               emergency situation?

          BDM                  That is correct.

          DCS6930              In view of the fact that the,

                               we've just had the, the warning

                               signal, can I terminate this

                               part of the interview new and the

                               time is 11, twelve minutes past

                               eleven (1112) and Mr TOPE if you

                               could switch off the audio please.

43.49                          (Tape switched off).

00.09    DCS6930              This is a continuation with an

                               interview with Superintendent

                              MURRAY.   The time is 1114 (1114)

                              on the 25th of June (250690).     I

                              am Michael POSTER, Detective

                              Chief Superintendent POSTER,

                              West Midlands Police.

         KM                   Bernard Dean MURRAY of

                              Superintendent South

                              Yorkshire Police.

         DCI2514              Chief Inspector Kevin TOPE

                              West- Midlands Police.

         RM                   Richard MANNING, Solicitor,

                              Walker Morris Scott Turnbull

                              with Leeds.

         PC9032               Police Constable Stephen BRCWN
 MURRAY              BERNARD D                                      45


                             of West Midlands Police.

 00.35     DCS6930          Could I just remind you Mr

                            MURRAY that the caution still

                            applies.

           BDM              Yes.

           DCS6930          Your briefing that we were just

                            talking about in the previous part

                            of the interview.    You actually

                            said that you discussed with Mr

                            MURRAY at the conclusion of...

          KM                No.

          DCS6930           Sorry.    Mr DUCKENFIELD, my

                            apologies.

          KM                Yeah.

00.58     DCS6930           You actually say in your statement

                            that you discussed with Mr

                            DUCKENFIELD after that, cutting

                            down your input on the briefing

                            presumably the following day?

          BDM               Yes the full briefing was given

                            to the Inspectors, I had to cut it

                            down for the following day, it was

                            taking too long.    The, the officers

                            just would not give their attention

                           to a briefing of that length.

01.23     DCS6930          Can you tell me, in terms of cutting

                           it down, can you tell me what you

                           cut out?

          BDM              Well I can, I cut out if fran my
MURRAY             BERNARD    D                                     46


                              briefing notes, I cut out the, the

                              details of television and video,

                              the train arrivals and departments,

                              departures for the travelling fans,

                              prisoners and ejections, alchol,

                              the call signs, the administrative

                              pieces, carmuncations, of what to

                             do with property, ground regulations

                             tactics that we've decided upon and

                             seme other information that was

                             useful to officers working the

02.17                        event.   All these could be given

                             by the Serial Sergeants and

                             Inspectors to the respective

                             serials, but I didn't cut out the

                             emergency evacuation procedure,

                             which I've always considered is the

                             most important part of my briefing

                             to officers at all events, and I

                             had to keep in something about

                             inflatables which had received a

                             lot of press and media coverage

                             over the last two or three days.

         DCS6930             Do I take it that, that in fact

                             if we look at your briefing notes,

                             that in fact the ones that you've

                             taken out are the ones with a

                             line through?

         BDM                 That is correct yes.
 MURRAY              BERNARD D


 03.08     DCS6930          Thank you.    When you talked about

                            the, the evacuation, your briefing

                            of the evacuation, does that

                            involve any talk on the the

                            major incident plan that is in

                            existence for your force?

           BDM              No, the the emergency evacuation

                            procedure is just the way we would

                            evacuate a section of the whole

                            of the ground, if an emergency

                            arose inside the ground.

03.50     DCS6930           Would there be any input to

                            any of the Inspectors and above on

                            the way in which you would implement

                            the major disaster plan?

          BDM              No.

          DCS6930           If, if that plan was to be put

                           into effect on an event such as

                           Hillsborough, how would it be put

                           into effect?

04.25     BDM              Well the, the officer in charge of

                           the event would possibly call

                           Operation Support, ask for a

                           Major Incident Box to be forwarded

                           to the stadium and take what ever

                           action he considered necessary.

          DCS6930          The, the officers that are at the

                           stadium doing shall we say football

                           duties.
 MURRAY              BERNARD D                                    48

           BDM              Yes.

 04.58     DCS6930          Are they given any designated tasks

                            should a major incident disaster

                            plan be put into effect?
           BDM              No their tasks that they are given

                            which are written into the Order,

                            are in relation to an emergency

                            evacuation which one could say

                            does run hand in hand with a

                            major incident or a major

                            disaster.    Those duties are are

                            specific in connection with

                           evacuating the ground and seeing the

                           people safely away from the stadium

                           but not for a type of incident

                           that occurred on the 15th of

                           April 1989 (150489).

          DCS6930          And the officers there, are you

                           saying are aware of their duties

                           in terms of evacuation?

05.46     BDM              Absolutely the Serial Sergeants

                           are instructed at every event

                           to make the officers aware of

                           their duties for emergency

                           evacuation,    in fact twice

                           during the, that current season

                           the, the emergency evacuation plan

                          was tested to my knowledge and

                          possibly once more.
 MURRAY               BERNARD    D                                      49

 06.14      DCS6930              Thank you.    The intelligence

                                 briefing that followed your

                                 briefing on the 15th of April

                                 (150489).    Was there anything

                                 in that briefing that would have

                                 made you reconsider the Match

                                 Order that you'd actually put

                                 out or been involved in for that

                                 game?

           BDM                  No, I, seem to recall that the

                                intelligence was made in relation

                                to pick pockets who were expected

                                to travel from Liverpool as they

                                had done the previous year.    There

                                was no intelligence that I can

                                recall that would have altered our

                                existing plans.

          DCS6930               You'd no additional information on

                                non ticket holders?

          BDM                   No.

07.02     DCS6930               Nothing additional on the suggestions

                                that people were going to drink

                                later in public houses or anything

                            like that?

          BUM               No.

          DCS6930           So you were quite happy, as and

                            when you did that briefing, and

                            you heard that intelligence, that

                            your, your match plan was in order
 MURRAY             BERNARD D


                            and didn't need any last minute

                           change?

          BDM              No the plan seemed, seemed good.

                           There were no last minute changes,

                           except that copies of the public

                           houses were given to all outside

                           Sergeants showing them which ones

                           were closed, which ones were open,

                           which ones had back doors sales

                           etc.

07.43     DCS6930          Thank you.   Can we move on now to

                           your actual role on the day.        You

                           actually I think say that you had

                           responsibility and overall command

                           of the Control Room?

          BDM              Yes.

08.03     DCS6930          Can you actually explain that in

                           relation to the role of Mr

                           DUCKENFIELD in the Control Roan?

          BDM              Well Mr DLCKENFIELD was in overall

08.17                      command of the event,        job,

                           as I saw it was in the Control

                           Room, overseeing the event, making

                           arrangements for reception of all

                          ccnmunications and acting on the

                           information received.   Mr

                          DUCKENFIELD had informed me

                          before the event that he would

                          be taking up his position as
MURRAY               BERNARD D                                         51


                             Commander in the Control Rocm and

                            where as Mr MDLE, the previous

                            year had not.
09.00      DCS6930          Yes, you, I think you actually

                            said to the Public Inquiry that

                            Mr DUCKENFIELD if you want to

                            look at it it's on Page      68   of the

                            transcript and I'll read it out to

                            you, I'm reading page   68   of the,

                            of your transcript.

                            You were asked the question, say

                            you were with Mr DUCKENFIELD or

                            intending to be with Mr DUCKENFIELD

                            for the match itself, and you

                           actually say, Well Mr DUCKENFIELD

                           took up the role which I expected

                           to take up...

         BDM               Which I expected him to take up,

                           that should be.

         DCS6930           What Mr DUCKENFIELD...
         BDM               Which I expected him to take.
         DCS6930           So it's wiiile Mr DUCKENFIELD took

                           up the role which I expected him

                           to take up, which was in the

                           Control Room.

         BDM              ■That's right.

         DCS6930          Because that makes a completely,

                          that makes a very significant

                          difference to the interpretation
 MURRAY             BERNARD D


                           of of that.

 09.44     BDM             No, Mr DUCKENFIELD didn't take ray

                           role he took the role I expected

                           him to take, because he had already

                           told me that he would be spending

                           most of the time in the Control

                           Roan.     He saw the Match Camanders,

                           that being the Match Commanders

                           position.

          DCS6930          I mean the the question that would

                           come from anybody reading that

                           would be that you you appeared not

                           to be sure of your role because

                           he was actually taking on your

                           role but that's not right?

          BDM              That's not right.

          DCS6930          No.    I mean, had you seen that

                           before in your transcript and

                           realised?

          BDM              I I feel so I think that's, that's

                          why I was so quick to recognise

                           to explain.

10.29     DCS6930         Okay.    So, the year before then,

                          Mr MDLE really had taken a

                          different method?

          BDM             Yeah, their leadership styles

                          were very different.     Mr MOLE

                          did the whole of the briefing

                          himself.     He operated mainly on
     MURRAY              BERNARD D                                    53


                                 the ground and moved around alot,

                                came to the Control Roam, visited,

                                was in radio contact all the time

                                but didn't spend the whole of

                                the event in the Control Roan.

                                I think Mr DUCKENFIELD saw his

                                position as supervising the

                                event fron the Control Roan

                                environment.

£   11.08      DCS6930          Right, new in terms of the

                                control that you have exercise

                                within the Control Roan.    You are

                                obviously in control of the

                                the officers within that roan?

              BDM               Yes.

              DCS6930           Radio canrruncations, decisions

                               being made at that stage caning

    11.28                       in requests being made.    Do

                               you put yourself even with

                               Mr DUCKENFIELD in position as

                               the person who responds or makes

                               the decision to agree to, for

                               example a request for the Landrover

                               that that went with the tannoy?

              BDM              If the request is to do with

                               movement of manpower, vehicles

                               and specific request then yes,

                               that's down to me.

              DCS6930          And that's what you performed on
 MURRAY              BERNARD     D


                                that day?

           BDM                  Yes.

 11.55     DCS6930              Were there any, was there the

                                occasion within that Control

                                Roan environment where the

                                canmand structure was difficult

                                because Mr DUCKENFIELD was with

                                you?

           BDM                  I don't think so.   There there

                                were certain sort of requests

                                that came in which would have

                                been referred to him, whether

                                he'd been in the Control Room

                               environment or elsewhere and I
12.25                          refer specifically to sort of

                               opening of the gates which is

                               not a decision that I would have

                               taken at the request of a fellow

                               Superintendent.

12.37     DCS6930              So if, if Mr DUCKENFIELD hadn't

                               been, we'll cone onto it later

                               on, but if he hadn't been in the

                               Control Room when that sort of

                               request made, you would have

                               contacted him, told him the problan

                               and asked for his decision on that

                               matter?

          BDM                  Yes.

          DCS6930              That sort of area?
  MURRAY              BERNARD D


            BDM              Yes.

            DCS6930          So are you...

            KM               Unless circumstances were such that

                             it was inpossible to do so.

 12.58      DCS6930          So you are happy that you were

                             clear in your role on that day?

            BDM              Yes.

            DCS6930          And there isn't the confusion or

                             or the suggestion that you

                             weren't as in that transcript?
            BDM              No.

 13.16      DCS6930          You produce a log of events...

           BDM               Yes.

           DCS6930          which we already referred to and

                             looked at and I think there has been

                            sane suggestion and I know that

                            Mr MARSHALL has intimated that the
13.31                       area of 2.17 (1417) and the

                            request that he made then for the

                            closure of Leppings Lane, that

                            he always felt that was a little

                            bit later.   Are, and I knew this

                            was brought up in the public

                            inquiry with you.   Are you still

                            happy that 2.17 (1417) was the

                            time?

13.49      BDM              I'm I'm reasonably happy because

                            of the fact that there was an

                            entry following that at   2.21
           BERNARD D


                   (1421).   rfy cwn impression was that

                   it was later.   I knew that there is,

                  is an error somewhere in the log

                  in relation to numbers, but I'm

                  reasonably happy, as I can be,

                  that 2.17 (1417) was the time.

 DCS6930          What watch or clock would you have

                  used for that?

 BDM              Probably my cwn, my cwn watch.

 DCS6930          Your wrist watch. Does it show

                  minutes or...

 BDM             Minutes.

 DCS6930         Or is a...

 BDM              It's not a digital it's, but I

                 can't I can't recall what I was

                 wearing at the time.     I can't

                 even recall whether there was

                 a clock in the Control Rocm.

DCS6930          Neither can I but I daresay

                 we'll see it in a bit.    But if

                 you can't, if you don't know that.

BDM              I don't know that I...

DCS6930          You certainly can't see the...
BDM              No.

DCS6930          The match, digital...

BDM              The one that is is is out of

                view of the Control Room.

DCS6930         Thank you.    Can we move on

                perhaps back new to your your
  MURRAY              BERNARD D                                         57


                              statement area.     I think you

                             you've gone to the Control Ftoom

                             quite early and you're in
  15.04                      position there.      I want to move on

                             perhaps around I think it's

                             about page   6   time, at about

                             12.30 (1230) where you refer

                             to I think supporters drinking and

                             mobile units checking them.        Would

                             that be about right?

            BDM              Yes.

            DCS6930          It's right in the bottom of the

                            page.

            bdm             Yes.

           DCS6930          And moves on to page 7 of your

                            statement.

           bdm              Yes.

           DCS6930          At that particular stage, 12.30

                            (1230), you've still got two

                            and a half hours to go, and you

                            talk about mobile units checking

                            them.   Now the they're actually

                            under your control now at this

                            time?

           bdm              Yes.

           DCS6930          Cause you, Mr DUCKENFIELD isn't

                            in the box with you anyway?

           bdm             That's right.

15.47      DCS6930         Can you tell me what actually
  MURRAY             BERNARD D
                                                                   58


                            you tell them to do at that

                            stage?

            BDM             All we can tell them to do is

                            monitor them.    It's not a question

                            of checking them, it's a question

                            of monitoring these public

                            houses and keeping their eyes

                            on them.   There's very little we

                            can do as as you know.    We can't

                           go in and turf them out of the pubs,

                           and we can't stop them going into

                           the pubs, we can't close the public
 16.13
                           houses down.     It's just semething

                           that we really should be aware of

                           it happening and units to keep their

                           eye on them, know what is happening

                           in different pubs, because its

                           there's every likelihood they're

                           going to have to respond to them.

           DCS6930         Would you say that you're trying

                           to gather intelligence at that

                          point?

16.33      BDM            Well, we we we're trying to sort

                          of, we're trying to make sure

                          that, that we get information

                          about what levels of drinking

                          there are, and whether they're

                          going to cause us problems later

                          on, whether they're good humoured,
     MURRAY             BERNARD D
                                                                     59


                               whether they are all supporters

                                from one particular area, I mean

                               the majority of the public houses

                               here were in what we saw as the

                               Nottingham Forest sector but that

                               didn't particularly mean that they

                               v*ere Nottingham Forest supporters

                               and obviously we we're trying to
    17.06
                               keep our segregation policy going.
£             DCS6930          In that period shall we say frcm

                               then 12.30 (1230) that you mention
    17.15                     onwards.     Was there anything that

                              gave you cause for concern in

                              terms of drink becanming a problem?

                              Did you get any intelligence back

                              or anything that was out of the

                              norm?

              bdm             No.     No more than the previous

                              year.    We, try try as we may, we

                              cannot step people drinking and

                              attending football matches. There

                              was no suggestion that huge

                              numbers of people were drinking

                              huge quantities of alcohol.      It

                             was the sort of reports that I

                             would expect and the sort of

                             intelligence I would expect from

                             the Tango units.     I wouldn't

                             expect them to drive past the
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D                                     60


                                public house that was full of

                                Nottingham Forest supporters and

                                say nothing.    They they would let

                                us knew.

 18.07     DCS6930              So, nothing unusual at all,

                                nothing that would rrake you

                                reconsider again your, your

                               plan or your, your, the way in

                               which you were going the police

                               the event prior to kick off?
           BDM                 No fran ray recollection of the,

                               of the year before, we we again

                               had similar calls of this nature,

                               which didn't result in any

                               particular problem.
18.34     DCS6930              Can I perhaps go back and let's

                               look at non ticket holders at

                               the same tine.   In this checking

                               of pubs or general patrol that

                               the officers are doing.   Are they

                           given any specific instructions

                           on the checking for non ticket

                           holders?

          BDM              Not particularly the, the Tangos,

                           but we do post serials out at

                           known arrival points on the

                           motorways and on the major roads

                           sane considerable distance away

                           fran the ground, sane miles, who
  MURRAY               BERNARD    D
                                                                       61


                                  check coaches arriving, and check

                                  that people have got tickets, and

                                  that they're not carrying alcohol.
  19.18      DCS6930              Does that information get fed back

                                  to you in the Control Rocm?
            BDM                   If it, if it's of interest to us

                                  yes.

            DCS6930              Well non ticket holders...
            BDM                  Absolutely.

            DCS6930              would be of interest.

            BDM                  Well what, what they were trying to

                                 do well if it was a bus, if it was

                                 a coach load of non ticket holders,

                                 the instructions were to turn them

                                 round and escort them back up the

                                 motorway.   Obviously if it's half
 19.46                           and half there is a problem, but

                                 we didn't get any information on

                                 the day that people were travelling

                             without tickets.
19.52      DCS6930               So you would have expected officers

                             one to have done that because

                             that's part of the briefing and

                             the plan is to actually step

                             coaches and that?

                             Yes.

20.01      DCS6930           I know that secondly there is a

                             situation where individual

                             officers will stop people out and
  MURRAY
                     BERNARD    D
                                                                        62

                                about in lappings Lane for tickets.

                                Would you expect shall we say

                                individual stop checks to be

                                reported anywhere to assess the

                               build up or is that, I mean let's

                               say you've got fifty officers all

                               doing that,     is that an inpossible

                               task to core back for you in the

                               Control Roan.    Would you expect them

                               to do that?
 20.27     BDM
                               I don't expect them to do that, not

                               officers on on public order, but

                           officers who have seen coach

                           loads of supporters in will probably

                           do that,     i mean each Inspector will

                           brief his, his serial in the way

                           that he feels they can best carry

                           out their duties.
20.46      DCS6930
                           I mean it has been suggested that

                           non ticket holders eventually were

                          were part of the overall problem in

                          the last few minutes.        I think

                          there's been various estimates.

                          What I'm trying to find out is, was

                          there anywhere that the officers

                          have obviously been briefed to go

                          and look for them at the different

                          locations and to find out, but

                          is there, is there any way in which
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D                                       63


                               that was coming together from outside

                               where somebody could have cone to

                               you and said, I think we've got more

                               of a problem than, than perhaps we

                               had last year.    Or is it really

                               just a matter of, they deal with it

                               on the ground, they do it, they

                               send them back, but they don't

                              actually tell anybody perhaps

                              until the debrief later on that,

                              Oh I stopped x number of coaches?

          BDM                 I don't know.     I honestly don't

21.31                         know.    I would expect to, I would

                              expect to get some information if

                              we had a a problem with with non

                              ticket holders, but I didn't

                              get any information on the day

                              and I wouldn't expect to know

                              that they'd turned a car load

                              back or a van load back until

                              later.

21.48     DCS6930             So, in that case there would

                              have been nothing to make you

                              feel prior to kick off time that

                              if non ticket holders were a

                              problem that in fact it was

                              building up that way?

          BDM                 No there was nothing to suggest

                              it.
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D


 22.05     DCS6930              Thank you.    Mr DUCKENFIELD I

                                think arrives with you about

                                ten to two (1350) and you brief

                                him in terms of, of what's

                                happening at that point?

           BDM                  Yes.

           DCS6930             And from then on virtually I

                                think you are together most of

                                the time?

          KM                   Yes.

          DCS6930              Apart, well in fact you both go

                               down to see the referee and sort

                               out one or two things shortly

                               after he arrives?

          KM                   Yes.

22.33     DCS6930              Just just out of interest who's

                               actually, who's actually in charge

                               of the Control Rocm then is it

                               Sergeant GODDARD?

          BDM                  The Control Roan then is under

                               Sergeant GODDARD yes.

22.43     DCS6930              You you come back and Mr JACKSON

                               arrives at about five past two

                               (1405)?

          BDM                  I can't recall whether Mr JACKSON

                               was already in the Control Room

                               when we arrived back or whether he

                               arrived shortly afterwards.

22.54     DCS6930              Right.    When he came in, do you
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D


                               recall him making any comments

                               about the difference in the build

                               up of supporters inside the ground,

                               that the Nottingham fans were in

                               quite early, but there seared a

                               problan with the Liverpool fans?

          KM                   I can't recall it, he may have, but

                               I can't recall it.

 23.20    DCS6930              It it, I mean it suggests that he

                               he noticed a considerable difference

                               and he, if you like, brings out

                               a concern at around that time?

          KM                  He say's this?

          DCS6930             Yes.   Well I'm I'm saying that

                              that's, that's what I believe

                              that he said in the Control Box or

                              made seme comment about, you you

                              have in fairness said you don't

                              recall it, but from your point

                              of view, this is the question,

23.46                         was there any concern at that

                              time fron you that there was a

                              problem with, with people in the

                              stadium and, and a different

                              build up?

23.58     KM                  There was certainly a lot less on

                              the Liverpool section of the ground

                              than there were Nottingham, there

                              were a lot more Nottingham Forest
 MURRAY             BERNARD D                                       66


                           supporters in.    I don't know whether

                           it was concern but I was, I was

                           hoping that they were going to

                           be here very quickly and in fact

                           it was very shortly after that

                           that they did start to, to arrive

                           in larger numbers.

 24.22    DCS6930          As you say, perhaps not concern

                           but, you, you were certainly

                           alive to the difference?

          BDM              Absolutely. Yes.

          DCS6930          So it perhaps wouldn't have been

                           an unusual thing for Mr JACKSON

                           to have said?

          BDM              It wouldn't have been, because if

                           it was, it was apparent at that

                          stage that there were far more

                          Nottingham supporters than

                          Liverpool.

          DCS6930         Was Mr JACKSON there for the 1988

                          (000088) game?    To your knowledge?

          KM              I don't knew.

24.47     DCS6930         You don't know.    The, the next

                          one is, is really in relation

                          to Mr CREASER.    I knew you were

                          asked this at the public inquiry

                          over the suggestion that and I

                          think I've got it right that

                          you don't recall this happening
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D


                               about how do we, how do we fill

                               up, do we fill these pens up one at

                               a tune until they're full and go

                               on, and in fairness you've said

                               you don't remember that conversation.

                               In 1988 (000088) was it done that

                               way?

 25.17    BDM                  No 1988 (000088) it was the

                               terraces there, let them find

                               their cwn level was the term/

                               let them ccme and and go where

                              they want.

          DCS6930             Am I right in, in saying that on

                              seme league games you in fact do

                              do that systan where you you

                              slowly fill up, going along

                              and perhaps would would keep

                              them within say pens   1   and   2   if

                              they weren't too marry supporters?

          3DM                 Yes, we we do it, we do it

25.50                         deliberately.   It it's an attarpt

                              to estimate from the intelligence

                              the number of away supporters

                              that will be arriving and to make

                          a section of the ground available

                          for than, if we think they can

                          be confined in the centre two

                          pens and they will be the ones

                          that will be used, because they're
  MURRAY              BERNARD    D


                                 the furthest away frcm, frcm the

                                 visiting, frcm the heme supporters.

                                 If however the intelligence is

                                 that they're going to need three

                                 pens or four pens then they will

                                 made available prior to the start.

            DCS6930              Has Mr GREASER got experience of

                                 that?

 26.24      BDM                 Well Mr CREASER has worked before

                                 I came to Hamilton Road, he worked

                                along officers at Hillsborough.

           DCS6930              So he he would have been used to

                                that systan?

           BDM                  He may well have been used to that

                                system.

26.36      DCS6930              And that, I mean that I presume

                                there is every possibility that

                                because he's used to league

                                matches or seen it that would

                                have been perhaps a reason why

                                he would have bought it up,

                            not because it was a plan or?

           BDM                  It's not a a, it was never a

                            deliberate sort of venture at a

                            league match, to say well we

                            will fill pens       2   and   3   and when

                            they are full we'll fill pen

                            1    and when that's full we'll we'll

27.01                       fill pen 4.        It was an estimate
           BERNARD    D


                      as to the number of supporters

                      that would come and space they

                      would require.    On some matches

                      we may get two thousand visiting

                      fans and make space available

                      for than on the terraces and

                      they all decide to sit down.

                     At other matches nobody decides

                     to sit down and stand and they

                     all cone on the terraces and

                     we've then got to make more

                     space available.    But I've

                     never, it's a question of saying

                     well we'll give than pen 2.

 DCS6930             Mm.

BDM                  We don't close one and fill

                     another one, we just open an

                     ajoining pen.

DCS6930              Again out of interest going

                     back to what we said earlier

                 about the tunnel gates.       If you

                     if you're just going to use 1 and

                 2 , how do you actually...

BDM              2 and 3 do you mean, 3

                 and 4 whatever we want to call

                 them.

DCS6930          Which ever, well let's say that

                 you didn't want to use 3 and 4.

                 Hew would you stop than going
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D                                      70


                               down the tunnel?

           BDM                 I've never, we've never failed to

                               use 3 and 4, we always use 3

                               and 4.   We always use the ones that

                               are first away from the heme fans.

28.01                          There is a gate to stop people

                               coining down the tunnel which I

                               found about, I didn't know which

                               way it opened, which way it

                               closed. But there is a gate there

                              where the tunnel can be sealed off

                              but I think that is purely a

                              security gate for the Club to

                              stop people...

          DCS6930             To stop people getting into the

                              ground.

          BDM                 getting onto the pitch.

28.25     DCS6930             Okay then fine thank you.    Again

                              moving through your, your statement,

                              you do say that about, I think

                              about quarter past two (1415), 2.15

                              the Kop area was, was filling up

                              quite nicely and I think you've

                              already intimated that you've

                              seen a slight difference with the

                              Liverpool supporters side caning

                              in.   So you've seen a little bit

                              of a difference.    It it's around

                              this quarter past tvro time (1415)
  MURRAY             BERNARD    D


  28.52                         time or 2.17 (1417), that you

                                actually made this log about the

                                problan or the the request from Mr

                                MARSHALL.     If we just, perhaps we

                                can just remind ourselves on the

                                video of the view in 1989 (000089)
 29.09                          and it's Document 109.    At at 2.17

                                (1417).

           BDM                 Yes.

           DCS6930             I only want to try and clarify a

                               little bit if you, I think you've

                               looked at the monitors when the

                               request came through.
           BDM                 Yes.

           DCS6930             If I recall.

           BDM                 Yes.

           DCS6930             And you've probably looked at

                               these a number of times since, but

                               if we look at 2.17 (1417) which is

                               caning on to now, if you see the

                               bottcm left hand comer shows

                               1416 (1416).    Does that help in

                           any way of confirming your 2.17

                               (1417) and the other question

                           I'd ask is, going back to how you
29.45                      took the time.       Would would that

                           time of been apparent to you on

                           there and could you have used

                           that clock for example?
  MURRAY              BERNARD    D


            BDM                  I think that time, whether it's

                                 on the actual monitor, I don't

                                 know, it may well be on the

                                 recording, I wouldn't look at the

                                 at the monitor that was actually

                                 recording at the time, I would

                                 look at the five fixed TV monitors.
            DCS6930              Mm.

            BDM                 And which would in front and near

                                 to my left but not the recording

                                machine which is to my right.
           DCS6930              If we just, can you just put that

                                on play and if you want to step
 30.21                          it at all, I, I mean the crowd

                                is, is fairly considerable there,

                                at that stage, and going back

                                up towards Leppings Lane, again

                                for the benefit of the audio, we're
30.32                           looking at Document 109 timed at

                                1416 (1416) and I think it flits

                                about now.   Can can you say row

                                whether that was the sort of view

                                and crowd that you would have seen

                            at that time?

           BDM                  I can't, I can't recall but I I

                            can recall sort of about 2.15 (1415)

                            about that time, thinking well,

30.56                       good there's plenty of people

                            in Leppings Lane, the the,
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D


                                45 minutes to go yet, they're

                                starting to cane in, a lot

                                quicker than they ware before,

                                this is what we want.     There's

                                plenty of room in the ground and

                                let's get them in.

31.13      DCS6930              You, you were quite happen then,

                                we've got Mr MARSHALL'S request

                                saying close it off, but really

                                that's because of the, the

                               traffic situation, to close the

                               traffic off?

           BDM                 Yes.

          DCS6930              Are you quite happy with the build

                               up of the crowd at that stage?

          BDM                  Yes.

31.29     DCS6930              There's no, there's nothing that

                               caused you alarm then?

          BDM                  There's nothing unusual there

                               are alot of people to cone, that

                               are caning, and and there's plenty

                               of time.

          DCS6930              Right.     Mr DUCKENFIELD is with you,

                               you can switch that off now, we're

                               just switching off that particular

                               video.   Mr DUCKENFIELD is with

                           you at this time?

          BDM              Yes.

          DCS6930          And and on that request from
  MURRAY             BERNARD    D                                         74


                                Mr MARSHALL, the, did you and

                                Mr DUCKENFIELD discuss that request?
             BDM                I I can't, I can't honestly recall

                                it.    I can't I can't recall whether

                                we discussed it or not.    We may have,
 32.14                          I may have said to him, we're

                                going to have to close Leppings

                                Lane, it doesn't look too bad but

                               we're going to have to close it,

                                if Mr MARSHALL wants it closing,

                               that sort of conversation may have

                               taken place but I can't, I can't

                               recall turning round to him and

                               saying, such, Do you want me to

                               close it.
32.32      DCS6930             No.    So you, who actually, did

                               you actually say okay close it

                               and gave the instruction?
           BDM                 Yes.

           DCS6930             I know there was again a bit of a

                               delay in it actually happening.
           BDM                 I I think so, I think so, but

                               I can't be one hundred per cent

                           sure, but I do recall looking at the

                           video and thinking, well fair

32.55                      enough, I don't think it's too

                           bad in Leppings Lane but if Mr

                           MARSHALL wants it closed then he's

                           the man on the ground he can have
 MURRAY             BERNARD D
                                                                  75


                            it closed.

 33.05    DCS6930          Would either, would Sergeant GODDARD

                           or one of the other officers, would

                           they have done that without your

                           authority?

          BDM              Em.

          DCS6930          I mean could it have happened

                           without, without you actually

                           agreeing it?
          BDM              It could, what I, what I would do

                           is I I I'd put a great deal of of

                           faith in the in the Control Roan

                          staff, Sergeant GODDARD has got a

                          tremendous local knowledge which

                          I haven't of the area and if a

                          unit is requested at a particular

                          area, he knows exactly where it

                          is and he knows a unit on stand,
33.40                     that is near.   If Sergeant GODDARD

                          gets an instruction frcm outside

                          or a request frcm outside and he

                          automatically sends someone,

                          despatches someone, I I will stand

                          by that unless I agree otherwise.

                         And if he did something that I

                         disagreed with I would tell him

                         and say no or we'll do something

                         else, but I would be, as far as

                         I am concerned it was my, it
 MURRAY              BERNARD D


                            was my instruction onr Mr MARSHALL'S

                             request that Leppings Lane be

                            closed.

           DGS6930          You have, I know you said to the
 34.15                      public enquiry, you have got a

                            limited view with those

                            cameras, along Leppings Lane, so

                            you you really are reliant upon

                            Mr MARSHALL giving you the

                            information and a very limited

                            view of it.    So you, nobody would

                            doubt, you would you would actually

                            go ahead with the instruction

                            if you haven't got the full view.
34.35                      But did either yourself or or Mr

                           DUCKENFIEtD consider or discuss

                           perhaps Mr DUCKENFIELD going or

                           you going to actually have a look

                           at the situation, to see whether

                           it wanted another look to see

                           whether you'd got a problem caning,

                           caning along?

34.53     BDM              Well I didn't, I I wouldn't leave

                           the Control Roan.    That that's my

                           position and the only time I ever

                           leave there is to, on the occasions

                           that I have to see the referee.

          DCS6930          Yes.

          BDM              Which are when I'm in camrand
MURRAY             BERNARD D                                     77


                          of the event and to go to the toilet

                          which we don't have.   But for

                          any other reason and perhaps

                          at half time briefing to the

                          officers.

35.22    DCS6930          Okay.   Did you ask at any time

                          following that request for any

                          of the officers shall we say

                          outlying areas whether the crowd

                          was a problem, whether there was

                          a bigger build up caning at all?

         BDM              No I I don't think I asked.

         DCS6930          Any reports caning in that you

                          could recall that, from people

                          saying, I've still got people in

                          coaches or I've still got, you

                          knew, they're aren't as many

                          coaches here as they should be,

                          anything else to warn you that

                          you know well I'm going to get

                          additional crowds caning over

                          the next thing than perhaps I

                          would expect?

         BDM              The only, the only information

                          was that at one public house there

                          was a lot of people in and there

                         were urinators outside, as far

                          as I can recall, there was no

                          information, no, no information
           BERNARD D


                   on those lines.

 DCS6930           The number of officers actually

                   in and around Leppings Lane,

                  did you at that stage consider

                  yourself or discuss with Mr

                  DUCKENFIELD the, the possibility

                  of sending any additional resources?
BDM               Not at that stage.     As far as I

                  can recall, there was forty odd

                  PC'S on foot outside the turnstiles

                  together with the horses and no

                  at that stage I didn't see a

                  need for extra officers and

                  I hadn't had any requests for extra

                 officers.

DCS6930          Was there anything here that

                 made you consider that it was

                 different to 1988 (000088)?
BDM              It was different to 1988 (000088)

                 in as much as we were closing

                 Leppings Lane.   That was the

                 major difference.     There was,

                 there was not as many people

                 in the stadium on the Liverpool

                 side, I wouldn't have thought

                 as there were in 1988 (000088),

                 but I still considered that at

                 that stage with so long to

                 go before the kick off that
 MURRAY               BERNARD D


                              tune was on our side.
 37.28      DCS6930
                              I mean vrould you recall looking

                             at it that the 1988 (000088),

                             the numbers of people in

                             lappings Lane in 1988 (000088)

                             would you have looked at the

                             monitors in 1989 (000089) and

                             thought, this is different.      I

                            know, I know again that this

                            was asked of you in the public

                            inquiryr and I know you said you

                            can't, you couldn't really

                            recall or remember?
37.47      BDM
                            I I can't recall.     I have an

                            impression that there were more

                            people in the stadium in 1988

                            (000088) at 2.15 (1415) than

                           there were at 2.15 (1415) in

                            1989 (000089).   So far as the

                           actual distribution of people

                           outside I can't recall.     We

                           didn't have a problem in 1988

                           (000088) so there was nothing

                           for me to sort of really remember

                           and hang on to.

          DCS6930          The, the situation at that stage

                          was that you you had access to

                          the turnstiles counts in the

                          Ground Control Roan?
S-


      MURRAY               BERNARD D                                     80

                 BDM               That's correct, yes.

                 DCS6930          And again, I think emphasising

                                  the public inquiry side, that you

                                  you couldn't recall actually

                                  using that facility or, or

                                  checking it.   But in fact I

                                  think you were told, and I think

                                  it's right to say that somebody

                                  in the Control Roan, in your

#                                 Control Roan, was actually on

                                  three or four occasions monitoring

                                  that situation.     Is that correct?

                                 What I've just said there?
     38.46      BDM              So far as I'm concerned, I never

                                 made contact with the Club's Control

                                 Roan to find out numbers inside the

                                 ground and I cannot recall

                                 at all anybody giving me any

                                 information that there were x

                                 number of people inside the ground

                                 and I do know that the Club

                                 Control Roan have said that they

                                 were given that information to

                                 someone in the Control Roan.

                                 If that is correct fair enough,

                                 but that information never, was

                                 never given to me.

               DCS6930           Is it something in the experience

                                that you've had in there, is it
  MURRAY             BERNARD    D                                      81


                                something that's done autanatically?

                                In other words does, on a fairly

                                regular basis, does the Ground

                                Control ring through or radio

                                through and say, It's now so and

                                so, it's now so and so.   Perhaps

                                not because there's a need or a

                                an urgency or anything else just

                                in general practice?

            BDM                No it it's a nice little facility,

                               because we we find out at the

                               end of the day just how many

                               visiting supporters we've had.

           DCS6930             Mn.

           BDM                 And what the crowd is and generally

                               the, the, that's the only time we

                               use the facility to find out the

                               total number of visitors for our

                               records.

39.58      DCS6930             So you have never had to use that

                               facility in terms of an operational

                               difficulty with a crowd getting

                               into the ground?

           BDM                 No, I I haven't used it in the

                           past.

40.13      DCS6930         And you have, have you ever had

                           an operational difficulty with the

                           crowd getting into the ground in

                           the past?
          BERNARD    D


BDM                  No.

DCS6930              So there would have been no, there

                     is no precedent for you, if you

                     like, to have learnt that that

                     was available to you for that

                     reason?

BDM                 That's correct.

DCS6930             Thank you.    You you did estimate

                    I think at one stage the number of

                    people that you thought were outside

                    a little bit later on.    Did you

                    knew the turnstile counts per hour

                    system.    Were you that well informed

                    that you would know that, out of

                    those 23, of 23 turnstiles at

                    Leppings Lane that x number of

                    people could ccme through per

                    hour?

BDM                 No, I I was given a general sort of

                    break dewn in turnstiles as a

                    thousand an hour for an event

                    of this nature, where there's no

                    money changing hands it's merely

                    tickets and a thousand a minute

                    so far as the ground overall was

                    concerned.   I I accept that that

                    it was very rough figures, but the

                    point that was being made to me

                    when they were given was that
MURRAY              BERNARD D                                    83


                            ten minutes before the kick off

                            this ground can shift ten thousand

                           people, all the way round, and I

                           have seen in fact huge numbers of

                           people, accommodated in the five

                           or six minutes before a kick

                           of at Hillsborough.
41.43     DCS6930          Who who actually gave you that

                           sort of information.    Was it

                           the Club?

         BDM               I can't remember whether it was,

                           whether it was the Club, Mr M3LE

                           or one of the Liaison Officers,

                           it was just given as, as sort of

                          rough figures to to work on.

         DCS6930          General information?

         BDM              Yeah.

         DCS6930          Not again am I right in saying,

                          it's not because you had experienced

                          any concern or problem, it was

                          really just general information on

                          that?

         BDM              It was more of on ore occasion

                          standing looking around and

                          someone saying to me, either from

                          the Club or the Police side, I

                          can't recall which.    Don't worry,

                         we can, we can get a thousand a

                         minute in here etc.
MURRAY               BERNARD D                                  84

42.26      DCS6930           I mean would you have known to

                            the extent that they can actually

                            identify and again I think this

                            came up at the public inquiry,

                            specifically the group of

                            turnstiles and the count

                            differences for those turnstiles?
          BI»d              I...

          DCS6930           Was that within your knowledge?
          Brad              I know that they can give the

                            information on every specific

                            turnstile, I don't know how

                           difficult it is to, to group

                           turnstiles, turnstiles together

                           and whether it is more difficult

                           than we are using recognised

                           turnstiles for one part of the

                           ground to the other.    But I

                           know that they can give you

                           that information, I don't

                           know whether it would be, whether

                           they'd be able to give it at

                           the drop of a hat or whether it

                           would be a lengthy process.

         DCS6930           I know that the tape is going

                           to finish in the next two

                          minutes, I think it's perhaps

                          best if we finish this one

                          now.     If I can say that the
 MURRAY              BERNARD D


                             time is 11.57 (1157) and if

                             we can switch off the audio.
 43.25                       (Tape switched off).

 00.09     DCS6930          This is the continuation of an

                             interview at Fumival House in

                            Sheffield.       The time is 12.25 pn

                            (1225) on the 25th of June

                            (250689).       I am Michael FOSTER

                            Detective Chief Superintendent

                            West Midlands Police.

          BDM               Bernard Dean MURRAY, Superintendent

                            South Yorkshire Police.

          DCI2514           Detective Chief Inspector TOPE

                           West Midlands Police.

          RM               Richard MANNING, Walker Morris

                           Scott Turnbull Solicitors Leeds.

          PC9032           Police Constable Stephen BROWN of

                           the West Midlands Police.

00.42     DCS6930          Remind you again Mr MURRAY that

                           you're still under caution.

          BDM              Yes.

          DCS6930          From the start.        Can we pick back

                           up on the, on what we were talking

                           about earlier which we've just gone

                           through the, your knowledge of the

                           turnstile counts and the the

                           crowd build up and I think at,

                           in your statement at around 2.30

                           (1430) 2 . 3 5   ( 1 4 3 5 ) time that
  MURRAY               BERNARD    D


                                  you, you are, or you had some

                                  concerns about the crowd build

                                  up.    Would that be correct?
             BDM                  Yes.

  01.16      DCS6930              I think at page 9 you actually

                                  talk about, by 1435 hours (1435)

                                  the Control Room was busy and

                                 perhaps it's my interpretation

                                 to says its concern at that time.

                                 Did you have concerns around

                                 that time?
 01.29      BDM                  Yes, I had I had concerns, I had

                                 a hint of concern about 2.30 (1430)

                                 when I looked at the crowd and

                                 I looked at the time we had

                                 available and in my own mind I

                             was satisfied that we would get

                             the crowd into the stadium in time

                             for 3 o'clock (1500) by 3 o'clock
02.00                            (1500) and did make canment of

                             that to Mr DUCKENFIELD.       We were

                             getting busy in the Control Room

                             shortly after and the crowd was

                             beginning to, was increasing and

                             people were still arriving.
02.24      DCS6930           We we have a situation now where

                             2.17 (1417) Mr MARSHALL has

                            requested the road to be shut off

                            and there is a large crowd and
MURRAY              BERNARD    D


                               you've said it was quite a large

                               crowd there and then by 2.30 (1430)

                               2.35 (1435) there is this concern

                               enough for you to talk to Mr

                               DUCKENFIELD on the basis of, Yes

                               we'll get them all in?

          BDM                 Yes.

02.50     DCS6930             And again I know at the public

                              inquiry you were then questioned

                              in terms of the discussion about

                              the delay kick off and the

                              reminder that Mr DUCKENFIELD

                              said, remind me of the, the

                              reasons, which you did that.     Can

                              you tell me why that conversation

                              came up at that time?

         BDM                  I don't knew the reason but it

                          was, it was a straight question

                              from Mr DUCKENFIELD, just remind

                          me what we said about delaying

                          kick off.     There were no hard and

                          fast rules about delaying kick off

                          and the sort of reasons that I had
                                                        a

                          reiterated to Mr DUCKENFIELD seme

                          days earlier at a meeting were

                          the same as I'd heard Mr M0T.E say

                          the previous year.

         DCS6930          I mean the, the impression would

                          be that because of the concerns
^ ■9
        MURRAY             BERNARD    D                                     88
                                      that you had identified that the

                                      reason to talk about a delay kick

                                      off was, was because in fact you

                                      felt you couldn't get the crowd

                                      in.   That seems the logical

                                      reason to, to talk about delay, but

                                      do do I take it that that wasn't

                                     a part of the consideration at that

                                     time that you couldn't get the

                                     crowd in?

       04.11      BDM                No it it, it wasn't a part of

                                     consideration to roe, I took it

                                     as as Mr DWZKENFIELD saying well

                                     tell what we'd said about delaying

                                     kick off, presumably in case

                                     we have to do it.

                 DCS6930             But, but the events are not

                                     connected as far as you're

                                     concerned?

                 BDM             The events weren't, weren't

                                 connected, no.

                 DCS6930         Certainly not in your mind or?
                 BDM             No.

                 DCS6930         obviously you can't speak for

                                 Mr DUCKENFIELD'S mind at that

                                 time?

                 BDM             No, it it wasn't a straight sort

                                 of, there was a big crowd out

                                 there tell roe what we said about
  MURRAY              BERNARD D                                       89


                              delaying kick off.     It was more of

                             a statement from me to him saying

                             there are a lot of people there but

                             I feel that ws'll get them in for

                             3 o'clock (1500).
 04.50      DCS6930          Just out of interest what was the

                             practical way in which the kick

                             off would have been delayed I

                             mean lets, lets just say that at

                             that time you'd have said, well

                             we can't get them in, we've got

                             to delay the kick off.    How how

                            was it in fact to be done?

           BDM              What I would have done was radioed

                            the Track Inspector, or a Serial

                            Sergeant in respect of Serial,

                            Serial 1, whose instructions were

                            during the whole of the event

                            there should be one of than at the

                            players' tunnel entrance to go

                            and inform the referee and

                            officials that we would be

                            delaying the kick off.

05.26      DCS6930          Mr GREENWOOD a part of that

                            plan or?

           BDM              They, they were under Mr GREENWOOD'S

                           control and the radio system

                           that operated in respect of

                           Hillsborough was that all
  MURRAY              BERNARD D                                    90


                              messages were on talk through

                              so that all radio messages were

                             both ways should have been heard

                             by everyone with a radio.

            DCS6930          And Mr GREENWOOD other than

                             being heard would he of actually

                             been informed?

 05.53      BDM              Well Mr GREENWOOD would of been

                             informed.   Yes he vrould of been

                             informed the kick off was to be

                             delayed.

 05.58      DCS6930          And, and what is the next stage

                             on from that, having got the

                             referee told, I mean is there a was

                             there a plan by which either you or

                            Mr DUCKENFIELD would actually

                            go and tell him the reasons?

           BDM              There was no, there was no plan.

                            There was no sort of set plan

                            for, for delaying the kick off.

                            It would then have of been the

                            Club would have been informed.

                            The Managers of the two sides

                            would be informed by the referee.

           DCS6930          Mm.

           BDM              And then if necessary the crowd

                            would be informed obviously by

                            the public address system.

06.29      DCS6930          I I think you've just said it
m    MURRAY              BERNARD    D
                                                                         91


                                    wasn't really a rigid policy.
               BDM                  It wasn't.

               DCS6930              On terms of the only reasons

                                    you would, you would delay.

                                    Hie, the other Superintendents

                                    there in particular, were they

                                    all aware of the, shall we say,
    06.45                           the reasons why it would have

                                   been delayed, that you actually

                                   reminded Mr DUCKENFIELD of?
               BDM                 I can't, I can't honestly say.

                                   I don't know whether that was,

                                   I don't think that was ever sort

                                   of approached at a, at an official

                                   meeting.   It may have been brought

                                   up at the, at the first meeting
    07.08                          which happened about the   2 0 th


                                   20th of March (200389) or 21st


#                                  (210389), 22nd of March (220389).

                               Mr MDLE might have brought it up

                                   at that meeting but unfortunately

                                   I can't remember everything that

                               that took place.

              DCS6930          Would you say it was ever that

                               rigid that someone like Mr MARSHALL

                               if he'd have felt that he wanted

                               to do it, would it, would it have

                               ever been that rigid that he

                               couldn't ask?
#     MURRAY              BERNARD    D
                                                                             92

      07.32      BDM                 It wasn't rigid.    It was not rigid

                                     at all.    It was just, if you like

                                     a, a contingency for a certain

                                     set of circumstances.    If people

                                     were late arriving then obviously

                                     this is what we would do.    Vie

                                    would delay the kick off.
     07.50      DCS6930             At around 2.40 (1440) you have

                                    the Inspector on the mounted,

                                    Inspector HANDS DAVIS requesting

                                    assistance to Lappings Lane.        Do

                                    you recall that?

               BDM                  Yes I do.

               DCS6930              And I think it's Police Sergeant

                                    GODDARD that actually sends or

                                    request Sergeant SOULSBY who

                                    was a Mounted Sergeant?

               BDM                  Correct.

               DCS6930          To send all available horses

                                to Leppings Lane?

               BDM              Yes.

               DCS6930          Did, did you question that request

                                in any way?

    08.19      BDM              No I accepted that that Inspector

                                HAND DAVIS is a very experienced

                                mounted officer and he wanted more

                                mounted officers round there, if

                                there were any available.        Sergeant

                                GODDARD picked the message up
 MURRAY              BERNARD D


                             immediately and and sent it straight

                            out to, to Sergeant SOULSBY which

                            I was in full agreanent with and

                            it was, it seemed a sensible thing

                            to do.

           DCS6930          Did Mr DUCKENFIEDD comment on it?

           BDM              No I don't think so.

08.54      DCS6930          Again I know that almost as a

                            result of that or at about the

                            same time, Serial 20 was

                            despatched...

          BDM               That's correct.

          DCS6930           frcm the gym as a, I think you

                            term it back up or it's just

                            contingency?

09.09     BDM               Obviously at that time the

                           mounted officers were asking for

                           assistance.     There is obviously

                           a problem in Leppings Lane.     I am

                            looking at what I've got available

                           to send there if they require

                           further assistance and the only

                           spare serial that is available is

                           the one reserve serial that

                           remains, the other one unfortunately

                           had been deployed elsewhere.

          DCS6930          Yes, that's the only one that you

                           knew was, well the only one that

                           was available at that time?
    :•    MURRAY               BERNARD    D
                                                                               94

                     BDM                  Yes.

                     DCS6930              I know later on you talk about

                                          sending 5 and 50...
                    BDM                   That's correct,

                    DCS6930               but those officers weren't

                                          actually available at 2.40 (1440)?
                    BDM                   They, whether they were or not I

                                          don't know.

                    DCS6930              Well, they, they weren't part

                                         of your...

                    BDM                  Their plan makes them available

                                         frcm after 2.45 (1445) on time.

                                         So they shouldn't have been.

                    DCS6930              They shouldn't have, they they

                                         would not have been officers

                                         that you knew were available to

                                         you?

                   BCM                   No.

£        10.05     DCS6930               You sent all available officers

                                         at that time?

                   BCM                   I have sent the one available

                                         serial I I have, obviously if

                                         I had received information that

                                     there, there were other officers

                                     who were available that might have

                                     affected my decision.

                   DCS6930           Okay.       You actually made that

                                     decision and gave that instruction

                                     to do that?
  MURRAY              BERNARD    D


            BDM                  Yes.

            DCS6930              Based upon what you ware hearing

                                 frcm Inspector HAND DAVIS?
            BDM                  Based upon what I was hearing and

                                 what I could see, that the crowd

                                 was starting to to ccnpact and that

                                 what we needed was, was assistance.
 10.37     DCS6930               Did you at that point, you you can

                                 see the problem on the monitors and

                                you're aware that there is a problem

                                but did you in any way either

                                question or talk to Mr MARSHALL

                                or to Inspector HAND DAVIS about

                                w hat   the problem was?

           BDM                  No.

 10.56     DCS6930              Did yourself and Mr DUCKENFIELD

                                at that time enter into any

                                discussion about the fact that

                                by now you've had the 2.17 (1417)

                                request to close the, the road,

                            that you've recognised at about

                            2.30 (1430) 2.35 (1435) some

                            concern about the, the build up,

                            that you now have the request for

                            the extra horses and you're
11.24                       sending people there.          There

                            are a number of things that

                            have happened that have, have

                            built up in the space of about
  MURRAY              BERNARD    D


                                 twenty, sorry about thirteen,

                                 fourteen, fifteen minutes?

            RM                   No it's 2.35 (1435).

            DCS6930              Sorry, 2.35 (1435), 2.17 (1417)

                                 to 2.35 (1435).

            RM                   Thirteen and five's eighteen.

            DCS6930              Eighteen minutes, around that
 11.45                           eighteen minute period, did you

                                 at any time discuss between

                                you whether there was anything

                                else that you could do to assess

                                the situation?

            BDM                 I don't think so.   Bearing in

                                mind that there was other things

                                happening, but Leppings Lane

                                vrould be demanding most of my

                                attention obviously because of

                                the circumstances that were
12.12                           there.   I don't recall sort of

                                discussing what else    could do.

                                The public address system was

                                PC RYAN was asked to use the

                                public address system to stop

                                people, tell people to sort

                                of move back, and stop pushing

                            and about what time it was

                            that the radio collapsed on us

                            I don't know.

12.38      DCS6930          Okay, did you give any specific
MURRAY              BERNARD    D



                               instructions to that Serial 20

                               that you, you asked to go, were

                               they given any specific instruction

                               as to what to do when they got

                               there?

           BDM                 No I didn't give them an

                               instruction, they were told

                              to go to the Leppings Lane end
12.55
                              and assist.   I I didn't give them

                              a particular instruction.
          DCS6930             I mean at that point, they would

                              of, they could of expected in

                              any event to see certainly one of

                              the Chief Inspectors or Inspectors

                              already on the ground?
          BDM                 Well the main thing was, they

                          would be there, I mean the

                          gymnasium is a considerable way,

                          distance from the Leppings Lane and

                          the main thing was that they would

                          be up there and available.
         DCS6930          Now that's actually coming frcm

                          the gymnasium along the side of

                          the back of the North Stand,

                          and actually inside the ground?
         BDM              Inside the ground.     I would

                          think that vrould be their approach.
.32      DCS6930         Right.     Was there any way you could

                         send any officers to assist outside
MURRAY             BERNARD     D



                              the ground?   Now I don't know at

                              that point whether you would have

                              known that, or whether it was the

                              fact that they perhaps couldn't

                              get out into Leppings Lane,

                              perhaps that thought didn't

                             enter your head but was there

                             any way in which you could have

                             sent other deployed officers to

                             the outside of Leppings Lane?
          BDM
                             If there were officers to deploy

                             and obviously the mounted going

                             to the outside of Leppings Lane,

                             if there were officers to deploy

                             there there are ways round,

                         depending on where they're caning

                             from.

         DCS6930         Mn.

         KM              Plus the fact that there, there

                         were a large number of officers

                         in Leppings L a m or as far as

                         I was concerned, as far as I

                         was aware, there there were

                         several serials actually in

                        Leppings Lane.
•22      DCS6930        And Mr MARSHALL at that point

                        had had he made any other

                        requests for additional resources

                        or or anything like that?
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D                                     99


           BDM                 No.    Hie the only request I

                               can recall was a request for the

                               the announcements over the tannoy

                               and a loud speaker vehicle to

                               Leppings Lane.

 14.43    DCS6930              That was the PC BUXTON?

          BDM                  Yes, a vehicle came up a few

                               minutes later.

          DCS6930              If we take it that the the Police

                               Control Box is what, how far

                               from the turnstiles about a

                               hundred yards?

          BDM                  From the turnstiles to Leppings

                              Lane?

          DCS6930             Yes.

          BDM                 Yes, possibly less.

          DCS6930             Possibly less.    Did either and I I

                              accept that you've just told me

                              that you wDuld never leave that

15.08                         Control Box, was it ever discussed

                              that perhaps Mr DUCKENFIELD should

                              go and try and assess the situation

                              on the ground, bearing in mind the

                              fact that the monitors and the

                              television give a restricted view.

                              Taking into account the build up

                              of of problems that are just

                              perhaps itemised.   Was that

                              ever discussed?
  MURRAY               BERNARD    D
                                                                          100

                 BDM              No.

  15.35      DCS6930
                                  Was there any conversation with

                                  Mr GREENWOOD in terms of any

                                  problems within the concourse

                                  area that you could recall.    That's

                                  the when I say the concourse area so

                                 perhaps w='ll all agree I I'm

                                 talking about the area between the,

                                 shall we say the back of the

                                 turnstiles and the West Stand

                                 area?

            BDM
                                 Yeah, I don't recall having any

                                 problems there at all.
            DCS6930              And I think you've just said as

                             well and I I think it's right to

                             to bring this in at this point,

                             that this is only one area of the

                             ground and you've got seme, you've

                             got problems there but there were

                             three other areas of the ground

                             that you vere also policing and
16.15
                             had responsibility for.      Did you,

                             can you recall any specific

                            problems elsewhere in the ground

                            at this time?
           BCM
                            The main concern to me was the

                            was the Kop, over and above

                            Leppings Lane and the situation

                            on the Kop where we'd ear marked
 MURRAY   BERNARD    D                                    101


                     a sterile area for Liverpool

                     fans who we knew would soon obtain

                     tickets for the Kop.     They'd

                     been sane arrests there round

                     about 2.15 (1415).     It was

                     beginning to fill up, we were

                     obviously going to get more

                     fans, it was a question of some

                     contingency being made to

                     receive and house that overspill

16,59           and I know that Mr GREENWOOD at

                    sane stage, but I don't know

                    when, was asked to look at that

                    and decide where he was going to

                    put any of the Liverpool fans

17,11           that, that came in.       So far as

                    the North Stand and the South

                    Stand are concerned, everything

                    seemed to be going okay there

                    and it wasn't an area that we

                    particularly expected problems.

                    There was of course other things

                happening outside the ground and

                not in the vicinity of the ground,

                the, there was some report of

                Middlewood Road in the vicinity

                of the park of youths with sticks

                gathering, there was also still

                the frustrating question of the
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D


                                of the unit that wanted a

                                breathaliser kit, we didn't have

                                a dragar, it was something that

                                had never been requested in the

                                past and had never been planned

                                for, this meant that we had to

                               bring it frcm the host station

                               Hanmerton Road, meant that they

                               had to call a car in, pick up

                               a dragar, fight their way through

                               the football track, just because

                               someone wanted a a breath tested.
18.10      DCS6930
                               I mean for people who aren't police

                               officers that, what I want to

                               try and do is get seme description

                           of, of a Police Control Roan

                           because on the ground, firstly

                           the recording or the the radio

                           transmissions that you do there

                           are not taped or kept are they?
          BDM              No.

          DCS6930          You have both conversations

                           of Police Officers inside the

                           ground on a talk through

                           situation which is all, you can

                          over hear presumably and if it's

                          on a talk through is it correct

                          that that talk through is both

                          could both be between shall we
 MURRAY               BERNARD    D
                                                                     103


                                 say Police Officer to Police

                                 Officer, as wall as from

                                 Control Room to Police Officer?
            BDM                  Absolutely yes.
18.50       DCS6930              So you have that situation within

                                 the ground.    You you still have

                                at this point outside the ground

                                on all four sides of the ground

                                a number of Police Officers there

                                are in camiunication or giving

                                you reports, for example what

                                you've just said breathalisers,
19.10
                                at that time.    I mean is that

                                radio constantly in use in that

                                Control Box, ws're talking around

                                now 2.35 (1435) 2.40 (1440) time

                                and can you describe to anybody

                                listening to this how that

                            radio's I mean is it just the odd

                            call or is it call after call

                            after call?

          BDM               Well it's continuous, if if i can

                            paint a picture for you, you've

                            probably seen the Control Box which

                            on the photographs looks larger

                            than it is.

          DCS6930           I mean there are some photographs

                            there, if you want to refer to

                            them or or look at them they
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D


 19.42                         are Document Number 176.
 19.45    KM                   No.   We sit three abreast which

                               covers the whole width of the

                               Control Room.    Myself on the left,

                               Sergeant GODDARD with the radio and

                               his map in the centre and PC RYAN

                               on his right.   PC RYAN has a couple

                               of telephones in front of him, he's

                               also got the PA system.    Now behind

                               us is PC BICHARD with his controls

                               for the, CCTV and on this occasion

                              Mr DUCKENFIELD was standing on the

                              raised area with him.

          DCS6930             Behind you?

20.20     KM                  Behind me.    Consistently calls were

                              being received by radio, calls were

                              being received by telephone sane of

                              them requiring no action except the

                              telephone being answered, there are

                              two telephones there.   At that time

                              PC RYAN was trying to speak

                              continously into the tannoy system.

                              Sergeant GODDARD is trying to

                              respond to messages, PC BICHARD is

                              trying to find out what he should

                              be videoing and I think that you'll

                              find that the majority of it was

                          on the actual Kop because that is

                          where we thought the problems might
MURRAY   BERNARD   D                                      105


                   occur where we might have to seek

                   the evidence later.   People are

                   asking for different things,

                   your train of thought is going from

                   one subject to another as somebody

                   wants an answer to a telephone call,

                   somebody wants something from the

                   radio and then as all this is

                   going on and you can see a situation

21.29              outside deteriorating we then get

                   a message that the radios are

                   going down and we're not being

                   received and we're not receiving

                   messages frcm outside.    Again

                   any train of thought is immediately

                   destroyed and it's necessary to

                   try and contact the Cormunications

                   Officer, fortunately for us he's

                   been listening to the transmissions

                   and he's heard that our

                   transmissions are breaking up and

                   off his own initiative he finds his

                   way to the Control Room while we're

22.00              still trying to find him.   He

                   arrives, it's necessary for him to

                   get under the desk, move everybody

                   out of their places, totally

                   disrupt the Control Rocm.   At this

                   time further radio messages are
  MURRAY             BERNARD    D
                                                                     106


                                being received, we can't respond

                                to them, we can't ask people what

                                they want, we can't give than what
 22.23
                                they want, and to my mind that

                                was one of the most devastating

                                moments of the whole afternoon up

                                til then and sort of incurred a

                                feeling of helplessness I think

                               that just when vre wanted radio

                               communications had gone.   Now

                               how long that situation lasted

                               I don't know, it may have, I've

                               no idea, it may have been a

                               minute, it may have been two

                               minutes, it may have been longer,

                               but it was certainly enough to

                               destroy the thought patterns and

                               the, the logic of me, of Sergeant

                           GODDARD and probably PC RYAN.
23.05      DCS6930         Crowd noise again for people

                           that perhaps have not been to a

                           semi-final or are not aware of

                           crowd noise.     The Control Box that

                           you've got is it sound proofed

                           in any way?

           BCM             It's not sound proofed but it is

                           it cuts out an awful lot of

                           sound, it is, it is good I I

                          we can hear the sound from outside
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D


                                but it it does not interfer with

                                our work.

           DCS6930              It doesn't interfer or obstruct

                                in terms of...

           BCM                  No.

 23.36     DCS6930              Okay.   Can I perhaps go back then

                                to, towards now the the tannoy

                                requests that came in from

                                Leppings Lane.   I think they

                                vrere to actually tell the crowd

                                to, to move back?

          BDM                   Yes.

23.49     DCS6930              Do you remember who, who asked

                               for that.    Was it Mr MARSHALL?

          BDM                  I don't know whether it was

                               whether it was Mr MARSHALL,

                               Inspector SYKES but one of,

                               one of the Inspectors or or

                               the Superintendent from out

                               there.

          DCS6930              And I knew it's around this

                               time that you actually had that

                               that break down in in radio

24.11                          cannunication. Did you make

                               the decision to give those tannoy

                               messages or was it done automatically

                               by the, by the request?

          BDM              Well it it was it was a request

                               that that should have been acted
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D                                         108


                                on by anybody who heard it and

                                whether PC RYAN did start to pass

                                the messages without my say so

                                or not I don't know.     He he possibly

                                did.    I did, I did tell him to

                                keep talking, just to keep talking

                                keep passing the message over and

                                over again.

           DCS6930              So you did tell him to keep going...

           BDM                  Yes.

          DCS6930               as opposed to, to actually knowing

                               whether you said, yes do it or or

                               whether he asked you if he could

                               do it?

          BDM                  I he, I don't think he would ask

                               me if he could do it.     I wouldn't

                               have expected him to.     I would

                               obviously have given permission to

                               do it straight away but I did

                               tell him rather than just pass one

                               or two, to keep passing the message.

25.15     DCS6930              You now have a situation at around

                               that time in addition to what I've

                               already mentioned, the 2.17 (1417)

                               and the problem, the request for

                               the horses, you've sent the serials,

                               you've now got the request for

                               tannoy messages on top.

          BCM                  Yes.
 MURRAY               BERNARD    D
                                                                       109

 25.29      DCS6930              Again did yourself or Mr

                                 DUCKENFIEI£> discuss any other

                                 option yourself that you could

                                 do to alleviate the problem that

                                 appeared to be facing you?
           BDM                   I don't think so.   I I don't think

                                 there would be discussion at that

                                time I think we would just be

                                observing events and there may have

                                been cannent but I can't recall any.
           DCS6930              I mean if people ware looking at

                                this they'd say wsll everytime

                                somebody asked you to do something

                                you did it, and I suppose the
26.02
                                question is, was there anything

                                that you could have added to that

                                or anything you could have done

                                in your role as a, as a Control

                            Room Carmander, additional to what

                            was being asked for.      Was there

                            anything that, even in hindsight

                            afterwards that comes to mind?
          BDM               I l l would be thinking there

                            about, about additional units

                            that that I could send, manpower

                            and where I could get it from
                                                   \
                            and hoping, I I knew that other

                            officers would be coming down

                            to the Leppings Lane end the
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D


                                ones who had been on escort

                                duties, sane had, had to be

                                down there just after the kick

                                off to get on board coaches,

                               they may have cane down early,
26.48
                               but there was, there was nothing

                               that that immediately came to

                               my mind that would have said

                               right we can ease the situation

                               by by doing this.
26.59      DCS6930
                               Yes, you actually say on page

                               11   of your statement, that by

                               1445 (1445) you could see on the

                           close circuit television that

                           outside Ieppings Lane turnstiles

                           the crowd was new compacting

                           and there appeared to be a crush.

                           Can I ask you this, you say 1445

                           (1445) 2.45 (1445), can you tell

                           me why it's 2.45 (1445) or how

                           you recall 2.45 (1445)?
          BCM
                           I can t, can I can I say when

                           I made this statement, I made it

                          fron several sources which which

                          gave tunes, there was video which

                          which showed times, there were

                          photographs that shoved times,

                          there were logs that showed times

                          and it was a question of, of trying
      MURRAY              BERNARD    D
                                                                          111


                                     to establish what time what

                                     took place.   The the times were

                                     rehashed and rejigged to to try

                                     and fall into a sensible sequence

                                     and the times I would, I would not

                                     take as, as concrete.

                DCS6930              Okay.

                KM                  They were tijnes that I thought

                                    different things were happening.
                DCS6930             So we we can't be accurate on

                                    on that...
                KM                  I can't...

                DCS6930             at 2.45 (1445) but at some stage in

                                    any event and it's probably in
    28.19
                                    and around that time, you do

                                    actually see the crowd appeared

                                    to be in seme sort of crush

                                    situation outside?
               KM                   It was certainly carpact it it
m
                                was alot, alot denser in in the

                                central area than it had been.
               DCS6930          And we are actually talking now

                                about where in, where outside?
               BCM              I can't...
    28.40      DCS6930          When you say, I mean you say

                                Leppings outside Leppings Lane

                                turnstiles, are we talking about

                                between the iron perimeter gates

                                and the turnstile area as opposed
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D
                                                                     112


                               to where outside?

            BDM                I can't, I can't see.     Fran the,

                               fran the pictures that I've got

                               on the, on the, and that's all

                               I've got to go on is the actual

                               CCTV, which I find very very

                              difficult sometimes to, to

                              estimate numbers and estimate

                              density, it it appeared to be

                              generally, as far as I was

                              concerned, across the whole of

                              the, of the concourse outside the

                              turnstiles, not in any particular
29.20                         area.   At one stage I recall the

                              the camera focusing on a police

                              horse, I don't exactly know where

                              that horse was, but that horse

                          was surrounded by by people,

                          but I I wouldn't like to say

                          whether it was in front of A to

                          G, 1 to     8    etc.

          DCS6930         No etc.         You you do actually

                          and were aware that at sane

                          stage the five and fifty police

                          officers that were, you were

                          told were were available in

                          fact I think double that were

                          available.        You actually sent,

                          soneone sent half fran the




                                                                           ! I;   /
  MURRAY             BERNARD    D
                                                                      113


                                gymnasium again to Leppings

                                Lane.   Was that your decision

                                to do that?

 30.03      BDM                 It was my decision, it was

                                a request fran an Inspector

                                for assistance and Inspector

                                BENNETT I think who was

                                actually standing on the

                                turnstiles, said we require

                               sane more assistance at

                               leppings Lane.     I think this

                               was after the first request

                               had been received for the gates

                               to be opened.     With it the

                               radio being on talk through,

                               Inspector SEWELL who was the

                               Liaison Officer and at the

                               gymnasium heard the request

                               got on the phone to the Control

                               Roan and said,      have, I have

                               eight or ten serials, I can't

                               remember.   I straight away

                               said send five and fifty.     Hold

                           on to the rest but send five

                           and fifty down to Leppings Lane.

30.52      DCS6930         So, so you were responding again

                           to a deteriorated situation

                           given to you.        Somebody was saying

                           that we've still got a problem...




                                                                            1
♦      MURRAY               BERNARD    D
                                                                          114

                  BDM                  Yes.

                  DCS6930
                                       and you then sent at the first

                                       opportunity officers certainly

                                       a a number of officers that were

                                           re available.   Now I know

                                      again at sane stage there prior

                                      to us coming round to the the

                                      authority to open Gate C to let

                                      people in, it did open for a

                                      short time as a result I think

                                      of somebody actually being

                                      ejected and a number of of

                                      supporters went in.
                BDM               Mm.

                DCS6930
                                  When that happened, did that

                                  did you see that actually take

                                  place on the monitor?
                BCM
                                  No.       I can't I can't recall

                                  exactly what I was doing but

                                  it might have been, I might

                                  have been sort of organising

                                  this manpower or whatever I

                                 was certainly doing something
    31.53
                                 and it was PC BICHARD who

                                 drew my attention to it as he

                                 did from time to time if he

                                 wanted me to see anything.        The

                                 request had already been nade

                                 for the gates to be opened.
MURRAY             BERNARD     D
                                                                  115

32.06
                              Initially and PC BICHARD says

                              he said the gate's gone, the

                              gate's txirst which I

                              automatically looked at the

                              monitor and did see at that

                              stage that the gate was open

                              and people were caning in.    I

                             had, I didn't know whether the

                             gate had burst or whether the

                             gate had been opened or really

                             which gate it was but it was a

                             gate and people were caning in.
         DCS6930             Can I ask you this. I mean there

                             they're quite big concertina gates

                             aren't they?

         BDM                 Yes.

         DCS6930         Which would take some, shall we say

                         bursting open?
         BDM             I would think so.
         DCS6930         Are you sure that was the gate,

                         are you sure he's referring to

                         that particular gate because and

                         again I don't want to put words

                         into your mouth or ideas into your

                         mouth, but the, a little later on

                         after Gate C's opened there is an

                         iron perimeter gate near to the

                        River Don that in fact does burst

                        open either through deliberate force
MURRAY              BERNARD    D


                               by the supporters or by just

                               pressure alone.   I mean that

                               seems to me the more, the more

                               logical thing to say the gates

                               burst open.   I mean is there

                              any possibility that you are

                              confused into what he's talking

                              about?
          BDM                 No.

          DCS6930             You're quite happy that he he

                              was referring to, to that situation

                              when the horseman I think later

                              retrieved it and it was shut?
 •27      BDM
                              He said the gate's gone or the

                              gate's burst, I looked at the

                          monitor and it was a perimeter

                          gate and people coming into the

                          ground.      It was a perimeter

                          gate...

         DCS6930          Of the ground?
         BDM              on on the perimeter of the ground.
         DCS6930          The large gate he was actually...
         BDM              and people people were coming into

                          the ground.

         DCS6930          And it was Gate C?
         BDM              It was Gate C yes.
.49      DCS6930         Did that alert you in any way

                         to you you've had the request

                         now I think you've said already
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D                                    117


                               fron Mr MARSHALL to actually

                               open the gates?

           BOM                Yes.

 34.00    DCS6930             Did that alert you, that incident,

                               to the fact that if you did let

                               people in you could have a problem

                               when they came in?

          KM                  It didn't, it didn't alert me to

                               that, it, I I was despatching

                               officers to the scene, I was

                               trying to watch the situation, I

                              was getting messages over the

                              radio that, that, to open the

                              gates that people were going to

                              be crushed.   It didn't, it didn't

                              alert, trigger any other thought

                              pattern in my mind.

34.32     DCS6930             I mean did yourself and Mr

                              DUCKENFIELD or did you, did you

                              discuss or consider that as they

                              were caning in there was no

                              ticket collection there could

                              have been non ticket holders,

34.45                         and that people, I mean I think

                              we know there was about five

                              hundred came in, I think you

                              estimated it at less at the time

                              or tut was there anything there

                              that made you discuss what to
  MURRAY             BERNARD    D
                                                                    118


                                do if you actually responded to

                                the request that was coming

                                to open the gates?

            BDM                 No, I think, I think that I would

                                only be thinking that Mr

                                DUCKENFIELD may have node a

                               comment that, why are they

                               still asking for the gates to be

                               opened if they've burst, or words

                               to that effect.

           DCS6930             But, but nothing on a, shall

                               vre say on an operational basis

                               that made you think that if we

                               do anything else we should put

                               seme more resources or get more

                               stewards to to receive the influx

                               that that would come?
           BDM                 No, I I was just hoping that

                               that would relieve the the obvious

                           problem outside which was

                           becoming apparent and the fact

                           that we'd got manpower either

                           about that time immediately

                           before and inmediately after

                           going up towards the Leppings
35.47                      Lane end, but no there was nothing

                           there that said to me, you've

                           got to direct these people in

                           one direction, you've got to
MURRAY               BERNARD    D



                                see to them when they ccme in.
           DCS6930              The the five and fifty that you'd

                                sent for, that again were coming

                                from the gym, w u l d have actually

                                gone along the back, do you know

                                if they did go along the back of

                                the North Stand...

          BDM                   I don't,

          DCS6930              to Gate A?

          BDM                  I don't.

          DCS6930              I mean was there any instruction

                               given to them as to where they

                               should go to other than Leppings

                               Lane?

          BDM                  No.

          DCS6930              I mean you may know now but would

                               it have occurred to you then that

                               in fact they would have been

                               restricted to the back of Gate A

                           because they've probably, well they

                           couldn't as I understand it, get

                           through to come behind where B

                           and C were anyway.

         BCM               Well I'm sure that there's an

                           opening gate there that they

                           can get through.

         DCS6930           Yeah.

         BDM               But I don't know whether they

                           got to the back of the Leppings
 MURRAY              BERNARD    D


                                Lane terraces or whether they

                                they were restricted to the

                                North Stand or whether they

                                even came along the track.

           DCS6930              I mean is it something that,

                                is there any reason why you

                                would have given that any

                                thought?

36.50      BDM                  Not really because Police

                                Officers, if we ask a serial

                                to go to a part of the ground

                                they get there, some have got their

                               own routes that they may have

                               a particular route that they

                               pursue, I certainly wouldn't

                               say to them, I want you to,

                               unless I have a specific,

                               specific duty for them to do.

37.11     DCS6930              No one discussed for example

                               you you're virtually talking

                               there about what three

                               serials no five serials aren't

                               you?

          BDM                  Well I I think five and fifty

                               with the serials were actually

                               a Sergeant and eight so it's a

                               and I think that they actually

                               sent seven serials.

          DCS6930              Seven serials and it didn't
  MURRAY              BERNARD    D
                                                                      121


                                 pass anybodies mind or

                                 discussion to say well send

                                 x number to Gate C, Gate B,

                                 Gate A, that that situation

                                 didn't arise?

            BDM                  No.

 37.42      DCS6930              Okay.   I know that in your

                                 statement at page   12   you

                                 actually refer to Gate C

                                opening at 1449 (1449), this

                                 is the main opening of Gate C

                                I think, but we are aware now

                                it was 1452 (1452).

           BCM                  Yes.

           DCS6930              Can you explain to me again how

                                1449 (1449)?

           BCM                  Again it it's purely and simply

                                working from seme fixed time

                                it's not, I didn't look at the

                                clock and say now it is 1449 (1449)

                                this is just a, my estimate of

                            of of the timing of events which

                                I I fully accept may be several

                            minutes out either way.

           DCS6930          The the reason I ask that is

                            because if if we go back to the

                            1417 (1417) incident, and Mr

                            MARSHALL thought that it was a bit
38.30                       later.       I just wanted to, to sort
  MURRAY              BERNARD    D
                                                                      122


                                 of get clear that there is no

                                 possible, or perhaps there is a

                                 possibility that if it was 1449

                                 (1449) there and we know it was

                                 1452 (1452), is it possible that

                                 1417 (1417) could have actually

                                have been 1420 (1420)?
            BDM
                                 I don't think so, I think the, the

                                1417 (1417) was a time written

                                down in a log, the 1449 (1449) is

                                merely my own recollection.
            DCS6930             Through looking at different

                                things?
           BDM                  Through looking at different

                                things and trying to fit

                                events into a time space.
           DCS6930          Right so we'd say 1417 (1417) is

                            precise, 1449 (1449) well we

                            know is is three minutes out...
           BDM              Yeah.

           DCS6930          Frcm what we know and that explains.
           BDM              I vojld say.
39.14      DCS6930          Thank you.     The opening of those

                            gates and the requests from Mr

                            MARSHALL that came through and we

                            know that ware a number a number

                           of requests.      Can you tell me what

                           you and Mr DUCKENFIELD discussed

                           if you discussed anything about
  MURRAY             BERNARD    D
                                                                         123


                                that request?

                                II      don't, I don't think there was

                                a discussion, I I was, I was doing

                                things at the time, very difficult

                                to recall what, but I was doing

                                things at the time.    I know

                                there was no discussion about

                               there was no real discussion at

                               all.     I was trying to, I was trying

                               to get these, these serials

                               initially I was trying to get the

                               Club Safety Officer on the Club

                               Radio.

           DCS6930             That's Mr LOCK?

 40.10     BDM                 That's Mr LOCK. There were

                               several things happening and Mr

                               MARSHALL'S requests were caning in.

                               I was hoping that the situation

                           might have been retrievable, I

                           was looking at the, at the video

                           and I I was seeing whether there

                           was a possibility that we could

                           get away without opening the gates

                           but eventually it got to a stage

                           where because of the, the urgency

                           in Mr MARSHALL'S voice I was
40.43                      satisfied that the gates had to

                           be opened, that the situation

                           wasn't recoverable and that we
m
     MURRAY              BERNARD    D
                                                                        124


                                    had to do it then and asked

                                    Mr DUCKENFIELD you know, are

                                    we going to open the gates and he

                                    thought about it for a few

                                    seconds and said yes.

               DCS6930              I think you actually said

                                   you've got to make that decision

                                   now or words to that effect?
               BDM                 I said he was behind me I recall

                                   turning round to him and saying,

                                   Mr DUCKENFIELD are we going to

                                   open those gates and he said

                                   Okay open the gates.
    41.26     DCS6930              Open the gates.   I think you've

                                   assessed that the, I mean there

                                   have been suggestions that it

                                   was up to five minutes between

                                   the the sort of request and the

                               decision and I think you've

                               actually suggested that it's

                               more like three to three and

                               a half minutes.

              KM               I think I said that at the,

                               the hearing I I don't I don't

                               know how long it was, but it

                               wasn't a long time and

                               certainly in that sort of

                               that cauldron of a control room

                               as it was then, it seemed a very
     MURRAY             BERNARD    D                                   125


                                   short time.

     41.58    DCS6930              I I mean you've explained what

                                   you were actually doing following

                                   their request you you've sent

                                   other officers, you, so you are

                                   responding to try and assist.

                                   Was any other option of any kind

                                   did you think of any other option

                                   of any kind?

£             BDM                  Did I think of any?   I I didn't,

                                   I didn't think of any, I I I

                                  was, there was a situation there

                                  that was obviously becanming more
    42.26                         serious it was obvious that

                                  people were in distress that

                                  people were being crushed against

                                  the wall of the turnstiles, or

                                  whatever and and my my only sort

                                  of thought process then was

                                  that we'd we'd got to relieve

                                  that situation, we'd got to

                                  get those people out of that,

                                  out of that danger and if the

                                  only way of doing that which

                                  it was, was to open the gates,

                                  then we'd got to open the gates

                              and relieve the pressure and and

                              get them free and save their lives

                              or save them frctn injury.
  MURRAY               BERNARD    D


             DCS6930              Again the tape's shortly going

                                  to cane to an end so I think

                                  we'll terminate that part

                                  of the interview now.    The time is

                                  eight minutes past one (1308)

                                  if we can switch off the audio

                                  tape please.

 43.18                            (Tape switched off).

 00.09      DCS6930               Continuation of an interview with

                                 Mr MURRAY at Fumival House, the

                                 time is ten minutes past one (1310)

                                 on the 25th of June (250690).     I'm

                                 Michael POSTER, Detective Chief

                                 Superintendent, West Midlands

                                 Police.

           bdm                   Bernard Dean MURRAY, Superintendent,

                                 South Yorkshire Police.

           DCI2514               Chief Inspector Kevin TOPE, West

                                 Midlands Police.

           RM                    Richard MANNING, Walker Morris

                                 Scott, Turnbull Solicitors, Leeds.

           PC9032                Police Constable Stephen BROWN

                                 of the West Midlands Police.

00.35      DCS6930           Remind you again that you're

                             still under caution Mr MURRAY.

           bdm               Yes.

           DCS6930           We're, we're referring in the

                             previous part of the interview to

                             the Gate C and the opening and the
  MURRAY             BERNARD     D
                                                                        127


                                possibility of any option that had

                                gone through and then we came onto

                                the suggestion of three to three and

                                a half minutes situation.     Did you

                                want to expand again on anything on

                                that particular point?
            BDM                 I don't think so, merely to say

                                that again, it it's only an

                                estimate it seemed a very short

                               period of time between receiving

                               the initial request and the final

                               request that was acted upon.     I

                               don't really know how long it

                               was.

01.23      DCS6930             Was anything done to inform, I think

                               the the Police Officers who are

                               allocated to those gates A, B and

                               C as well as stewards, is that

                               right?

           BDM                 No.

           DCS6930         Not at all?

           BDM             That's not correct no.
01.37      DCS6930         There was sane suggestion that

                           Police Officers went to those

                           gates and I think in one point

                           Gate A one of the Police Officers

                           said if the gates aren't, if the

                           gates aren't opened it's it's

                           going to be forced in.     Would




                                                                              9
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D


                               er officers then of just

                               happened to be at those gates if

                               they were there as opposed

                               to posting?

           BDM                 I don't think so, I I I would

                               have hoped that we had a, we had an

                               Inspector and Sergeants on the

                               inside of the concourse with radios

                              who would be listening to everything

                              that was taking place and would

                              position themselves in position to
02.15                         to open the gates.     Certainly

                              there was no no one deliberately

                              sent to Gate A, Gate B or Gate C.
02.25     DCS6930             When the order goes out, to to

                              open the gates, who is that directed

                              to?

          BDM                 That wasn't directed at a serial

                              I do recall open the gates, open

                              the gates and and I saw from the

                              CCTV a few seconds later that, that

                              a gate was opened and people started

                              to come in.

02.50     DCS6930             But no no specific officer is

                          actually contacted to to do that

                              job or to pass that message to

                          the stewards on the gates.

          BDM             No specific officer was, was told

                          to do that.        It was obvious I
  MURRAY              BERNARD    D
                                                                      129


                                 think, I think it was obvious

                                 fron the picture that we were

                                 looking at which happened to

                                 be Gate C that Police Officers

                                 were immediately behind the gates

                                 and obviously, it was obvious to

                                 me were waiting for for for a

                                 decision or or otherwise.
 03.26      DCS6930             Again we know now that certainly

                                there was seme delay in Gate A

                                being opened and Gate B was

                                opened perhaps for a short time.

                                I don't think you could see

                                either of those on your monitor

                                is that right?

           BDM                  Gate B we cannot see at all on

                                Gate A    can.   Fran my point of

                                view the gates at Lappings Lane

                                means the gates to the Leppings

                                Lane enclosure and not the gates

                                to the North Stand.   I don't think

                                I would have expected the North

                                Stand gates to be opened.    In

                                fact I would have been concerned

                            if they had been opened.

           DCS6930          Mm.

04.03      bdm              I would, I was expecting the gates

                            to the concourse at the rear of

                            the West Stand to be opened.
                   BERNARD    D                                       130


         DCS6930              So you would, the ones you would

                              have expected to be opened were A

                              and B?

         BDM                  Yes.

         DCS6930              I mean at that time did you know.

         BDM                  Sorry B and C.

         DCS6930              Sorry.

         bdm                  B and C.

         DCS6930              Rectify that you vrould have expected

                              Gates B and C to have been opened?

         bdm                  Yes.

         DCS6930              I mean did you know that they

                             were actually called B and C then or?

        bdm                  No.

        DCS6930              You only learnt that in hindsight?

        BDM                  I didn't know they were called B

                             and C.

        DCS6930              So there's no way in which you

                             could have actually nominated them

                             by, shall we say by by letter?

        bdm                  That's right.

        DCS6930              Did it...

        bdm                  I think there is a possibility

                             that saneone in the Control Room

                             may have but but I certainly

                             didn't.

04.51   DCS6930              You didn't.   Did anyone at any

                         stage consider checking if you

                         couldn't see Gate B, did anybody
MURRAY             BERNARD    D


                             check to see whether in fact

                             that instruction had been carried

                             out?

         BDM                 No.

05.05    DCS6930             I mean you've explained the reason

                             and I think before that you would

                             have expected people to be

                             listening to what was going on

                             and in response to the request

                             that officers in that concourse

                             area would have done and irade

                             sure those gates were open?

         BDM                 I think there was a sense of

                             security by by watching a picture

                             on a television screen albeit it is

                             at one particular gate that

                             when an order is given, that

                             gate opens and people come into

                             the ground, would perhaps tend

                             to make me feel, well what's

                             been requested has been done.

05.45    DCS6930             Has been done.   You haven't

                             actually got direct contact with

                             the stewards, is that right?

         BDM                 We have a radio in the Club's

                             radio system which certain

                             members of the, of the Club's

                             staff including the head

                             stewards in the four different
 MURRAY             BERNARD    D


                               stands in different sections

                               and the Security Officer and

                              several others have and that's

                              the contact we have with the

                              stewards.    I'd never ever

                              spoken to a steward on a radio

                              and the only person I would

                              speak to on the Club's radio

                              would be the Security Officer

                              Mr LOCK and ask him to get

                              Stewards to do, to do what we

                              want.

06.27     DCS6930             I knew you said earlier you you

                              were trying to get hold of Mr

                              LOCK and I, you couldn't do it.

          BDM                 I was.

          DCS6930             Can you explain the reason for

                              that.    Was that in response to

                              these requests to open the gates?

          BDM                 No it wasn't.    It was, the reason

                              I wanted to get hold of Mr LOCK

                              was because, as far as I was

                              concerned, there was something

                              wrong with the turnstiles, or

                              there was something wrong with

                              the flow through the turnstiles.

06.53                         We had a large crowd and the crowd

                              seemed to be getting larger, but

                              it wasn't dissipating the people
          BERNARD   D


                    were not coming into the stadium

                    at the rate that I would have

                    expected than to and I wanted

                    to get hold of Mr LOCK and draw

                    his attention to it for whatever

                    action he could take I I didn't

                    know.

DCS6930             There was no way in which the

                    request to open the gates and your,

                    and the decision that was made,

                    there was no way in which it was

                    felt necessary to inform Mr LOCK

                    at that stage, there's nothing

                    there's nothing he could have

                    actually done?

BDM                 I don't think he could have done

                    anything.

DCS6930             In the urgency of the situation?

BDM                 Obviously if I'd got him in radio

                    by radio and and we'd of maintained

                    radio contact I would have told

                    him.

DCS6930             The question's been put to you

                    before in terms of and I know

                    that the decision to open the

                    gates was Mr DUCKENFIELDS and

                    the, the quickness of time by

                    which you had to open those gates,

                    because I think it's fair to
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                    134


                             say that you were told that

                             people would be killed outside

                             if you didn't.

         BDM                 Yes.

         DCS6930             I think that was the situation

                             you ware faced with.     Is that

                             correct?

         BDM                 That's correct yes.

08.10    DCS6930             Did that give you any time to

                             consider where those people

                             would go or how to receive them?

         BDM                 I don't know whether it, I don't

                             know how much time it gave me,

                             but it it certainly didn't didn't

                             give me time to sit down and

                             think calmly and quietly as to

                             where they would go.     I thought

                             they would come into the ground

                             and I thought they would be

                             absorbed by the concourse.     I

                             thought they would go all over

                             the terraces.     I thought they

                             would be up in the stands, where

                             the, where the seats would be

                             taken.     I expected them to, to

                             go all over the place.

         DCS6930             I think we've, we've looked

                             and you've seen the, the

                             situation on the terraces which
m
    MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                    135


                                 is shall we say, I don't knew

                                 whether you agree with me that

    09.02                        has shewn the two centre pens

                                 three and four, shall we say

                                 full, or...

             BUM                 Yes.

             DCS6930             with a number of people in, but

                                 quite a lot of capacity on the

                                 the wing terraces?

             BUM                 Yes.

             DCS6930             Was that any part of your

                                 thoughts on that crowd?

    09.18    BUM                 No it was, it was clear to me

                                 from the Control Roan that

                                 certainly there was quite a

                                 lot of roan in the pen immediately

                                 below the, the Control Box and

                                 the two centre pens there was a

                                 lot of people in but there was

                                 nothing, there was no thought

                                 process that said well those

                                 people should be directed to

                                 a particular area.   It didn't

                                 occur to me at the time, I I

                                 I think it may have been a

                                 dangerous strategy to to

                                 employ anyway but it was not

                                 something that occurred to me

                                 at the time.
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                     136


         DCS6930             It would have been dangerous

                             to actually try and control than?

         BUM                 I I think to try and and and put

                             that amount of people in one

                             particular area no matter where

                             it was, nay have lead to, to, to

                             a calamity somewhere else.

         DCS6930             When basically looking at the

                             numbers, I think you estimated

                             two to two and a half thousand

                             in your statement out there...

         BDM                 Possibly.

         DCS6930             at one stage prior to the

                             opening of the gates and I know

                             that there's been estimates

                             of far higher than that but did

                             you, did you have in any events

                             of sufficient Police Officers to to

                             have made any control of those

                             people coming in?

10.34    BDM                 Once the concourse area outside

                             the turnstiles had become

                             compacted and the way it was,

                             I I don't see how we could, we

                             could of released that pressure,

                             I don't see how we could of,

                             I know an attempt was made by

                             closing the perimeter fences...

         DCS6930             Perimeter gates.
    MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                    137


             BUM                 Outside perimeter gates and I'm

                                 sure that helped but once they

                                 were compact I don't know how

                                 we could of, especially as I

                                 learn afterwards that officers

                                 had actually been withdrawn

                                 from that area, which of course

                                 we did not know at the time.

             DCS6930             But having made the decision

                                 to to put them into the concourse

                                 area and into the terraces, I

                                 mean, perhaps the the question I

                                 was trying to get at is, that

    11.27                        did you really have sufficient

                                 Police Officers in the concourse

                                 and and that area to actually

                                 control at least two thousand

                                 two thousand five hundred?

             BUM                 People, once they ccme through

♦                                the gates.

             DCS6930             I mean could you actually, could

                                 you actually of fed them into

                                 different pens.     Did you have

                                 enough Police Officers for that?

             Bffl                Like I said it wasn't, it wasn't

                                 anything that, that crossed my

                                 mind at the time.     I've thought

                                 about it since and I've I've

                                 thought about putting a line
    MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                   138


                                 of Police Officers across the

    11.59                        the tunnel.    I I can't see a

                                 a line of Police Officers across

                                 the tunnel with the number of

                                 people caning in, in the numbers

                                 that they did, would have been

                                 effective.    It would have been

                                 alright the first ones that

                                 came up to the, to the line,

                                 the Police Officers would have

                                 been able to canmunicate with

                                 them, but you knew as well as

                                 I do that people will not just

                                 do as w= tell them, they they

                                 stand and they argue and they

                                 say no, and the more I think

                                 about it, the more I could think

                                 about a, a build up behind than

                                 which would break the line and

m                                I I would see a situation

                                 occurring that's occurred before.

             DCS6930             I think I know you...

    12.42    KM                  I think I would have needed a

                                 lot of officers who had been

                                 well briefed to be able to

                                 direct those people coining in,

                                 totally unsupervised in huge

                                 numbers to any particular area

                                 of the ground and at the same
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


                             token, of had someone to receive

                             them and try and slow them down

                             on their approach.

13.06    DCS6930             The point is are you saying to

                             me you wouldn't, you couldn't

                             possibly have had enough Police

                             Officers to do that?

         BUM                 I don't think...

         DCS6930             Not just for the tunnel but to

                             actually...

         H I                 I don't think there was sufficient...

         DCS6930             of controlled them and taken

                             them...

         BDM                 There weren't, there weren't

                             sufficient there at the time.

         DCS6930             And I think in fairness you you

                             have said before that the tunnel

                             in any event never entered your your

                             thinking or thoughts at that

                             stage?

         M                   It did not no no.

         DCS6930             Okay.    The, I'd I'd like now

                             just just to show you a couple

                             of photographs which are

13.40                        actually Document 162 for the

                             audio which are photographs and

                             I I accept that they are taken

                             from a completely different

                             perspective to the one that you had
          BERNARD   D


                    but they're timed at according to

                    the match clock at 2.52 (1452) and

                    2.54 (1454).     It's photograph number

                    28 Document 162 and that's the first

                    on.    If you see here you've got a

                    time of__

BDM                 Yes.

DCS6930             1452 (1452) at that situation

                    there.     That that is agreeing that

                    the clock may not be right within

                    a minute or...

BDM                 fin.

DCS6930             or whatever to the gate opening.

                    That is about the situation at

                    the time that the the decision

                    was made to open those gates?

BDM                 Yes.

DCS6930             Is there anything there that

                    would concern you at that stage

                    and I say I accept that's it's

                    a very different view to what

                    you had?

BDM                 The only concern or the only

                    thing that sort of comes to

                    mind is that there is, there

                    appears to be a lot of room in this,

                    this pen, I don't know whether

                    you'd call it five or six.

DCS6930             Mm.
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


         BDM                 But there's nothing, there's

                             nothing else there that vrould

                             vrould really concern me.

15.02    DCS6930             And if we look at the next one

                             which is photograph number 28

                             of the sane Document 162, you'll

                             see that this one is timed at

                             1454 (1454) and it's a very

                             similar photograph. Again the

                             impression of perhaps the crowds

                             in three and four or or the crowd

                             near the net, does that give

                             you any any thought?

         BDM                 I think it looks, it looks

                             much the same as it does in the

                             previous photograph.

         DCS6930             Hew would you describe the crowd

                             frctn that?

         BDM                 In three and four.

         DCS6930             In terms of their...

         BDM                 Their denseness?

         DCS6930             Well perhaps not density but in

                             tents of are they, are they a

                             happy crowd, is is there anything

                             suggesting a problem to you?

         BDM                 They look comfortable to me and

                             they look, I I can't see a problem.

15.46    DCS6930             And was that the case with the

                             crowd on those terraces as far
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


                             as you're concerned prior to

                             the decision to open those gates.

                             Was there anything on those

                             terraces that gave you cause for

                             concern at all?

         BDM                 No.

16.13    DCS6930             We we've mentioned than before

                             the iron perimeter gates outside

                             of the turnstile area and I think

                             you've just said that you, you

                             know that at one point they were

                             actually closed off and at seme

                             success in, in controlling the

                             crowd outside.     Did you actually

                             see that take place at the time,

                             the closing of all those iron

                             perimeter gates?

         BDM                 I, I don't think so.

16.44    DCS6930             Was it discussed at all, as a,

                             as a measure that had been taken

                             by the officers outside by yourself

                             or Mr DUCKENFIELD that you can

                             recall?

         BDM                 No, not that I can recall.

17.00    DCS6930             Do you recall the bursting open

                             of the iron perimeter gate

                             nearest to the River Don at

                             any stage?

         BDM                 I don't think I saw it at the
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                     143


                             time.     I've seen it since on the

                             video there but I don't recall

                             seeing it at the time.

         DCS6930             Was it ever bought to your

                             attention at the time?

         BDM                 No I don't think so.

         DCS6930             Even if you didn't see it were

                             you aware of it?

         BDM                 I don't, I don't think so, I I

                             wasn't aware of it no.

17.26    DCS6930             The the opening of the gates

                             themselves and the decision to, to

                             do it.    We know now that a number

                             of people came in from the area

                             between those iron perimeter gates

                             and the turnstile area.

         BDM                 Yes.

         DCS6930             It's also evident from the

                             video and tell me if you don't

                             agree with this but it it it

                             appears to be evident that that

                             iron perimeter gate nearest the

                             River Don was forced within about

                             a minute or two minutes of Gate

                             C being opened in particular if

                             not the other gates and the people

                             from outside actually tagging on

                             to the end and caning through

18.14                        Gate C.    Do you recall at any
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


                             stage the fact that not only were

                             the people from within the area

                             between the iron perimeter gates

                             and the turnstiles coming in, but

                             also that the additional crowd

                             from outside were caning in?

         BDM                 No I I couldn't recall that, I

                             didn't I don't recall that on the

                             day.

18.33    DCS6930             Okay.   Was any discussion ever

                             made to close the gates at any

                             time once they'd been opened?

         BDM                 Not that I can recall.

         DCS6930             I mean if we look at, if we

                             talk about Gate C as as the main

                             one for the time being, we we

                             know that it was opened at 2.52

                             (1452) and I think the first time

                             it shuts is about 2.59 (1459) sane

19.04                        seven minutes.   Can you tell me

                             what was happening in the Control

                             Box at that time, was there any

                             thought on or or discussion about

                             well, how do we retake the control

                             of what's happened, you knew, do

                             we shut the gates.   Was there

                             anything on that line discussed?

         HM                  I think we were overcome by Gate

                             A by by a request for for Gate
A to be opened and that became

quite serious because again the

Sergeant said if you don't open

it people are going to be killed

and Mr DUCKENFIELD immediately

saying open it and I think

asking for the remaining serials

from the gymnasium to be

despatched to receive them on

the North Stand concourse.

I I had a real fear with that

gate that people were going to

come spilling through the,

the the exits and entrances on

the North Stand onto the pitch

into the seats which were all

ticket and there was going to be

chaos and I was watching the

North Stand and I was watching

the West Stand and I was watching

the terraces and I I didn't, I

don't think I gave a conscious

thought to saying right enough

was enough, we've eased the pressure

let's shut the gate and for a

while the mounted officers was

there and he was excercising sane

control over people going through

but eventually he withdrew or
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


                             was pushed aside and and I didn't

                             give a conscious thought to

                             saying stop it there.

21.00    DCS6930             The there was some discussion

                             on the queuing, queuing situation

                             outside.

         BDM                 Yes.

         DCS6930             In in Leppings Lane.    Those iron

                             perimeter gates, that that feature

                             outside, they, there are I think

                             six pairs that open out.       Is that

                             right?

         bdm                 I think so, yes.

         DCS6930             If we talk about the ones that

                             that give access to turnstiles

21.30                        A to G.    Is there any policy on

                             prior to the match and the build

                             up of the crowd on which of those

                             gates are open, be it   1, 2   or?

         bdm                 I think there there may have been

                             the perimeter gates for the

                             Sheffield Wednesday it's the

                             edge of their property and and

                             they delegate the the end of

                             Sheffield Wednesday's property.

                             I've never known than be, be

                             closed.    I've, as far as I can

                             recall and I stand corrected

                             they're always sort of opened
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


                             and left in the open position.

         DCS6930             Is that all of them?

22.07    BDM                 All of them.   I've never, apart

                             frcm the ones that lead down,

                             actually dcwn to the road at

                             the South Stand and then

                             again, I can't remember

                             whether they closed or not,

                             but I've I've never noticed

                             the gates have never featured

                             in any plans or strategy, they're

                             just there, they just happen to

                             be perimeter gates.

         DCS6930             Are they manned by Police

                             Officers?

         BUM                 No.

22.33    DCS6930             The the reason I bring it up

                             is because in eighty, people

                             have said that in 1988 (000088)

                             the the queuing was better.

         BDM                 Yeah.

         DCS6930             Now what I'd like you to do is

                             just have a look at a piece of

                             video from 1988 (000088) that

22.54                        shows those those gates, because

                             it does seem evident and it's

                             not very clear but if we, it's

                             about 2.45 (1445) and in fact

                             if you'd accept that it, it's
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                     148


                             the same at tvro o'clock (1400).

                             There is in fact only one of

                             those iron perimeter gates open.

         BDM                 Is there?

         DCS6930             Which gives access to turnstiles

23.14                        A to G.     We're now showing for

                             the audio Document 146 at about

                             2.46 (1446) time, you'll have to

                             give us a few minutes just to

                             find it, there, if we can, that's

                             shaking a little bit.     Can you

                             see that across there that it

                             appears that most of the supporters

                             are ccming in one gate.     It's

                             not very good, it's a freeze

                             one at the minute and that the

                             the other gates appear to be

                             closed.

         BDM                 Is that the actual position of

                             the gates, I thought they were

                             further back than that?

         DCS6930             Yeah, they are along there

                             actually.

         BDM                 Are they, are they I...

         DCS6930             Can you run it, I know it's going

                             to jump away very quickly and

                             you'll see it miss it can we

                             go back again or, it it'll run

                             through to it again won't it.
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                       149


                             It's coming to it new, just

                             there.     Can you see the way

                             that they seem to be...

         BDM                 Yes.

         DCS6930             caning into one area?

         BDM                 Yes.

                             (Pause)

24.25    DCS6930             Going across and into A to G.      To

                             your knowledge then there's no

                             set policy on that?

         bdm                 No.     No it's a, it might be

                             something that the the officer

                             who was in charge of that

                             particular sector decided, you

                             see I I thought that the gates

                             ran parallel, almost parallel

                             these seen to be.

         DCS6930             Well there's a map here if that

                             helps.    It's actually there in

                             terms of...

         bdm                 Yeah.

         DCS6930             And that's the end of the, the

                             barrier type thing...

         BUM                 Mn.

         DCS6930             for A to G.    I mean there is the

                             possibility that a few are

                             actually coming in through that

                             second gate and it appears to be

                             perhaps it's partly open.
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                     150


25.10    BDM                 I don't, I don't knew of any

                             policy of closing these perimeter

                             gates or using them as a, as a

                             crowd control or a crowd screen.

                             Whether the, the officer who was

                             who was on the ground there,

                             decided to do it on that occasion

                             I don't knew.   I must admit that

                             I I never noticed it at the time.

         DCS6930             I mention it because the, the

                             suggestion has come from a number

                             of supporters that the queuing

                             was better and the filtering was

                             better and I just wondered whether

                             because it was the same supporters

                             the year before whether that

                             created a better impression of

                             queuing as opposed to more gates

                             being open and more free, free for

                             all sort of situation.

         BDM                 No I would think that someone who

                             arrived last year and found that

                             there was only a sparse crowd there

                             with forty, with the same number

                             of Police Officers, forty four,

                             forty five Police Officers and

                             someone who had arrived in 1989

                             (000089) when the crowd was very

                             dense they would no doubt feel
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                        151


                             that there were more Police

                             Officers that they were, they

                             were better coordinated, pore

                             and simply because there would

                             be much higher profile along

                             a smaller crowd.

         DCS6930             Okay.    Thank you.   Can we

                             move on then back now to 1989

                             (000089) and the situation perhaps

                             in respect of monitoring the pens

                             that we've already spoken briefly

26.41                        about.    I think you told the

                             public inquiry that you felt the

                             the monitoring of the crowd was

                             both a Police and a stewards

                             responsibility or role?

         BDM                 Yeah.    The general safety

                             considerations similar to

                             fire have got to be the, have

                             got to be the responsibility of

                             of the, have got to be aware to

                             everyone that's at the event and

                             I don't think the, I don't see

                             it as a, I didn't see it as

                             necessary to give a specific

                             responsibility to anyone to

                             monitor safety considerations.

27.26    DCS6930             When you talk on that line when

                             you say that joint role.       Are you
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                    152


                             actually talking about monitoring

                             it for, for packing purposes, or

                             for overcrowding or, what has

                             been your view of, of why you

                             would monitor those pens?

         BDM                 I'm not, no I wasn't talking

                             about packing or overcrowding, I

                             was talking about a a serious

                             situation which comes, comes

                             to the attention of anyone and

                             I I can only, there's no

                             specific, we never gave any

                             specific instructions for anyone

                             to monitor pens, but if there

                             was a serious problem I would

                             just expect to be notified of it

                             by anyone.

         DCS6930             So what you're actually saying

                             to me is that, that shall we

                             say that questioning around

                             the public inquiry on that

                             point.   What you're really saying

                             is when you talk about monitoring

                             the pens is you're looking at them

                             for any sorts of incident, be it

                             for, for a hooligan a drunk,

                             anything at all, people being

                             injured, fainting.

         BDM                 That's right.
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


         DCS6930             And not specifically for a problem

                             that we we know that happened here

                             where there was more in there than

                             perhaps there should have been and

                             there were crushing and injuries

                             resulting in the fact that people

                             died, not not for that purpose?

28.46    BDM                 I just don't think, it never

                             occurred to me that I would have

                             to give a specific officer or a

                             specific person a a brief to say

                             that you will watch for this or

                             you will watch for that.     I

                             consider that is part of an

                             officer's or a steward's normal

                             duties.

         DCS6930             If you, if you were a Police

                             Constable on the perimeter

                             track with your knowledge and

29.14                        experience, would you realistically

                             have been looking for overcrowding

                             on terraces and and that

                             possibility?

         BDM                 I I don't, I don't know what you

                             look for.   I would I would be

                             observing the crowd, I would be

                             observing the crowd and it's by

                             observing the crowd that you see

                             anything and everything.   I don't
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                      154


                             knew whether I would be looking

                             for anything particular.    I recall

                             I've seen it years ago where

                             children always used to go to the

                             front and sometimes they they

                             were in distress and the policeman

                             would lift them out and relocate

                             them somewhere else.   Ill

                             certainly don't think I would

                             be standing there looking to see

                             how hew dense the crowd was if if

                             I could, if I could sort of

                             figure it out.   I would just be,

                             I would be looking at the people,

                             looking at the crowd and looking

                             for signs of anything and

                             everything.

30.21    DCS6930             So there would, from what you're

                             saying there would be not need

                             for individual perimeter track

                             officers to be specifically

                             briefed by yourself or Mr

                             DUCKENFIELD or indeed Mr

                             GREENWOOD about that inside

                             responsibility on the need to

                             look for that, that potential

                             problem?

         bum                 I would have thought not.

                             Obviously in the light of
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


                             circumstances I think it's

                             completely different new.

         DCS6930             New you would do it?

         BDM                 Absolutely.

         DCS6930             Yes.   But nothing had happened

                             previously from what I think

                             you've said for you to have

                             been involved in that sort of

                             situation?

         BDM                 No I I I would find it very

                             difficult to say to a Police

                             Officer, well look at the crowd

                             and if you see anybody who's

                             sort of obviously suffering

                             severely, do something about it

                             it's part of his his job, his

                             duties, he's highly trained.

         DCS6930             While we're on the perimeter

                             track side, the postings of

                             those officers, and perhaps the

                             the plan that was put into

31.30                        effect.     They're not specifically

                             posted to set perimeter gates

                             are they?

         BDM                 No.

31.35    DCS6930             Can you tell me what the, the

                             thought behind that is, in terms

                             of how those gates are even

                             monitored by the Police Officers
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                          156


                             or are given any sort of

                             responsibility?

         BDM                 Each each individual officer is

                             given a a perimeter gate in case

32.01                        of an emergency, evacuation.     They're

                             not given specific gates to look

                             after and they're there, or they

                             weren't at that time and it's

                             down to the, again to the the

                             Track Sergeants and the Inspector

                             on the track to post his men as

                             he feels they are going to be

                             most effective.

         DCS6930             So if there was a situation that

                             required evacuation.

         BDM                 Yes.

32.24    DCS6930             Officers are, know that they have

                             to go to a set gate?

         BDM                 Yes.

         DCS6930             And they're given that posting

                             separate to the order or within

                             the order?

         BDM                 Can I see if it's within the

                             order?

32.37    DCS6930             Certainly yes.    We're just

                             looking at Document 194 again

                             which is the, the match order.

         BDM                 It's not specific in the order

                             but I would have expected than
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                    157


                             to be given that, those

                             instructions by their, by their

                             Serial Sergeant, as to which

                             gates they look after, in the

                             case of an emergency.

33.03    DCS6930             The the evacuation that you

                             talk about, the evacuation, of

                             the ground is there a separate

                             order or plan for that particular.

         BDM                 No.

         DCS6930             system.     So it really is a,

                             a verbal briefing and set of

                             instructions built up over

                             experience and time?

         BDM                 Yes it's a, in the event of

                             the emergency evacuation

33.30                        procedure arising, PC'£5 at

                             either end of the ground will

                             take up positions at the fence

                             gates, and these gates will

                             only be opened if the specific

                             message to evacuate is given.

         DCS6930             So when it talks about procedure

                             there isn't anything actually

                             written down that, that goes

                             that far?

         BDM                 That says PC so and so will

                             be responsible for Gate 3, no.

         DCS6930             Thank you.    It's fair to say
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


                             that in fact I think the

                             reason I've pursued that is

33.58                        that certainly PC ILLINGWOKffl

                             didn't seen to be aware of

                             a responsibility on him to

                             man any particular gates and

                             I think from what you've said

                             is that would be right.      That

                             he wouldn't...

         BDM                 Yes.

         DCS6930             perhaps be given a set

                             responsibility.   The only

                             further point I I'd put to

                             you on that is, it was

                             suggested by that officer that

                             indeed that he had suggested

                             seme four or five weeks before

                             to a senior officer that more

                             track officers ought to be

                             employed with the big game

                             caning up.   Was that ever

                             considered or was there any

                             knowledge of that within your

                             knowledge?

34.37    BDM                 I don't know whether PC

                             ILLINGWORTH had suggested it

                             certainly the track serial

                             is slightly increased in the

                             year before and there were
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                    159


                             twenty PC's I think in the

                             track serial, where as the

                             year before there were

                             either sixteen or eighteen and

                             that was for the whole of the

                             event.

         DCS6930             Yes.

         BDM                 And the track was to be

                             increased at the end of the

                             match and I don't know whether

                             that was when PC ILLINGWORTH'S

                             doubts or fears were going to

                             be materialised.

35.10    DCS6930             So you actually did increase

                             the size of the perimeter track

                             serial from the following year?

         BDM                 I increased the size of the track

                             serial and arranged I think

                             for a, a further four or five

                             serials to support it before

                             the end of the game which was

                             on my own observations from the

                             year before.

35.41    DCS6930             Okay.    Moving now to the, after

                             the gates had been opened and

                             a number of people had cane

                             into the ground.    I think you've

                             already said that you expected

                             then to go to various places
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


                             where there was space and I

                             take it from that you didn't

                             really foresee any problem of

                             any kind occurring once those

                             gates had been opened?

         BDM                 Well I I wouldn't say no

                             no problems at all.

         DCS6930             In terms of people being

                             injured?

         BDM                 In terms of the injury no, I I

                             thought we may have problems

                             I thought that people would be

                             going all over the, that end

                             of the ground where they

                             shouldn't have gone and they

                             would, many would head for the

                             seated areas where there

                             wouldn't be seats and we we

                             would have problems of that

36.24                        nature but I didn't, I didn't

                             foresee any crushing problans.

36.33    DCS6930             It it's evident that certainly

                             both PC SMITH and PC

                             ILLINGWORTH opened the

                             perimeter gates before kick

                             off time.

         BDM                 Yes.

         DCS6930             Can you ranember and I think

                             you actually say in your
-   •
        MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                     161


                                     statement, it's just after,

                                     it's about three minutes

                                     past three (1503) before you

                                     recognised a problem on the

                                     on those terraces.   Would that

                                     be correct?

                 BDM                 I don't, I don't know what the

                                     time is.

                 DCS6930             Sorry no at 14, sorry at

                                     1458 (1458) on your page

                                     12   you you becane aware of

                                     scnething happening behind

                                     the West Stand but couldn't

                                     see what it was, but the

                                     police constable was opening

                                     either Gate 3 or Gate 4, so

                                     it's actually just before

                                     3 o'clock (1500).

                 BDM                 Yes.    It was it was before

        37.11                        it was before the kick off.    From

                                     what I can remember it was

                                     before the kick off that, that

                                     I became aware that something

                                     was happening behind the goals.

                 DCS6930             And are you still unable to be

                                     sure of which gate you've

                                     actually seen being opened?

                 BDM                 Yes.

                 DCS6930             Because you say they're either
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                 162


                             3 or 4.

         BDM                 I don't know which one it

                             was.

37.28    DCS6930             We've got, it seems that

                             certainly PC ILLINGWDRTO

                             opened his gate seme

                             minutes before, probably

                             some minutes before 1459

                             (1459) and moved people

                             out and took them up towards

                             pens 6 and 7 and it's also

                             evident that at some stage

                             PC SMITH did the same and I

                             I think you refer to the Police

                             Woman or...

         BDM                 Yes, it was it was the people

                             who were coming towards where

                             we were that I noticed that,

                             I didn't notice any movement

                             towards pens 6 and 7.   The

                             movements I was hoping for

                             was towards the one in front

                             of the Control Box.

         DCS6930             So if you hadn't noticed that

                             movement certainly from Gate

                             4 which PC SMITH was was

38.14                        dealing with, it's evident

                             that you wouldn't particularly

                             have been concerned with that
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                  163


                             end of the ground at that time

                             and wouldn't have perhaps

                             sent any resources to it.     I

                             know that some resources did,

                             were sent there, because they

                             came round, can you remember

                             how that occurred, or the

                             thing that made scmeone send

                             for those resources, the first

                             initial recognition you

                             needed more people there?

         BDM                 Not really no I can't I can

                             I can't remember where they

                             came from or whether they

                             were just to support the

                             track serial on that side

                             cause people were coming

                             onto the track.   I can't

                             remanber.

38.54    DCS6930             But at that point you're

                             not particularly concerned,

                             you you've got you can see

                             that there's something

                             happening but there's

                             no concern for people's

                             safety.

         BDM                 No I I think the, my thought was

                             that one of the officers had

                             opened the gates to help one or
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                       164


                             two people out who perhaps being

                             pushed or, or crushed or when I

                             say crushed I mean in the mildest

                             form..

         DCS6930             Mn.

         BDM                 they they were uncomfortable that

                             he was going to help them out and

                             relocate them which seemed a

                             sensible idea to me and and and

                             because there was room, roam in the

                             wings.

39.30    DCS6930             Did you, did you request radio

                             ccnmmication with either officer

                             to see what the problem was at that

                             stage?

         BDM                 I was trying to get hold of

                             unfortunately PC, WPC...

         DCS6930             ROBINSON was it?

39.46    BDM                 RICHARDSON.

         DCS6930             RICHARDSON.

         DCS6930             Yes.

         BDM                 Who I could see immediately in

                             front me, who who could see what

                             was happening.   She was looking

                             round the touch line, to go and

                             help and get these people in,

                             unfortunately she didn't have a

                             radio, she was, wasn't one of the

40.02                        area officers.     I   think, I think
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                       165


                             Sergeant GODDARD was calling PC

                             SMITH and ILLINGWORTH, I couldn't

                             be sure but I'm sure that they

                             weren't receiving and we weren't

                             receiving than they were

                             transmitting to us.

         DCS6930             Can, can you tell me who actually

                             sent for the other officers to

                             come round and assist?

         BDM                 No.     I can't, I can't recall.   It

                             might have been, it might have

                             been me I don't know.

         DCS6930             Or the actual reason why they were

                             sent.

         BDM                 No I can't.

40.34    DCS6930             At that particular point again did

                             you and Mr DUCKENFIELD discuss what

                             was taking place, that you can recall

                             now?

         KM                  I I can't, I can recall Mr

                             DUCKENFIELD saying something about

                             what's going on, where's Roger

                             GREENWOOD, get Mr GREENWOOD round

                             there and and he was called up on

                             the radio and asked to go round and

                             find out what was was happening,

                             that that I can recall.    Whatever

                             stage I don't know.

41.08    DCS6930             We certainly know that at, I think
    MURRAY               BERNARD   D                                       166


                                   by by 1503 (1503) you've seen a

                                   a number of people spilling onto the

                                   track area and as you've said Mr

                                   GREENWOOD at that time has been

                                   asked to go round to see what the

                                   problem is by Mr DUCKENFIELD?

               BDM                 Yes.

               DCS6930             Are we sure about that time is is

                                   the game started or is that again


#                                  a time that you estimate because

                                   of events?

               BDM                 I l l don't know, I, my, I can tell

                                   you that after the event my

                                   perception was that the match had

                                   been played perhaps for about two

                                   minutes, when I was informed that

                                   it had been going on for six

                                   minutes I found it difficult to

                                   believe.

               DCS6930             You, again the tape is very close

                                   caning to an end so I think we'll

                                   we'll finish it at this point

                                   again the time being now 1.52 pm

                                   (1352), if we can switch off the

                                   audio tape please.

    42.22                          (Tape switched off).

    0 0 .1 0   DCS6930             This is the continuation of an

                                   interview with Superintendent MURRAY

                                   at Fumival House, Sheffield.      The
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                       167


                             time now is 2.04 pn (1404) on the

                             25th of June (250690).     I am

                             Michael FOSTER, Detective Chief

                             Superintendent, West Midlands Police.

         BDM                 Bernard Dean MURRAY, Superintendent

                             South Yorkshire Police.

         DCI2514             Chief Inspector Kevin TOPE, West

                             Midland Police.

         RM                  Richard MANNING, Walter Morris

                             Scott Turnbull Solicitors.

         PC9032              Police Constable Stephen BROWN of

                             West Midlards Police.

00.41    DCS6930             Reminder again Mr MURRAY that you

                             are still under caution.

         BDM                 Yes.

         DCS6930             And we've just reccrmenced from a

                             short five minute break.     Just

                             going back to what we were talking

00.54                        about earlier which was the, the

                             spilling out onto the pitch and

                             that recognition by you and I

                             think you actually talked about

                             that you considered there must be

                             some in your statement at page 13,

                             some pushing and crushing, but I

                             think you, you've actually said that

                             when when you say that it wasn't

                             that you could see crushing at that

                             particular point?
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                      168


         BDM                 No, no it was merely a perception

                             that there mast have been some

                             people in some discomfort at the

                             front and the officers were trying

                             to relocate than.     It was also my

                             perception that other people were

                             taking advantage of the situation

                             as I would expect and were getting

                             out onto the track for a, for a

                             better view of events.

         DCS6930             You say that because, has that

                             happened before?

         BDM                 It's nothing, it's not that I've

                             known at Hillsborough but I I do

                             knew that when I've been to

                             Football matches, both as a Police

                             Officer and as as a spectator

                             that people do take advantage

                             of any situation to gain themselves

                             a better position to, if they feel

                             sometimes they're helped onto the

                             track for, for a reason, once that

                             reason's gone they they stand about

                             and watch the game.

02.14    DCS6930             So there was no association in

                             you you recognising or thinking

                             about crushing.    There was no

                             association with that thought and

                             the fact that you had opened the
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


                             gates and let a number of people

                             come in.   The two didn't at that

                             stage go together?

         BDM                 No, not at all.

02.34    DCS6930             Not at all.   You eventually having

                             heard I think Sergeant GODDARD

                             saying, stop the game, step the

                             game which is on the bottcm of your

                             page 13 of your statement, you

                             actually grabbed your hat and

                             Mr DUCKENFIELD said, yes stop the

                             game.   You grabbed your hat and

                             and went down from the Control

                             Room at that point?

         BDM                 Yes.

02.58    DCS6930             Did yourself or Mr DUCKENFIELD

                             ever discuss or consider going

                             down any earlier to see what the

                             problen was with people ccming

                             out or did you feel you knew what

                             the problen was?

         BDM                 Well there was no discussion,

                             but I I think Mr DUCKENFIELD and

                             possibly other officers thought

                             we were going to have a a pitch

                             invasion, I didn't, I couldn't

                             see a reason for it, at that

                             particular stage of the proceedings.

03.31                        I was pleased when the game was
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                      170


                             stopped, I was pleased that we

                             were going to stop the game and

                             then we could see exactly what

                             what's happening.

03.41    DCS6930             Now I'd like you to look at

                             Document 153 which are, which is

                             actually some photographs and I

                             think there are two photographs of

                             you on the perimeter track which

                             is photograph, first one is

                             photograph number 4 which is

                             actually timed at 1507 (1507)

                             and would you agree that that is

                             yourself, I think near to the

                             photographer with a number four on

                             his back?

         BDM                 Yes that's me.

         DCS6930             That's you.    Does that in any way

                             assist you in terms of, of saying

                             what you've just been doing or had

                             just done?     I mean I know that if

                             if I can just say that, I know

                             your statement says, on returning

                             to the Control Roam at about five,

                             1505 (1505).

         KM                  Yes.

         DCS6930             And again I'm sure the same thing

                             applies with the, with these times

                             that that's, you didn't perhaps
    MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                       171


                                 have the advantage of that at

                                 the time, but are you there making

                                 your way back do you think?

    04.43    BDM                 Hie photograph takes me a bit by

                                 surprise.     I, it's obvious looking

                                 at the time and looking at the

                                 number of people who were actually

                                 behind the goals that this is

                                 straight after I attempted to stop

                                 the game to attract the linesman's

                                 attention and must have walked

                                 across the corner of the pitch

                                 to seme position roughly where I

    05.12                        am there.     It's clear to me that

                                 I'm making my way back to the

                                 Control Roan on both photographs.

             DCS6930             That's both, both photograph 4 and

                                 photograph 5 which shows you

                                 closer to the Control Box.     Is

«                                that right?

             BDM                 Yes, I think there are only two

                                 seconds difference, I'm walking

                                 from that position back to the

                                 Control Box.

             DCS6930             And I think it's fair to say

                                 I I, nobody can guarantee

                                 exactly how accurate that

                                 time is, it depends on how

                                 it was set at the time?
MURRAY              BERNARD   D


05.40    BDM                  No I I don't, I don't, I don't

                              know the time but looking at the

                              number of people who ware actually

                              behind the goal it is almost

                              immediately after the game has been

                              stopped and players have been taken

                              off.

         DCS69330             I mean you are quite close

                              certainly in the first photograph

                              to, to Gate 3 I think, or seem to

                              be ccming fran the direction of

                              Gate 3, did you actually look...

         BDM                  I think...

         DCS6930              at the problem then?

         BDM                  I think that is Gate    2 actually.

         DCS6930              Gate 2 sorry.

         BDM                  This is the weak pen.

         DCS6930              Did you get close to Gate 3 and

                              Pen 3?

06.07    BDM                  I had, I had no idea    at that

                              stage what was happening.    My

                              intention had been to go down, stop

                              the, stop the game and get straight

                              back to the Control Room which was

                              my allocated spot.

06.29    DCS6930              Okay.    Thank you.   Do you recall

                              at that point having seen

                              Superintendent GREENWOOD at that

                              end of the ground?
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                      173


         BDM                 No.   I saw, I saw Mr GREENWOOD

                             immediately before wa requested the

                             game should be stopped because he

                             signalled fran the fence and I

                             interpreted his signal as meaning

                             stop the game.   As I got onto the

                             track and approached the linesman

                             he ran past me and I set off after

                             him and as I set off after him I

                             saw Mr GREENWOOD on the pitch,

                             stepping the game by the referee.

07.07    DCS6930             You didn't have any communication

                             with Mr GREENWOOD?

         BDM                 No.

07.10    DCS6930             Did you have any canmuncation with,

                             with anyone on that track, I know

                             Chief Inspector JfcROBBIE had gone

                             down earlier and was down there.

                             Can you recall whether you had any

                             conversation with any other

                             officers?

         BDM                 I I can't recall speaking to anybody

                             I thought I came, prior to seeing

                             those photographs, my perception

                             was that I I came immediately back

                             and I obviously went a bit further

                             than, than I I remember, but I

                             I don't recall speaking to anybody.

07.41    DCS6930             I mean it, part of of one of the
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


                             specific allegations against you

                             that wa will cane to later on was

                             that you ware slew to respond to

                             the, to the developing tragedy and

07.55                        set up a rescue operation.   When

                             you were actually there at that

                             time, can you think of anything you

                             specifically did or you felt

                             necessary to do in response to

                             what you ware seeing?

         BDM                 When I first want down.   No my

                             my intention was to stop the game

                             and stop it via the linesman,

                             having failed to do that I my my

                             intention then was to get back to

                             the Control Room as swiftly as

                             possible.

08.23    DCS6930             I mean did it, did it cross your

                             mind at any time then to, to stay

                             there and find out what the problem

                             was or was there anyway in which

                             you think you could have at that

                             stage recognised that, that maybe

                             it was a serious problem?

         BDM                 Fran where I was and and what was

08.42                        happening no.   There was no way

                             I could recognise it was a

                             serious problem.   Obviously now

                             if I'd gone further and gone up
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                      175


                             behind the goals I may have seen

                             for myself that it was a serious

                             problem but at that time I had

                             no idea, still thought that we'd

                             got, what we'd got were, vare people

                             who'd cane onto the track, taking

                             advantage of a, of a situation.

         DCS6930             So nothing, you saw nothing,

                             nothing was said to you that in

                             any way would have alerted you

                             to to what we knew unfolded later?

         BDM                 No.

09.13    DCS6930             You then came back up into the

                             Control Box and PC RYAN was

                             passing various messages over the

                             public address system I think

                             you say in your statement, and

                             Mr DUCKENFIELD then again asked

                             you to go back down onto the field

                             and try and clear people from the

                             goal area?

         BDM                 That's right.

         DCS6930             Is that virtually you coming

                             back in and going straight back

                             out again?

09.36    KM                  Almost, I I came up to the Control

                             Room via the South Stand, I still

                             had my coat on, I stood at the

                             door, I seared to think that
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                        176


                             Mr JACKSON was there at that time

                             or inmediately after me and before

                             I could take ray coat off I was

                             asked to go down and to clear the

                             pitch.

         DCS6930             Okay.    No do those two photographs

                             that w e 'v e just looked at.   I mean

                             bearing in mind that you've been

                             down twice.   Certainly they appear,

                             it appears to be that you're

                             walking back to the Control Box...

         BDM                 I think...

         DCS6930             could could have been the first

                             the first occasion.

         BDM                 It was the first occasion.

         DCS6930             Are you quite sure about that?

         BDM                 I'm almost sure because there

                             were more people on the pitch

                             when I went down the second

                             occasion, they they vere spilling

                             out towards the penalty areas.

         DCS6930             It's only just to, I didn't want

                             you to to feel that, that was

                             definitely right.     There is the

                             option that it, it could have

                             been the later one.

         BDM                 I can't remember being there

                             that, I'm I'm satisfied that

                             was the first occasion.
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


10.39    DCS6930             Okay.   When you went back down

                             you, you saw a lot of people as

                             you say in your statement that

                             were stocked and dazed lying on

                             the ground and then you saw

                             people apparently jammed hard

                             against the fence?

         BDM                 That's right.

         DCS6930             And actually graphically describe

                             the fact that they were starting

                             to discolour?

         BDM                 Yes.

11.02    DCS6930             Can you tell me what you actually

                             did at that particular point?

         bum                 Yes, went for a radio.   I needed

                             a radio, when I left the Control

                             Room on the second occasion nobody

                             in there gave me any hint that

                             they knew that people vere

                             seriously injured.   In fact as I

                             left I recall PC BICHARD who had

                             the job of also communicating with

                             force ops room asking for an

                             ambulance to be made ready for

11.39                        standby.   When I saw those people

                             hard against the fence, and at

                             the same time someone lying on

                             the track being sick, vcmiting

                             discoloured, I realised then we
MURRAY   BERNARD   D                                      178


                   had a a serious problem and there

                   was probably going to be a lot

                   of people who were injured and

                   I wanted to make sure that ve

                   were going to get sane ambulances

                   down there and enough ambulances

12.08              and I wanted a radio.     I didn't

                   have a radio, my own radio had

                   been taken out of me jacket of

                   me coat pocket when the radios

                   had gone down.    I always used

                   to carry my personal radio in my,

                   in my anorak in case I I had to go

                   out for a reason.    When the radios

                   went down and we were using

                   personal radios and I took it

                   out and put it on the desk for

                   use as a radio.     I had to get

                   a radio, I looked around saw a

                   couple of officers to my left and

                   went to than, spoke to one of

                   them, it was a PC, he didn't have

                   a radio, I I realised that that

                   the one of the Sergeants would

                   have a radio, saw a Sergeant,

                   made my way to him, took his

                   radio actually off him and and

                   passed radio messages to, well I

                   asked to be acknowledged first
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                      179


                             and I was acknowledged by Sergeant

12.56                        GODDARD.     I asked for, for a

                             fleet of ambulances.     I asked for

                             tannoy messages to tell people to

                             get back because it was my

                             perception then that it was the

                             force of the crowd at the back that

                             was injuring these people at the

                             front.     I think I asked for, for

                             bolt croppers I can't remember

                             if I, if I asked for them, if I

                             didn't ask for them, it was

                             purely and simply because the guy

                             next to me said I've already asked

                             for them, but that was, that was

                             what I wanted.    I I wanted mainly

                             I wanted to make sure that we'd

                             got ambulances on route and that

                             we we did what we could to get

                             people to move back.

13.33    DCS6930             I mean you've, you've recognised

                             now that you've got a serious

                             situation?

         KM                  Yes.

         DCS6930             There's yourself and Mr GREENWOOD

                             on that pitch at the time?

13.42    BDM                 Mr GREENWOOD I I assumed was

                             was at the fence leading the rescue

                             operation.
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                     180


13.49    DCS6930             It, I mean it again in relation

                             to the specific ccnplaint against

                             you that revolves, revolves around

                             the slowness to react to that

                             developing tragedy.   Can you

                             tell me what specific

                             organisation you did down there,

                             organisation of Police Officers,

                             organisation of stewards, any sort

                             of organisation at all?

14.11    BDM                 In the initial stages I knew Mr

                             GREENWOOD was, was at the fence

                             I could see that officers were

                             absolutely thick around the

                             gates so it was inpossible to see

                             what was happening inside the

                             gates.   There was no way that

                             that I could have been any

                             assistance there in ray role as

                             a Superintendent unless I'd have

                             thrown ray hat off and got stuck

                             in and and pulled people out.     I

                             didn't think that was ray job.

                             It was something that I wanted

                             to do and would have been the

                             easiest thing in the world to do

                             I felt however that, that ray

                             role was different from that.

                             MR GREENWOOD was really the the




                                                                         1
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                      181


                             give me a word, he was leading,

                             he was leading the the...

         DCS6930             Rescue.

         BDM                 rescue, the rescue of people from

                             the fence.   I I looked at the crowd

                             I asked for the tannoy messages, I

                             watched the crowd, I listened,

                             I don't know whether I could

                             hear the messages or not, I

                             don't know whether the PA system

                             would, would have been heard by

                             me on the pitch or whether it would

                             just be directed at the, at the

                             people.   I saw no movement whatso­

15.30                        ever at at the back.    I I kept

                             asking for the tannoy messages

                             and then decided that the only

                             thing to do was to get round to the

                             back, find out what officers were

                             in the concourse and see what

                             inroads we could make into

                             actually getting people out of

                             the, out of the back to get the

                             weight off the, off the people at

                             the front.

15.50    DCS6930             Right, so you, you've made the

                             decision that Mr GREENWOOD is

                             there and is organising the

                             the Gate 3 problem...
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


         BDM                 Resue operation.

16.00    DCS6930             Were you aware of the same

                             problem in Pen 4 then?

         BDM                 I wasn't, all I was aware of was

                             that there ware officers around

                             the gates and I was aware that

                             people ware, ware crushed and

                             what they ware trying to do was

                             obviously get in and get them

                             out.

16.15    DCS6930             But there was nothing else that

                             you felt you could do constructively

                             on that pitch by those pens that

                             wasn't already being done by

                             Mr GREENWOOD and the other

                             officers?

         BDM                 That's correct.

         DCS6930             So you you made the decision

                             because you felt that people

                             at the back of the pens weren't

                             responding.     Is that what you

                             said?

         BDM                 That's right.

16.36    DCS6930             To go to the back and see

                             what officers ware there and

                             see what you could do fran the

                             back?

         BDM                 Yes.

16.40    DCS6930             You actually go to the back
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                    183


                             I I know and you actually go

                             through the central tunnel area.

         BDM                 Yes.

16.47    DCS6930             In that time there did you see

                             Mr MARSHALL?

         BDM                 No.

         DCS6930             You, so you you want into the

                             back of the tunnel area and was

                             that by, did you take officers

                             with you or did you meet officers?

17.03    BDM                 No I want there and there was

                             two or three PC's and an

                             Inspector and I said to the

                             Inspector, lets get everybody

                             out of the tunnel.   'Utere

                             waren't many people in the

                             tunnel.   I estimated it at

                             fifty, but I I I don't, I don't

                             know whether that is a realistic

                             figure or not.

         DCS6930             Is that injured people or...

         BDM                 No no.

         DCS6930             just people milling about?

         BDM                 Just just people standing around

                             swearing, being abusive towards

                             the Police Officers and we did

                             actually shift them out of the

17.33                        tunnel.   The Inspector said to

                             me wall wa've got, we've got
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                      184


                             them out, ws've got them all

                             out.     I thought he meant the

                             people in the tunnel, people frcm

                             the back.     I don't know, I don't

                             know whether he, I can't even

                             remember which Inspector it was

                             I spoke to, so I don't know

                             whether he was talking about

                             injury or whether he was talking

                             about, about just people standing

                             there.    He did say to me, we've

                             got them all out, they were all

                             drunk again I don't know who

17.59                        he was relating to.    But we

                             cleared who there was in the

                             tunnel and I got to the front of

                             the tunnel.    The crowd was still

                             standing there but as I got to the

                             front I was able to see down and I

                             was able to see that, in the wall

                             behind the goals that Police

                             Officers ware now either side

                             of the fence and there was a gap

                             behind the wall.

18.20    DCS6930             So there were Police Officers in the

                             terraces at that point?

         BDM                 Yes.

         DCS6930             Certainly in in 3?

         BDM                 I I don't know which pen it was I I
®   MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                         185


                                 I it was the one in front of me, it

                                 was the one where I had seen the

                                 it was the one where I had seen the

                                 people trapped.     It was the one that

                                 I was was aiming at.

             DCS6930             So you you would, vrould you agree

                                 new that was pen 3 from where you,

                                 that's the one nearest the Control

                                 Box?

             BtM                 Possibly.

             DCS6930             Possibly?

                                 I I don't, I don't, I don't know

                                 which pen it was.

             DCS6930             But certainly there were police

                                 officers in the, the back of those

                                 terraces...

             BtM                 Yes.

             DCS6930             assisting and and doing a job?

    18.57    BDM                 As far as I was concerned that

                                 meant that the pressure had cane

                                 off.     That the pressure had cone

                                 off because the officers had been

                                 able to get in and actually sort

                                 of were in there.    There was a,

                                 there was a space between the

                                 the wall, and the and the police

                                 officers.

    19.15    DCS6930             Right.    Was there anything else

                                 that you organised or did at the
MURRAY               BERNARD   D


                               back of those terraces?

           BOM                 Not at the back not at the back

                               once I'd seen that I was satisfied

                               that the, the pressure was off and

                               that it was not necessary to get

                               anymore people out of the way.

           DCS6930             You then went back I think to the

                               pitch itself?

           BDM                 Yes I did.

           DCS6930             Did you see Mr MARSHALL on the way

                               back at all?

           BtM                 No.

19.36      DCS6930             On the way back which would have

                               been out back through the tunnel

                               presumably and round towards the

                               Control Room...

           BtM                 Yes..

19.46      DCS6930             area.     Did you see or have

                               dealings with any injured or

                               supporters in any way?

           BDM                 No.     I didn't see any injured

                               people.

           DCS6930             You didn't see any at that stage...

           BtM                 No.

           DCS6930             there.

                               I didn't see any injured people

                               at all after leaving the pitch

                               until getting back there.

2 0 .0 2   DCS6930             So you went back onto the pitch
MURRAY           BERNARD   D                                      187


                           and I think is it right that

                           you actually organised the

                           shall we call it a buffer across

                           the, the half way line of Police

                           Officers?

2 0. 1 8   BDM             No I didn't do that, I I spoke

                           to a Fire Officer who said it,

                           he they intended taking sane of

                           the injured out through the South

                           Stand and I I got a couple of

                           officers and and members of the

                           public who agreed to help to keep

                           that part of the stand open and and

                           available so there would be no

                           hinderance of the, of the injured

                           being taken out.   I I then saw

                           that there was a large number of

                           officers along the North Stand

                           track and also a large number on

                           the Kop side.   I knew the problems

                           we'd been having in comnunications

                           in the Control Room, I wanted to

                           identify different key officers

                           who I knew that the Chief

                           Superintendent could contact in

21.09                      different areas.   I went to the Kop

                           side and I saw that Mr CHAPMAN,

                           Superintendent CHAPMAN was on the

                           track and asked him if he was
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


                             staying there and he said yes and

                             I went to the North Stand, the only,

                             I couldn't find the Chief Inspector,

                             the only officer I could find was

21.29                        Inspector WALLACE and asked him if

                             he would stay there, he said yes,

                             which gave me the two contact

                             points.   But I also saw then

                             supporters were were encroaching to

                             the half way line, that sane of them

                             were in an angry mood and I just took

                             one serial from the North Stand and

                             redeployed that on the South Stand,

                             just to prevent clashes there because

                             there were no fences or no walls

                             there and and sorted that out.

22.03    DCS6930             By this time was Mr NESBIT present?

         KM                  I think Mr, I think Mr NESBIT was

                             there on the track, I don't know

                             whether I I can't remember whether

                             I recall seeing him personally

                             at that stage.

         DCS6930             So you got as far as your were

                             concerned now, you got Mr

                             GREENWOOD if not Mr NESBIT...

         KM                  Mr GREENWOOD.

         DCS6930             in charge of the, the operation

                             on the terraces.

22.24    KM                  As far as I'm concerned Mr
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                      189


                             GREENWOOD is in charge of the

                             operation at the back of the

                             goal rescuing the, the injured

                             people.   The Superintendent who was

                             in charge of the deployment of

                             officers in front of the Rep and

                             an Inspector in charge of of the

                             deployment on the North Stand and

                             I've got a Sergeant who is knewn

                             to me with his serial on the South

                             Stand, looking after that side of

                             the ground.

22.50    DCS6930             So everything that you felt was

                             a problem area you have either one

                             got a situation where the

                             Superintendent is dealing with it,

                             Mr GREENWOOD?

         BDM                 Mm.

         DCS6930             You've gone to the back of the,

                             the terraces because you

                             recognise the problem but when

                             you get there you're happy it's

                             being dealt with?

         m                   Yes.

23.12    DCS6930             You then recognise that you need

                             contact pxaints with Mr DUCKENFIELD

                             at the Kop end and at the North

                             Stand end and you identify Police

                             Officers for that?
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


         BDM                 Yes.

         DCS6930             You then use the Sergeant and

                             his serial as what I call the

                             buffer to stop the...

         BDM                 Yes.

         DCS6930             the problem that you then saw.     From

                             that point on is it then that you

                             then go back to the Control Roan?

23.38    BtM                 More or less. There there were

                             one or twD things that obviously

                             you can't ignore as we're going

                             about they they are different

                             people being abusive or being

                             insulting or or needing a very

                             quick helping hand that any

                             Police Officer would give that

                             sort of attention to, but then it

                             I I make my way back to the

                             Control Roan to to see what, after

                             all my brief really was to clear

                             the pitch which which very quickly

                             I realised was an impossible and

                             unfeasible task anyway.

         DCS6930             Right, did, before you actually

24.17                        get back to the Control Roan.    Did

                             you at any stage either the first

                             occasion you went down or the

                             second occasion when you've gone

                             down and done what we've just
^   MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                    191


                                 gone through see Mr JACKSON

                                 on the pitch?

             BDM                 I didn't see him, I didn't see

                                 him until I got back into the

                                 Control Roan.

    24.32    DCS6930             So you got back into the Control

                                 Roan and did you then, I think you

                                 briefed Mr DUCKENFIELD...

             BDM                 Yes.

             DCS6930             about what you'd done, what you

                                 found.    Is that right?

             BDM                 Yeah I told him what I'd what I'd

                                 done and what I'd seen and that

                                 we'd obviously got a lot of

                                 casualties.

    24.54    DCS6930             And Mr JACKSON was present at that

                                 stage?

             BDM                 I can't remember sir.

             DCS6930             Okay.    At sane stage Mr JACKSON

                                 came into the Control Roan?

             BDM                 At at sane stage he was there, he

                                 was certainly there when when Mr

                                 DUCKENFIELD said he was going to

                                 the Directors Lounge.

             DCS6930             I mean you've said that you

                                 think you you got back to the

                                 Control Room again and I know it's

                                 your time, you've estimated

                                 probably around 3.35 pm (1535).
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


                             Can you be any more precise as to

                             when Mr JACKSON was present in that

                             Control Rocm?

25.40    BDM                 I can't.   I know Mr JACKSON was

                             there when I, when I went down

                             on the second occasion.     I can't,

                             I can't remember whether he was

                             in the Control Room when I

                             returned or whether he came

                             afterwards.

         DCS6930             But, but he certainly was there

                             at seine stage?

         BDM                 He was there at sane stage because..

         DCS6930             And and we're talking around that

                             3.35 (1535) mark?

26.04    BDM                 Well, whatever time it was it was

                             at the time when Mr, when Mr

                             DUCKENFIELD went to the Directors

                             Box because he said I'm I'm going

                             to the Directors Lounge to to

                             tell them what's happened and Mr

                             JACKSON followed him a few

                             minutes later.

26.17    DCS6930             Went with him.     Did you give any

                             brief to Mr JACKSON on the events

                             that had occurred at that

                             particular time?

                             Well I don't even know if he

                             was there so I I can't remember
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                      193


                             I would give my I would give rny

                             brief to Mr DUCKENFIELD.

         DCS6930             No I mean, going going back to

                             what you've just said, you said

                             you knew he came back in...

         BDM                 Oh yes.

         DCS6930             at sane stage.

         BDM                 Yes.

         DCS6930             If we forget when he was, when he

                             was there but certainly before

                             he went with Mr DUCKENFIELD.      At

                             that time did you brief him in

                             any way shape or form about

                             any events?

         BDM                 No, I I don't think so.

         DCS6930             Not personally?

         ra                  Not deliberately or not

                             personally I would tell Mr

                             DUCKENFIELD.

26.58    DCS6930             I know that you told the Public

                             Inquiry that Mr DUCKENFIELD, that

                             Mr JACKSON asked Mr DUCKENFIELD

                             what had happened.

         BI»1                Initially yes.

         DCS6930             Initially.     Is this the time

                             we're talking about now, is this

                             the same time?

         BI»1                This is a a sort of, after I

                             came back off the pitch, from
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                  194


                             the first occasion after

                             stepping the match.

         DCS6930             This is the first time?

         BDM                 Yes.

         DCS6930             This is around seven minutes,

                             eight minutes past three?

         BUM                 Seven minutes, eight minutes

                             yes.

         DCS6930             Mr JACKSON is there then?

         ra                  Yes.

27.28    DCS6930             Now on that occasion did you

                             give, did you give Mr JACKSON

                             any brief of any kind then?

         BI»1                No I I know he asked what's

                             what's happening and Mr

                             DUCKENFIELD said I'm I'm

                             not quite sure yet or words

                             to that effect.

         DCS6930             I'm not quite sure yet.     If

                             we ranember that then both

                             yourself and Mr DUCKENFIELD

                             knew that you'd opened the gates

                             at the request of Mr MARSHALL

                             was that actually said to Mr

                             JACKSON at that time?

         BI»1                Not at that time no.

         DCS6930             No.

28.00    BUM                 No.    Mind you when Mr JACKSON

                             asked what's happened I I'm
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                     195


                             he's looking at the pitch and

                             he's he's talking about the

                             people sort of who were on the

                             pitch and certainly if he'd

                             said that to me instead of

                             Mr DUCKENFIELD and said what's

                             happened, I would have said

                             well I'm not sure, I don't

                             knew the people are coming

                             over the wall and caning onto the

                             pitch for sane reason.    I feel

                             that that was what he was getting

                             at.    He wasn't sort of after an

                             overall picture.

         DCS6930             He's obviously there quite

                             quickly...

         BDM                 Yes.

         DCS6930             in terms of, he was originally

                             sat in the Director's Box and

                             he's cane round and in the space

                             of the tine of you going down and

                             caning back he's obviously seen

                             something wrong and and cone

                             into that Control Box and he's

                             trying to find out what's

28.49                        happened.    I mean that that point

                             when you came back in, had you

                             associated the opening of the

                             gates to the problem that
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                      196


                             you'd just seen outside or not?

         BDM                 No I I don't think so, not not

                             the opening of the gates to the

                             people on on the pitch, no I hadn't.

         DCS6930             No.     You you just felt that

                             you'd got a problem and the

                             two hadn't at that time...

         BDM                 Yeah.

         DCS6930             cone together?

         BDM                 It hadn't registered that that

                             the chain of events had had

                             occurred.

         DCS6930             New in that case if the question

                             had been asked to you what's

                             happened, you've just said I

                             think you would have said,

                             the same thing because you

                             didn't relate the two events?

         BDM                 No I thought, well I thought

                             Mr JACKSON was talking was was

                             asking about the people on the

                             pitch, what's happened, you know

                             why has the game been stopped in

                             the tracks and I think that when

                             Mr DUCKENFIELD said I'm not quite

                             sure yet I think he was he was

                             saying exactly what he thought

                             he knew that something was

                             happening but he didn't knew...
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                     197


29.51    DCS6930             Didn't knew what it was. New you

                             went back out then we knew.    Were

                             you present in the Control Box at

                             any tine when Mr KELLY and Mr

                             KIRTON from the FA cane?

         BDM                 No, wall I don't knew.     I know

                             Mr KELLY, I don't know Mr KIRTON, I

                             never saw him at all.

         DCS6930             As far as you're concerned

                             you you were not present then?

         BDM                 No I didn't see than afternoon.

30.12    DCS6930             Did Mr DUCKENFIELD at any time

                             in that first meeting when

                             Mr JACKSON was there or when you

                             came back and before they went

                             to the Directors Meeting.     Did

                             Mr DUCKENFIELD or yourself

                             mention to Mr JACKSON about the

                             gates, you opening the gates

                             and the reason why?

         BCM                 Not that I can recall, not that

                             I can recall, but I mean, Mr

                             JACKSON was only in the Control

                             Rocm for a very, a very few

                             seconds or a minute at the most

                             initially, when I, when I saw

                             him initially.

         DCS6930             That's that's just after, that's

                             around the seven eight minutes
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


                             past three (1507) (1508)?

         BDM                 When the game has been stepped.

         DCS6930             What about the second occasion?

30.54    BDM                 And the second occasion I seem

                             to think that as I vent into

                             the Control Room Mr DUCKENFIELD

                             was was ready to walk out

                             straight away and more or less

                             sort of, had been waiting for

                             me if you like, before he went

                             to the Directors Lounge.

31.10    DCS6930             So you heard no conversation

                             then or any briefing fran

                             Mr DUCKENFIELD to Mr JACKSON

                             on the opening of the gates

                             and the reasons for it?

         BDM                 No.

31.22    DCS6930             Again, can can we go back to Mr

                             MARSHALL.   Did Mr MARSHALL come

                             into the Control Box at any time

                             that you recall up until that

                             point of when Mr DUCKENFIELD and

                             Mr JACKSON went to the Directors?

31.38    BDM                 I can't recall seeing Mr MARSHALL

                             at all.

         DCS6930             No okay then.   Not at all at the

                             ground, do you rananber seeing him

                             later on at all, did he, were you

                             present when he gave any sort of
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                     199


                             briefing or otherwise to the, veil

                             either to Mr DUCKENFIELD, Mr

                             JACKSON later about the, what took

                             place outside?

32.60    BDM                 I can't I can't recall seeing Mr

                             MARSHALL at all after the, apart

                             fran, after the briefing really.

                             I don't think I don't think I

                             saw him at all.

         DCS6930             Which briefing would that be?

         BDM                 I'm talking about the briefing at

                             in the morning.

         DCS6930             The following morning?

         BDM                 No before the morning of the

                             of the match.     He may of, he may

                             of come into the Control Roam at

                             sane stage, I I don't recall

                             seeing him at all.

32.38    DCS6930             There was a, you had a debrief

                             did you after this?

         BDM                 Oh yes we had a number of ...

         DCS6930             That night.     Did you have a

                             debrief that night?

         BDM                 Not that night.

         DCS6930             Not of any kind?

         HM                  I didn't have a debrief, I think

                             there was one at Headquarters

                             that Mr, that other officers

                             went to but I didn't go to that
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                    200

                             one.

32.47    DCS6930             Okay.    So fran your point of

                             view then, from that point on

                             from the time that Mr DUCKENFIELD

                             and Mr JACKSON left to go to the

                             Directors Box, you were then

                             back in control of the...

         BDM                 I was back in the Control Roan,

         DCS6930             of the incident?

         BDM                 Yes.

         DCS6930             Right.     And at no point had

                             there been any conversation to

                             do with the opening of the gates

                             and the reason why in your

                             presence?

         BDM                 Not that I can recall.

         DCS6930             Not that you can recall.    Okay.

                             Were you actually in the, we

                             need to go back just a little

                             bit now.

         BDM                 Yes.

33.22    DCS6930             Were you actually in the Control

                             Box at the time that Operation

                             Support, Operation Support was

                             requested?

         BDM                 No.

         DCS6930             Were you in the Control Box at

                             the time that the Operational

                             Support was, that the confirmation
    MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                       201

                                 was requested of Mr JACKSON?

             BDM                 No.

    33.51    DCS6930             Your view of Operation Support,

                                 Operational Support, what what

                                 does it actually do in South

                                 Yorkshire Police if you ask for

                                 Operational Support?

             BDM                 What it does is it asks for all

                                 all officers, all available

                                 officers except absolute minimum

                                 manpower requirements to attend at a

                                 given rendezvous to assist with

                                 with sane sort of incident.

    34.16    DCS6930             Is it correct to say that it is

                                 for a, it's a public order

                                 Operational Support Document as

                                 oppposed to a, a Major Disaster

                                 Document?

             BDM                 I think, I think that is the

#                                general idea it is a, it is a

                                 it would generally be used for

                                 a public order situation.     It is a

                                 question of getting as much

                                 manpower as possible to a site

                                 as quickly as possible.

    34.41    DCS6930             I mean, I mean if you were in the

                                 situation of being in the Control

                                 Box and knew you had a disaster

                                 taking place as opposed to a
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


                             public order.   What vrould you

34.53                        actually implement. Would you

                             implement Operational Support

                             or would you implement your

                             Force Major Disaster Plan?

         BDM                 I think you've got to look

                             at the Force Major Incident

                             Plan.

35.04    DCS6930             Major Incident Plan.   Who would

                             take responsibility for setting

                             that Major Incident Plan into

                             operation.

         BOM                 Well the decision would be

                             given by the Senior Officer

                             present and I think it would be

                             normal to request the Detective

                             Chief Superintendent to, to come

                             out and take over the incident.

35.42    DCS6930             But in any event you weren't

                             present when this situation

                             was set up and taking place.

         BDM                 No.

         DCS6930             If, I think you've said that

                             you didn't think it was a

                             pitch invasion or a problem

                             area when it first happened.

35.49                        Was there any discussion from

                             Mr DUCKENFIELD at that time that

                             he, he felt that it was a public
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                      203


                             order situation or did you get

                             the impression frcm him that he felt

                             it was a public order situation?

         BDM                 I I can't recall any conversation

                             and I can't recall whether I

                             made I made conment but I as if

                             to say well I think there's

                             something wrong, I can't remember

                             whether, what was said, but

                             certainly when I went down onto

                             the pitch for the second occasion

                             I think my brief was quite clear

                             was to to sweep the people off

                             the pitch onto the wings vrfiich

                             I think inferred to me Mr

                             DUCKENFIELD probably did think

                             it was, there was a possibility

                             of public order from the, fran

                             what was happening.   In fact it

                             was my intention to do exactly

                             what he'd told me until I got

                             down there and and then realised

                             that that I couldn't do that.

36.50                        We weren't, we weren't dealing

                             with people who were just out to

                             cause a nuisance.

36.55    DCS6930             When you came back the first

                             time to the Control Room had

                             Operation Support been
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                       204


                             requested by then?

         BDM                 Not that I knew of, I don't,

                             I I don't know, not that I

                             know of, but I wouldn't have

                             thought so.

         DCS6930             But the logical thing for the

                             match Catmander to have done

                             would have been to send

                             for Operational Support if

                             he felt he had a public order

                             situation?

         BDM                 Yeah, if if he felt he had a

                             situation I would say where he

                             needed a a a large input of

                             manpower over and above what he'd

                             got.

37.24    DCS6930             When you came back up and at some

                             stage recognised that you had a

                             disaster type situation, vere

                             you aware that the Major Incident

                             Plan was then actually talcing

                             place.   Do you know hew it started?

         KM                  I I've no idea.      I had to try and

                             pick up the pieces when I came

                             back to the Control Room because

                             I'd been away for half an hour

                             or more and the first thing, I that

                             triggered in me was that sane

                             Humberside officers asked if they




                                                                           Q
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                      205


                             could be of assistance.

38.00    DCS6930             So hew would you effectively find

                             that the Major Incident Plan had

                             actually been commenced?

         BDM                 I I think I picked, I don't know,

                             I don't knew hew I picked it up

                             but I picked it up that we were

                             on a Major Incident situation.

38.19                        Bearing in mind that when I returned

                             to the Control Rocm I still didn't

                             know the extent of what we were

                             dealing with.    I was able to tell

                             Mr DUCKENFIELD that I I felt we

                             ws'd got alot of injuries and

                             possibly some fatalities but I

                             was certainly not thinking that

                             had the type of incident that we

                             had.

         DCS6930             What's going on is being

                             monitored in the Force Control

                             Roan.    Would that be right?

         BDM                 At that, at that stage once I

                             think, once Operation Support had

                             been, had been called then the

                             Force Ops started to monitor I

                             think.

39.00    DCS6930             Now then in terms of Command of

                             the Incident that's taking place.

                             As far as you were concerned
MURRAY        BERNARD   D                                       206


                        who was actually in charge of the

                        shall we call it the disaster, the

                        rescue operation.   Was it Mr

                        DUCKENFIELD or Mr JACKSON that

                        was making the decisions?

         KM             Well as far as I was concerned Mr

                        DUCKENFIELD was the officer who was

                        the officer who was in charge of

                        the events and of course from

                        seven or eight past three (1507)

                        (1508) until 3.40 (1540) I I

                        was away from the Control Room.

39.40                   I returned to the Control Rocm

                        and I was told that there would

                        not be any public announcements

                        on the PA system until it was

                        specifically given by the ACC

                        Operations I think, cause I

                        recall Mr NESBIT calling up and

                        asking for me to give a public

                        address announcement to all the

                        stadium to tell then that the event

                        was going to be abandoned and calling

40.19                   back to him and saying well I want

                        Mr JACKSON'S authority and Mr

                        NESBIT saying wall he's standing

                        next to me and when I looked I could

                        see he actually was and so I gave

40.29                   the announcement.   So at that stage
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


                             I was satisfied that Mr JACKSON

                             was the officer who was going to

                             give that particular instruction

                             anyway.   As to who was, who was

                             in charge of and at what particular

                             stage I don't knew.    Certainly the

                             event was Mr DUCKENFIELD's and there

                             must have been a stage when Mr

                             JACKSON took over.

40.53    DCS6930             Who for example can you recall

                             said we want the temporary mortuary

                             set up, we want the Incident Rocm

                             Box, the Major Incident Plan, the

                             Emergency Box.   Who made those

                             decisions?

         BDM                 Well I wouldn't be in the Control

                             Rocm I don't think when those

                             decision were made?

         DCS6930             Okay that's fine.    Can I move

                             perhaps finally onto the specific

                             allegations and I've covered most

                             of than but it's an opportunity

                             for you, through what w e ’ve

                             been through and what we've said

41.26                        Mr HICKS has made specific

                             allegations against you and the

                             first one is that you failed

                             to prevent a dangerous build up of

                             supporters outside the gates.      Is
MURRAY         BERNARD   D                                       208


                         there anything you wish to add

                         to that allegation as a result of

                         what ws've said today?

         BDM             I don't think so.   I I think you've

                         gone through it and I think that

                         on the circumstances that prevailed

                         that the time limits that was

41.58                    available that that we did everything

                         that we we thought was possible to

                         prevent that build up, bearing in

                         mind that there ware all sorts of

                         other factors, the the weather which,

                         was unusual at the time, the the

                         familiarity of the fans with that

                         particular area having come the

                         year before and obviously arriving

                         later, the layout of the ground

                         which which doesn't become apparent

                         until after something like this

                         has happened, the number of

                         turnstiles, the ticket coding,

                         the signing actually inside and

                         outside the ground, the fact that

                         a barrier collapsed, the attitude

                         of seme of the people that were

                         there, the fact that many had

                         drunk alcohol, the fact that our

                         comrunications went down.     I

                         think there ware so many factors
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


                             that that helped to to create this.

42.56    DCS6930             He nekes two other allegations

                             that you failed to control the

                             movement of supporters subsequent

                             to the opening of Gate C and that

                             you failed to respond to the

                             developing tragedy and was

                             slow to effect a rescue operation.

                             Is there anything that you wish

                             to add to those other        specific

                             allegations?

         BDM                 No except, all all I would say that

43.13                        my aim and and as far as I was

                             concerned was to remove the danger

                             that existed outside the ground and

                             to relieve the pressure and the,

                             and the, the obvious hazard to those

                             people who again reports of were

                             being crusted outside the ground

                             and the opening of the gates

                             obviously relieved that but

                             caused secondary problems that

                             that I didn't foresee at the time.

         DCS6930             And is there anything else of any

                             other nature that you wish to bring

                             up with me at this point?

         PPM                 No I don't think so I would say

                             that pure and simply I I'in a Police

                             Officer I do the job as best I can
MURRAY             BERNARD   D


                             I'm not a Superman, I'm not a,

44.01                        I thought I I could handle anything

                             and everything and as a result of

                             these, I new knew I can't.     I lean

                             on my experience and my experience

                             has never brought me up against

                             anything like this before.     I've

                             always tried to my job properly

                             and I continue to do so.

44.20    DCS6930             Thank you.   Hie final thing that

                             I need to say to you is that

                             the the facts will be reported

                             to the Director of Public

                             Prosecutions and it will be a

                             matter for him to decide whether

                             any criminal offences have been

                             committed. Do you understand?

         BDM                 Yes.

         DCS6930             Thank you.   The interview is now

                             terminating and the time is 2.58

                              (1458), sorry 2.48 (1448), 2.48 pm

                              (1448) on the 25th of June (250490).

                             If you can switch off the audio

                             please.

44.49                         (Tape switched off).
                        Part VII
                      Appendix C




WEST MIDLAND POLICE




   TRANSCRIPT
        OF
    INTERVIEW

    Superintendent
Bernard Dean MURRAY

    ( Discipline)
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                        211

00.10    DCS6930             This is an interview taking place

                             at Fumival House, Sheffield.      It's

                             a discipline interview with

                             Superintendent MURRAY, South

                             Yorkshire Police.   The time is

                             2.54 pm (1454) and it's the 25th

                             of June 1990 (250690).    I am

                             Michael POSTER, Detective Chief

                             Superintendent, West Midlands

                             Police.

         BDM                 Bernard Dean MURRAY, Superintendent

                             South Yorkshire Police.

         DCI2514             Detective Chief Inspector TOPE

                             West Midlands Police.

         RM                  Richard MANNING, Walker Morris

                             and Coles Solicitors of Leeds.

         FC9032              Police Constable Stephen BRCWN

                             West Midlands Police.

00.46    DCS6930             I now intend to deal with the

                             discipline aspects of this inquiry

                             and I note that your solicitor is

                             still present and you wish him to

                             remain for this discipline part of

                             the interview, is that correct?

         BDM                 Yes.

00.58    DCS6930             You will recall that you were

                             actually served with a Regulation

                             7 Notice by Mr COOPER, Assistant

                             Chief Constable Northanptonshire




                                                                            1   1   f
                                                                            \   \   f'
MURRAY             BERNARD   D                                        212

                             Police.     Would you confirm that

                             that is the Regulation 7 Notice

                             that was served upon you?

         BDM                 Yes, it's got my signature.

01.16    DCS6930             Thank you.    This Regulation 7 Notice

                             details specific complaints and

                             allegations made by Mr Trevor

                             HICKS and relates actually to

                             three allegations.     As you were

                             told at the time the Regulation, in

                             accordance with the Regulations

                             you're not obliged to say

                             anything concerning the natter but

                             you may if you so desire make a

                             written or oral statement concerning

                             the matter to myself or in this case

01.42                        the Chief Constable.     You are

                             however warned that if you make

                             such a statement to me or the

                             Chief Constable the statement may

                             be used in any subseqeunt

                             disciplinary proceedings.     Do you

                             understand again that form and its

                             content?

         BDM                 Yes I do.

01.54    DCS6930             If you agree I would like to use

                             the questions and the answers that

                             you've given for the criminal

                             interview for the purposes of the
MURRAY               BERNARD D                                     213


                            discipline aspects.     Have you any

                            objection to that?

           BDM              No I agree with that.

           DCS6930          Is there anything that you wish to

                            add in relation to the discipline

                            aspects that we haven't already

                            covered?

           BDM              No thank you.

0 2. 1 2   DCS6930          In that case it remains for me

                            to say that the facts will be

                            reported to your Chief Constable

                            and it will be for your force in

                            consultation with the Police

                            Complaints Authority to determine

                            if you should face any disciplinary

                            offences.    Do you understand?

           BUM              Yes.

02.28      DCS6930          Thank you.    I'll serve you with

                            a notice new that is in relation

                            to the use of the audio tapes and

                            video tapes goes back to both

                            interviews and the discipline

                            interview is terminating and the

                            time is 2.57 pm (1457) on the

                            25th of June (250690).    Mr TOPE

                            would you switch off the audio

                            please.

02.48                        (Tape switched off).
