                         f   f



               O'


6/ b J L        ft   ^

k$£        QaJ2s»~*~ f

f ijju ^      ■W '& V
  -KEXTli. BQMK Pol i ce Sergeant 1Q73    Cnmmnnt.-iy   1,-j ai s n n   Dppapt.pmpnt,   Main   StT»PPt ,
  Police Station Rotherham, South Yorkshire.

                                 CZX2-3\0<\




              1 am a Police Sergeant in the South Yorkshire Police at present stationed

              at Main Street Police Station working as a Community Liaison officer.




              On Saturday 15 April 1989, 1 was working at Hillsborough at the semi­

              final of the F.A. cup Nottingham Forest versus Liverpool United.




              My status were that of Sergeant: 1/C Serial No. 53-                       1 was supervising

              eight police officers

                                    PC    953   Mugglestone
                                    PC    9^7   Uttley
                                    PC    389   Lawrence
                                    PC    243   Lythall
                                    PC   1851   Spurr
                                    PC    200   Hoyland
                                    PC    270   Innes
                                    PC    520   Hogg

              Our duties were to receive the Nottingham Forest supporters coaches at

               the Merries Road, bus garage, check the supporters and direct them to the

              nearby Sheffield Wednesday football ground.



GEN/5          Signed                    P.V 1f ? ^     Signature witnessed by
                                                                                     © O f?      M l

                                 STATBCNT OF WITNESS

               (C .J .A c t,1967,s . 9; M.C.A.,1980,s . 102; M .C.Rules,1981,r.70)

             Continuation of statement of      KEITH BOWN PS 1073

            Soon after kick off with my serial, and serial 52, along with Detective

            Inspector Charles we left Herries Road on route to Claywheels Lane

            for refreshments.




            Before we were able to arrive at Claywheels Lane we were all re-directed

            to Leppings Lane - both serials arrived there around 3.10 pm.            The

            gates of the football ground were open and there seemed to be general

            confusion.




            Mr Charles received an instruction over the radio for both serials

            to enter the Leppings Lane end of the ground to give assistance.               The

            message was unclear and did not define the assistance required.




            As a result, together we entered the football ground through a

            tunnel towards the terraced area, there were masses of Liverpool

            supporters who soon split our unit up thereby losing contact with

            each other.    The whole    area was in total chaos, people were pushing

            and shoving and generally worse for drink, abuse was shouted at us by the

             supporters as they pushed and shoved.




             It was apparent that there was a major disaster taking place as 1 came

I            across   injured persons pushed up against the boundary fence, 1 could see

             police officers and football supporters, squeezing through a gap in

             the mesh netting, injured persons were passed through this gap as others

             were carried towards Leppings Lane.




    GEN 6   Signed.                              Signature witnessed by.
                                                                                           Qpfl 44 ?,
                                STATEMENT OF WITNESS

            ( C .J .A c t,1967, s . 9 ; M.C.A.,1980,s . 102; M.C.Rules, 1981 , r . 70)

          Continuation    of   statement   of   KEITH BOWN PS 1073

         I was jostled towards the football pitch and managed to get on to

         the playing area 1        had now lost total contact with my serial.




         It was then that 1        saw numerous persons lying onthe edge of the pitch

         injured and apparently dead, police officers and supporters were giving

         assistance to them.




         Together with supporters I smashed a boundary fence, and carried one

         unconscious person to an ambulance point, assisted by another police officer,

         near to the gymnasium, cardiac massage and mouth to mouth was attempted

         by an ambulance man to no avail.




         I then returned to        the ground leaving the police officer with the

         unconscious personand went towards the Leppings                Lane end,        1 saw

         nunerous persons laid or the pitch; and football supporters running

         about the pitch in a chaotic manner.            I assisted with others to carry

         another man off the pitch to the same ambulance point, near to the

         gymnasium.      1 tried mouth to mouth respiration to no avail the man was

         apparently dead.       1 again went on to the football pitch near to

         Leppings Lane end and carried off a third male (Christopher Barry

         Devenside), assisted by a supporter, this person was apparently dead.




         I took the young man into the gymnasium where I remained with him,

         and at around 3-^0 pan a coloured doctor whose name I do not know

         stated that he was dead, I then commenced documentation, completing




GEN 6   Signed.                   P i <«r>3      Signature witnessed by.
                              STATBENT OF WITNESS

           (C .J.A c t,1967,s . 9; M.C.A.,1 9 8 0 ,s. 102; M.C.Rules,1981 ,r .7 0 )

         Continuation of statement of         KEITH BOWN PS 1073

        a sudden death report and major incident form at 5-00 pm Dr

        Birkby confirmed the boys death.




        I remained in the gymnasium with the deceased who was tagged number 17.




        After midnight 16.4.89, identification was made by the boys father,

        Barry Devenside, in the gymnasium who stated that it was his son,

        Christopher Barry Devenside, I then went with Mr Devenside to a

        nearby reception area where he telephoned his family.




        I was present when a CID officer obtained a statement from Mr Devenside.




        Together with the deceased I travelled by ambulance to the mortuary at

        the Medico Legal Centre at Watery Street, Sheffield around 12.40 am

        16.4.89.




        It was their that I left the deceased having handed him over to the

        mortuary attendant.




GEN 6   Signed..                                Signature witnessed by.
