                     Hillsborough Saturday 15.*f.890


  Nottingham Forest v Liverpool0

   Statement of Police Constable 504 Gilberthorpe, Dinnington Police Station, C3
   Sub-Division, Rotherham.


00am   commenced duty at Maltby Police Station and then transported to Hillsborough
       Fgotball Ground for briefing in the North Stand.    Deputed together with
       P 19^7 Longford and serial to the Herris Road area of Sheffield. The serial
       deputed to static points along the road supervising the mainly Nottingham
       Forest supporters towards the ground. On static point outside the Devonshire
       Arras Public House together with PC Longford.  This public house well patron­
       ised by and large with the travelling Notts Forest supporters as they arrived
       in the City both by private vehicles and a large number of coaches. Many of
       these supporters appeared under the influence of intoxicating liquor and very
       bo^erous,,

        Sometime shortly after 3«oopm message received via radio to walk towards the
       -the ground and assist in crowd control.   Attended at the ground to the rear
        of the North Stand where alarge number of police officers were milling around
        wondering what was happening.   Deputed together with a large number of these
        officers to form aline on the playing area facing the Kop, the Notts Forest
        supporters. The crowd in the mail static and well behaved. During this time
        supporters were running passed us and pulling advertising^boards off the low
        kop wall and returning with these boards towards the Lepping Lane end of the
        ground*,  The whole scene on the playing surface was of complete chaos with
        persons running all over the playing surface carrying injured persons off the
        playing surface, and just generally running about.

       This situation prevailed for some considerable time and our duty appeared to
       be holding the thin blue line facing the" Nottingham Forest supporters. During
       this time although the mass of supporters were getting generally frustrated
       at the obvious lack of knowledge of the seriousness of the situation, this line
       was held and no Notts Forest supporters invaded the pitch.

       This position was maintained until the official announcement that the match
       was in fact abandoned whereby the supporters started slowly drifting away.
       I remained in this poli os line until the Kop was cleared and we were told to
       stand down*
