 Block out Dates Officer an d /o r
     witnesses not available

               *    rf) & h



     l ) 17

     I’1>
     1 1 2 )




 Q
C )   4 15 ^2®              : 2 29
               30           ; i 30
               H            : i 31
                            2S
                          2)
                        2C§>
t w                         28


 A uo
                        5 22
                      M 5 23130
                        1 24
                         ! 25
                       1 > 26
Order required from Court for D isp


Time and D ate Recovered and fror




A m ou n t o f M oney in Possession

C om pensation applied for

N am e and Address o f Claimant:
                                                                                                                                                                    ,D

                                                                        No r t h u m b r ia / p o l ic e

               ........ E__or _S/Tynes i de.... Division                                   /   South Shi el ds............. Station

               Ref. N o ..........................................                     I                   ............................................. 19...f.?

               SUBJECT                          FOOTBALL MATCH AT HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD ON
                                                 SATURDAY 15TH APRIL L989




                                                        Sir,

                                                                I am P C .                 3f the Northumbria Police
                                                        Force, presently stationed at South Shields Police Station,
                                                        Keppel Street, South Shields.

                                                                Having been brought up in Nottingham, I attended the
                                                        semi-final of the F.A cup between Nottingham Forest and Liverpool
                                                        along with my brother.   We both had standing tickets for the
                                                        Spion Kop at Hillsborough and drove up myself to Sheffield
                                                        from Nottingham.

                                                                We arrived and managed to park approximately 500 metres
                                                        up a road from the ground and walked down to the ground at about
                                                        2.10 p.m. From leaving the car to entering the ground I was
                                                        approached at least half a dozen times by Liverpool supporters
                                                        asking if you had any spare tickets.  In fact all the way to the


    9
                                                        ground you could see people asking for tickets from anyone
                                                        and everyone.

                                                                After entering the ground and standing at the Kop end I
\                                                       commented to my brother that there looked to be far too many
                                                        people at the Leppings Road End in the areas behind the Goal.
                                                        That would have been at about 2.40 p.m.

                                                               When the teams came out and the fans at both ends were
                                                       cheering you could see even from the Kop end people start to
         Examined                                      be pulled up into the stand above, although at that time it was
                                                       only one or two.  The match started and then there were people
                                                       who could be seen on the fencing behind the Goal trying to
                                                       climb over. As more and more people climbed over the fencing
                     Sergeant                          it was obvious to me if not others at the Kop end that it was
                                                       the sheer number of people in that end that was causing the
                                                       overspill.

                    Inspector                                  A matter of minutes later people who were coming over
                                                       the fencing and onto the pitch were just collapsing and a number
                                                       started to be carried towards the Kop end to the exit at the right
                                                       hand side of the Kop end.
         Superintendent




                                                                                                  Yorkshire Police Incident Room
               Your R ef.........................................................                  Hemmelton Police Station
                       F O R W A R D E D for the information of.


                                                    21-4                   ^ ^ ,9 89


    M isc. 4
Continuation Sheet N o .   2.


SUBJECT: —




             About 5 minutes later I noticed the first person to
     be carried across the pitch towards the Kop end on a makeshift
     stretcher made from the Advertising Hoardings who had their
     heads covered with a jacket.

             It was only then that people at the Kop end began
     to realise the seriousness of the incident.  Unable to help
     in any way, about 15 minutes later my brother and I left
     the ground, returned to the car and when two other lads arrived
     who had also travelled up with us we left and returned to
     Nottingham.

             For your information my brother's name and address
     are as follows:




             The other two lads I only know as _______ |and
     but are friends of my brother.  They both had seating tickets
     in the stand in front of the Directors box and may have seen
     more than us. My brother will have their addresses should
     you need them.
