                        Sheffield Archives Ref: T 6 l | ^ | i | N c o '*                   M I R . 15
                                                                                                                  •0? ( O O ^

OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                               Date and tim e raised                                 Num ber



  itie
T itle
(Include
         Uiiy V-p/wbb/
  'nclude source and any document number
                                  no     i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No      fi)                           ^        <Q,
                                                                                                                       Receiver
                                                                                <o*-~_____
                                                                                                                    72<f7
                                                                                                                           Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised
                                                                                                                   Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                           Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

                                                                                                                    O /M         SIO
Examined - fu rth er action to be taken




                                                                                                                           Indexer
F urther action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master N um ber Form
Secretary to the Enquiry
Room 662
50,Queen Annes Gate                       Leics
London SV1H 9AT
                                          27th April 1989


Dear Sir,
                  HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY

      Having been unable to get through on the Freephone number I
would like to submit the following evidence, as a witness to events
preceding the tragedy.

      Three friends and I, all Notts Forest followers were directed
by Sheffield locals down a ' quicker 1 route to avoid traffic jams,
and finished up parking in an area where Liverpool supporters were
decoaching and parking. We were not wearing favours, and followed the
route taken by many Liverpool supporters along the 20 minute walk to
the ground.
      There were many Liverpool supporters carrying cans and many
were obviously the worse for drink. The time was approx 14.10 to
14.30 in making this journey.At about 14.30 we approached the Lepping
Lane end in a bid ( in the absence of signs) to reach the South Stand
where we had Seat Tickets. Along the length of this walk we were
repeatedly asked for spare tickets by literally hundreds of Liverpool
supporters without them. At Lepping Lane there were no filters to
sort out ticket holders from those without tickets leading to a melee
in the area. We turned back and eventually found our way back to the
Forest end where we reached our seats at 14.45. There were no similar
scenes at that end and I heard only one lone request for spare
tickets.
      Even at 14.30, there were still crowds of Liverpool fans
walking away from the ground presumably towards the pubs in the
vicinity.There were many that were very drunk causing us to be
jostled at one stage because some could hardly stand.

      I believe that the tragedy was directly caused by thousands of
Liverpool supporters that had travelled without tickets and had known
that by causing trouble or by bribing the gatemen believed that they
could enter the ground. Any other argument about policing ,allocation
of tickets or opening gates should not hide this fact.
      I would recommend a filter system to prevent ticketless fans
approaching the ground, clearer announcements inside and outsideusing
better tannoys and adequate signs directing and warning fans in the
areas surrounding the grounds.
