                                     1989 C     No. 5925

IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
                                     Courts of Justice,
(QUEEN *S BENCH DIVISION)            Crown Square,
                                     Manchester.
(Liverpool District Registry)

                                     Wednesday, 3rd October 1990


                               Before:

                       MR. JUSTICE JOWITT


IN THE MATTER OF THE DISASTER AT HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM
15TH APRIL 1984

AND IN THE MATTER OF THIRD PARTY PROCEEDINGS


BETWEEN:

CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE
                                                Third Party Claimant

           AND

SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB PLC
                                         First Third Party Defendant

           AND

EASTWOOD & PARTNERS
                                         Second Third Party Defendant



M R . R . PAYNE and MR. P. LIMB (instructed by Messrs. Hammond
          Suddards) appeared on behalf of the Third Party
          Claimant.

MR. E. GLASGOW Q.C. and MR. R. DAVIES (instructed by Messrs
       Davies Arnold Cooper) appeared on behalf of the First
       Third Party Defendant.

MR. R. TOULSON Q.C. and MR. J. FENWICK (instructed by Messrs.
       Reynolds Porter Chamberlain) appeared on behalf of the
       Second Third Party Defendant.



    Transcript of the shorthand notes of D. L. Sellers & Co.
            (Official Shorthand Writers to the Court)
          10 High Street, Leatherhead, Surrey KT22 8AN.



                  OPENING ADDRESS BY MR. PAYNE
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D



                                                                Wednesday, 3rd October, 1990

  MR. PAYNE: May it please your Lordship. My Lord, the Police are now also
       represented by Miss Swindells. My Lord, I had got in the opening to
       page 10 of the skeleton and I had just embarked on the exercise of
A      identifying the management responsibilities and duties of the Club by
       reference to a number documents. I am about to ask your Lordship to
       look at the extracts from the Popplewell Report which are included in
       the Taylor report. My Lord, we have in Court if necessary the Popplewell
       report itself but the material parts are extracted at 163 and 164 in the
       Taylor interim report, so unless anybody would like me to go to the original
       I intend to take them from that. At 163:
B                         "There was considerable controversy in the course of   the public
                          inquiry held by Mr. Justice Popplewell in 1985 as to   the responsibility
                          of the Club and the police. In paragraph 3.6 of his    interim report
                          Mr. Justice Popplewell quoted from a report produced   for the Minister
                          of Housing and Local Government in 1069 as follows:
                          'The responsibility for controlling crowd behaviour is divided
                          between the police and the club operating the ground. The broad
C                         line of division being that police are responsible for movement
                          of spectators in public thoroughfares and from public thoroughfares
                          into the ground, while the club is responsible for thecontrol of
                          spectators once they are on the club's premises...'
                          Mr. Justice Popplewell said he did not quarrel with that view and
                          went on to observe that in practice the police have to take charge
P                         and be responsible for controlling crowd behaviour. He then said:
                           'It follows, therefore, that as a matter of practice, while the
                           physical safety of the building and the maintenance and good
                           housekeeping of the ground must always be the responsibility of
                           the club, the police have to take the de facto responsibility of
                           organising the crowd, with all that entails during the game ...'
 £                        Mr. Justice Popplewell went on to instance evacuation of the ground
                           as a procedure in which only the police could bear the responsibility
                           of supervising the organisation of the crowd.
                           The Final Popplewell Report
                           164. He harked back to this subject in chapter 4 of his Final Report.
                           There, he came down more firmly in favour of holding the club
 F                        responsible for crowd safety. At paragraph 4.13 he said 'Because
                           as a matter of practice, police officers have regularly attended
                           in large numbers at football arour.ls it has somehow been assumed
                           by the clubs that the responsibility for control of what goes on
                           inside the ground has passed from them to the police. A police
                           presence is there to assist inthe enforcement of law and order.
                           Those responsible for organising a private function, however, have
                           the primary and continuing obligation and responsibility to ensure
 G                        reasonable safety for those who are invited to their premises.'
                           Mr. Justice Popplewell ended that section as follows: 'It cannot
                           be too strongly emphasised that it is upon the club, or the occupier
                           of the ground who is putting on the function, that the primary and
                           continuing obligation rests.'
                  At 165 it boils down to the fact he is saying the situation is inconclusive
    u             and he is going to deal with this in the final report. My Lord, we have
                  that also in Court and he does deal with this topic at paragraphs 206 to 214
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LLO Y D W O O D L A N D




               which I am going to paraphrase unless anybody asks me to look at them by
               saying this: that Lord Justice Taylor comes to the conclusion that there
               ought to be better liaison between the police and the club and that they
               ought to make particular arrangements between themselves to allocate those
               respective spheres of responsibility. That is a paraphrase of what is in
               those paragraphs.
      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: What is the status of that reference to the Popplewell
           report. I do not understand it as meaning that what is said in the
           Popplewell report in fact defines the responsibilities as shared between
           the police and the occupiers. What are their respective responsibilities
           must depend, must they not, upon the facts of the particular case and the
           nature of the arrangements^—
      MR. PAYNE: My Lord, we would respectfully entirely agree with that. My Lord,
           the only comment we make about Popplewell is that prior to the 1989
           disaster at Hillsborough this was the last authoritative statement directly
           dealing with the subject, and my Lord, Mr. Justice Popplewell was particularly
           addressing himself to the question of division of responsibilities betweenthe
           club and the police in general, and so that that as a statement in general
           of the responsibility between the two parties was what was in effect at the
           time of the 1989 disaster.
  MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: I am wondering how far what is said in that report helps me.
       One surely has to look at the position in law. The club are under the
       duties imposed by the Occupiers' Liability Act. Vis a vis the police when
       it comes to contribution, how far their responsibilities catch them may
D      depend upon what arrangement has been made with the police. At the moment,
       not because there is anything said there that I disagree with, but it does
       not seem to me that it has any bearing on the matters that I have to consider
       which are questions of fact in this case and the general law.
  MR. PAYNE: My Lord, at this stage, during the opening of the case, all we would
       seek to do is to draw your Lordship's attention to that last authoritative
       statement on this subject before the disaster, and when your Lordship has
E      heard all the evidence and it comes to submissions, we will then make our
       submission as to the relevance of these passages to the particular case.
                     My Lord, in Lord Justice Taylor's report, after he reviewed all the
                evidence including the passages I have just looked at, at 290 to 292 he
                made some findings which are adopted as part of the case for the police
                before your Lordship and they are at 290;
 F                        "Nevertheless there are a number of respects in which failure by the"
                nevertheless moaning after 289 in summary he was saying that the club and
                Dr. Eastwood worked together over many years and had spent one and a half
                million pounds on ground improvements over the previous four years. At
                290 he went on:
 q                        "Nevertheless there are a number of respects in which failure by the
                          club contributed to this disaster. They were responsible as occupiers
                          and invitors for the layot and structure of the ground. The Leppings
                          Lane end was unsatisfactory and ill-suited to admit the numbers invited,
                          for reasons already spelt out. The Club was aware of these problems
                          and discussed solving them in various ways between 1981 and 1986. In
                          the result, there remained the same number of turnstiles, and the same
                          problems outside and inside them. The plan for this semi-final
 H                        involving as it did the loss of 12 turnstiles for the north stand
                          and large numbers to be fed in from Leppings Lane was one agreed
                          between the Club and the police. The Club knew best what rate of

                                                          - 2 -
D.L. S E L L E R S fit C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




                          admission the turnstiles could manage and ought to have alerted the
                          police to the risks of the turnstiles being swamped.
A                         291. The alterations inside the turnstiles and on the terraces
                          clearly affected capacity, but no specific allowance was made for
                          them. In that respect both Dr. Eastwood and the Club should have
                          taken a more positive approach. Either a scheme such as one of those
                          Dr. Eastwood put forward should have been adopted giving more turnstiles
                          and total separation of areas or at the very least the capacity of the
                          new pens and of the terraces as a whole should have been treated more
                          cautiously. The police view in 1981 that 10,100 was too high a
B                         figure was known to the Club (although Dr. Eastwood says not to him)
                          Yet despite that and the sub-division into pens the figure remained.
                          292. Although the police had assumed responsibility for monitoring the
                          pens, the Club had a duty to its visitors and the Club's officials
                          ought to have alerted the police to the grossly uneven distribution
                          of fans on the terraces. The Club operated and read the closed circuit
                          television and the computer totaliser. Liaison between Club and police
C                         on the day failed to alert the latter to the number of Liverpool
                          supporters still to come. The onus here was on the Club as well as
                          on the police."
                     My Lord, may I comment please on those three passages which we adopt
               as part of our case, and I mentioned earlier in the opening that the case
               for the police is largely to accept the findings in Lord Justice Taylor's
               report as your Lordship will see, but to invite your Lordship to interpret
D              those findings and, so faras the greater apportionment of liability is
               concerned, to attribute more emphasis to some parts than to others. The
               part that we invite your Lordship to attribute greater emphasis to than
               appears in the report, although it is substantially set out in the report,
                is the importance of assessing the capacity of the pens, because what Lord
               Justice Taylor's report does not directly address, although there is ample
               material in the report to illuminate this conclusion, is the significance
k              of the certified capacity in the safety certificate and what flows from that,
                i.e. once you have got a certain capacity then you have to have a means of
               control of it, so you have to have structural alterations or more turnstiles
               to provide a means of counting and controlling the numbers into the pens.
                     So that the assessment of capacity leads on to those necessary
                structural alterations which provide a safe ground which would have prevented
               this tragedy. As a matter of emphasis that is our case. My Lord, that is
p              why we asked your Lordship earlier on to look at those passages which deal
               with capacity, and as to emphasis that is the way we put it.
  MR. JUSTICE 00WITT: I would like your help about the status of some of the under­
       lined passages in the Taylor report. If it is a finding of fact, it may be
       as far as the party is concerned you have underlined (inaudible) there is no
       evidence of it unless the evidence appears elsewhere. As against those who
       have not underlined it, that is a finding of fact binding upon them and not
G     one they may invoke against the party underlining it. When it comes to
       conclusions and in a sense it is an unusual state of affairs in which the
       trial Oudge has as part of his required reading conclusions already drawn on
       the very matters now in issue by another tribunal; but if those conclusions
       are accepted, then of course they are binding on the parties who accept them
       in the same way as findings of fact. I do not think you can rely upon a
       Taylor conclusion against a party who has underlined it. All you can do is
       point to it and say this is what we say you should do.


                                                             - 3 -
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




      MR. PAYNE: My Lord, yes, that is what I mean by rely.                           I expressed it badly
           as usual.
      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                        You adopted it as your submission.
A
      MR. PAYNE: My Lord, what I mean is I could not express it better than the way
           in which Lord Justice Taylor has put it in this report and we adopt his
           words as our own. My Lord, that is what I say. Of course, clearly insofar
           it is a finding based upon facts which are set out in the report, it is open
           to your LOrdship either to make the same findings as Lord Justice Taylor, a
           different one, or to give a different emphasis to it.
B MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: Ought I to ignore if it is not accepted that it is a conclusion
       drawn by Lord Justice Taylor or ought I to treat it as as stated.
      MR. PAYNE: I think the answer is the former. If the parties do not accept it,
           then it has no evidential or it has got no weight to it. The only effect
           it has is this is a convenient way to incorporate these words in my opening.
      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: But you cannot say that is what Lord Justice Taylor thought
C          about it and although the others do not agree we say that is what you should do.
      MR. PAYNE:              Yes, I cannot say that.
D.L. S E L L E R S & CO . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




A         MR. PAYNE:  My Lord, I now go on to invite your Lordship to look at
              the general safety certificate and the clauses in which it
              identifies the duties of the Club.  I ask your Lordship to go
              please to the core bundle, 151.

          MR.      JUSTICE JOWITT:                         Yes.

                PAYNE:  Your Lordship has looked at parts of this certificate
B         M R ’ before but this is the first time I have asked your Lordship to
                work through it, not in great detail but just to illuminate the
                point I am trying to make.

                        At 151, which is the certificate itself, your Lordship
                   sees the heading and this is quite significant, it identifies
                   the premises, of course, as the address for the premises for
C                  which the certificate is issued.   It then identifies the
                   occupier of the premises and holder of the certificate as
                   Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Ltd. and the operative
                   section, I think, is 2 which says,

                               "The terms and conditions set out in the sch e d u l e s .... are
                               hereby imposed."

D                       Now in the body of the certificate,                           on the next page at
                   152, half way down the page,

                               "The holder means the applicant for and the person to whom
                               the General Safety Certificate has been issued and who is
                               a 'qualified person' for the purposes of the Act."

                               Over the page at Clause 3, in Schedule 2---
E
          MR.      JUSTICE JOWITT:                         Yes,   153,   Clause 3.

          MR. PAYNE:  Your Lordship has seen this before.  It brings into
              effect the capacity schedule.  Then Clause 6 over the page at
              154 ,

                                ”6(1) The holder shall agree with the Chief Constable at
F                               least 21 days (or such shorter time to which the Chief
                                Constable may consent) prior to every Specified Activity
                                the methods of admission to be employed in connection with
                                the specified activity and....the methods to be used for
                                the segregation of home and visiting supporters.”

                   Does your Lordship have that,                            it is at page 154 at the top,
                    6 ( 1 )?
G
          MR.      JUSTICE JOWITT:                         Yes,   I have got that.

          MR. PAYNE:                   Obligation of the Club to

                                "agree with the Chief Constable at least 21 days prior to
                                every Specified Activity the methods of admission to be
H
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




                               employed in connection with the Specified Activity and (in
^                              relation to the Football Match) the methods to be used for
                               the segregation of home and visiting supporters.

                                (2)  The holder shall refuse admission to, or evacuate
                                spectators from, the stadium or any part thereof at any
                                time before or during the Specified Activity upon
                                receiving instructions so to do from the Chief Constable.

B                              (7)  The holder shall at his own expense arrange for the
                               attendance at every Specified Activity of an adequate
                               number of police officers to secure the orderly and lawful
                               behaviour of the spectators and the number of police
                               officers required at each Specified Activity shall be
                               agreed between the Chief Constable and the Holder 21 at
                               least 21 d a y s .... before a specified activity takes place,"

C                   subject to various provisions which I hope I don't have to read
                    but I will if asked.

                                "(9)  The holder shall arrange for the attendance at every
                                Specified Activity of such number of safety stewards as
                                may be required by part 2 of Schedule 3,"

                   and, my              Lord, it might be helpful just to   go to that at 159.
D                  This is              half way down the page,

                                "Part 2, Safety Stewards.  The minimum number of safety
                                stewards required for each function shall be, manning of
                                exits 26, control and direction of spectators entering or
                                leaving the stadium 38, patrolling the stadium and dealing
                                with any emergency including raising an alarm and
E                               extinguishing any small fire, 2."

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  ...(inau d i b l e )..and exits,              is it,   I have not
              heard it called that before.

          MR. PAYNE:   I am afraid so, yes. I am trying to avoid that word.
              Then it gives distribution of stewards under sections, each
              main exit, 13 of them, so 26 required for each function, and
              south west, north and under south stand are each specified and
              given a number.

                         My Lord, going back to 154 I have read the introductory
                    words. Part 2 of schedule 3,

                                "And shall ensure that the safety stewards,"

                    these are obligations of the holder,

                                "safety stewards shall be, (a) fit and capable to carry
                                out their duties, (b) properly trained and instructed, (c)
                                identifiable by dress, (d) provided by the written
                                instructions as to their general duties in order to carry
                                out the following: il) manning of exits...and (2) control
 H

                                                           b
D.L. S E L L E R S Qt C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




                                and direction of spectators entering,               using or leaving the
                                stadium."

                                My Lord,               then on to 15 which is at 156.

                                "15(1)  The holder shall at all times maintain all
                                structural parts of the stadium in sound order and to the
                                appropriate and relevant standards in the guide and in all
                                cases to the satisfaction of the Council."
B
                                Then 24 on page 157:

                                "The holder shall arrange for the stadium to be inspected
                                by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer (Structural or
                                Civil),"

                    and your Lordship has read this paragraph and perhaps will
                    recognise it.

                         Your Lordship will notice that the purpose of this
                    exercise is to invite your Lordship's attention to the primary
                    obligation which is being placed by the certificate on the
                    holder, i.e. the Club, to initiate all these various actions
                    which have to be taken.
D
                                My Lord,               then finally 28:

                                "The holder shall make and keep the following records
                                which shall be made available for inspection at all
                                reasonable time to authorised persons:

                                 (1 ) a record of the numbers of spectators admitted to the
E                                stadium during a Specified Activity and to each area of
                                 spectator accommodation therein mentioned in Part 1 of
                                 Schedule 3.

                    My Lord, the significance of that is apparent, that particular
                    attention is being directed in record keeping to the importance
                    of maintaining and not exceeding the crowd capacities certified
                    in Schedule 3, part 1.
F
           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  As I understand it, and certainly on the day,
               the use of turnstiles was such that it would not have been
               possible to distinguish between the west terrace and the north
               west terrace.

           MR. PAYNE:                   I am afraid that is correct.
Q
                          My Lord, that completes my invitation to your Lordship to
                     look at the certificate.  My Lord, to avoid duplication if
                     there is any particular passage that any of my friends would
                     like your Lordship to look at in this certificate while this
                     part of the exercise is going on, this might be a convenient
                     moment to do so.

 H

                                                                     7
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




                        My Lord, then I go on on page 11 to the next sub-
A                  paragraph.  My Lord, the next series of documents, of which
                   there are five altogether, which we ask your Lordship to look
                   at are a series of documents delivered to the Club over the
                   years immediately preceding the disaster, and they include
                   descriptions of the duties of the Club and words drawing the
                   attention of the Club to its particular responsibilities.   That
                   is the purpose of this exercise.
D
                         My Lord, the first document is a letter from South
                    Yorkshire County Council at page 353.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                              Yes.

          MR. PAYNE:  This is a letter from Mr. Vaughan of South Yorkshire
              County Council dated 9th August, 1985 to Mr. Chester, the
P             Secretary of the Club, headed "Safety of Sports Grounds Act
              1975."

                                "I write to confirm the concluding paragraph of my letter
                                of 13th May, the discussion which took place with all the
                                South Yorkshire Football League Clubs at Police
                                Headquarters, Sheffield, and the comments made at the
                                recent 'summer' inspection of your ground by the Officer
D                               Working Party.

                                Now that the Interim Report of Mr. Justice Popplewell has
                                been published and advice has been received from the Home
                                Office, the County Council would draw the following
                                initial measures to your attention:

                                (a) Evacuation procedures should be reviewed in
E                              consultation with the South Yorkshire Police and the South
                               Yorkshire County Fire Service should this not have been
                               done already following previous discussions.

                                (b)   Safety stewards should be (i) trained and instructed
                                to deal with any emergency relating to fire of evacuation,
                                (i ) be given written instructions about the action to be
                                taken in cases of emergency, (iii) receive practical
 *                             instruction and training appropriate to their
                                responsibility, (i v ) not be so employed unless they have
                                been so instructed and trained, and (v) be adequate in
                                number, physically and mentally capable of performing
                                their duties, effectively deployed, effectively supervised
                                and readily identifiable.

 q                             Note:   as previously indicated, the South Yorkshire County
                                Fire Service and the South Yorkshire Police are willing to
                                assist clubs in these matters, and of course paragraph 9
                                of your Club's General Safety Certificate specifically
                                refers to safety stewards."

                     My Lord, that is the paragraph that your Lordship saw.        It is
                     .just a gee up from the County Council.
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                         My Lord, the next document in the bundle is at 384.  This
                    is a few months later in the same year, 1985, and it is from
                    the Football Association and it is a general circular to
                    secretaries of football league clubs.  It says:

                                "Dear sir,  Following lengthy discussions between the
                                Football Association and the Football League we are now
                                able to send you, over our joint signatures, a revised
B                               memorandum on crowd management.

                                This document sets out to amplify and clarify the
                                responsibilities of clubs in relation to this most
                                difficult problem.  Both our bodies are fully aware of the
                                enormous amount of time, money and energy expended by
                                clubs ensuring that the public can attend matches in
q                               safety.  With the eyes of the world on us, however, we
                                cannot afford to relax for one moment.

                                We ask you to study the memorandum in great detail,"

                    and then there is this caution,

                                 "Failure to act on any of the recommendations may be taken
D                               into account should a Club be subsequently charged with
                                m i s c onduc t...."

                         My Lord, then the memorandum on crowd management follows
                    on the next few pages.  My Lord, I am going to be selective in
                    asking your Lordship to look at it but if any of my friends
                    would like you to look at any other part, then perhaps they
                    will interrupt me.
E
                                 "A. Admission of Spectators.

                                 1.  Clubs must, in consultation with the Police and
                                 visiting club, consider whether any match should be made
                                 "all t i c k e t ."

                                 a.  If a match is made "all ticket" the home club shall
 *                               decide, in consultation with the Police and visiting club,
                                 how many tickets, if any, shall be allocated to the
                                 visiting club.

                                 b.  Under no circumstances should tickets be sold on the
                                 day of the match.  Maximum publicity should be given to
                                 this fact, in the areas of both clubs.
 Q
                                 c.  Clubs are entirely responsible for the distribution of
                                 tickets allocated to them and must take all possible steps
                                 to ensure that tickets are now sold to supporters of the
                                 opposing team."



 H


                                                            9
    D . L S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




    A
             MR. PAYNE:                    B.        PRIOR PLANNING:        I go down to 3:

                                    "Clubs should consider, in the interests of control at
                                    particular matches, reducing capacity, even when
                                    agreed with the competent authority under the Safety
                                    of Sports Ground Act, either for the ground as a whole
                                    or for a particular section."
    B
                       And 4:

                                    "Clubs should consider, if necessary, closing a
                                    particular section or sections of the ground."

                       Over the page, C. SEGREGATION:                            Paragraph 5:
•   c                               "Contingency plans must be made to move supporters
                                    situated in the wrong section to the area or areas
                                    allocated for them or else to be expellrd from the
                                    stadium."

                       Does your Lordship have that?                            My Lord, on page 386?

    D         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                                Yes.

              MR. PAYNE:                   Under SEGREGATION: Paragraph 6:

                                    "Wherever possible should be effected by permanent
                                    structures, such as wall, barriers or fences.  Only in
                                    exceptional circumstances should the Police be called
                                    upon to form a human barrier."
     E
                        Paragraph 7:

                             "Double barriers and walkway systems..."                           That does
                        not matter.

                        8:          "Spectators must not be able to circulate freely
                                    between sections of the stadium."
     F
                                       PROTECTION OF PLAYING A R E A : 2:

                                     "Clubs must protect the playing field by means of a
                                     fence, moat, double-barrier, wall or other system
                                     capable of denying access to spectators.  Any form of
                                     protection must incorporate an adequate number of
     G                               exits, manned at all times, to allow access to the
                                     field of play in emergencies."

                        Over the page under E:                          OTHER MEASURES AT THE GROUND:

                                     "A sufficient number of Police and adequately trained
                                     stewards must be on duty before, during and after the
                                     game."



                                                                          10.
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                   7:           "During the entire time of presence of spectators in
^                               stadium, all doors and gates must be sufficiently
                                staffed to control entry or exit."

                   And 11:

                               "An effective public address system must be in
                               operation before, during and after the game, manned by
g                              personnel trained in crowd control techniques."

                        Those seem to be the paragraphs which have a bearing
                   on the issues which are being tried before your Lordship
                   and I make the same comment I made in relation to the
                   County Council letter which is that your Lordship sees that
                   the primary obligation to discharge these obligations in
                   respect of crowd management is being fairly and squarely
q                  placed with the Club.  They are being reminded in direct
                   terms what their duties are, and whatever they may say
                   about the functions of the Police on this particular
                   occasion, they cannot be absolved from all liability
                   themselves under these strictures from the Football
                   Association merely by saying, "Oh well, the Police were
                   having to do it." That is our case about it.

D                       My Lord, then the next document which drew the
                   attention of the Club to these sort of responsibilities is
                   in the bundle at 516. My Lord, that involves going onto
                   bundle 2.

          MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT:                         Yes.

          MR.       PAYNE: My Lord, here is a letter, another circular letter
 E                  from the Football League Ltd. dated March, 1987, to all the
                    clubs, from the secretary, Mr. Kelly, headed: "Anti-
                    Hooligan
                    Measures." I am not going to read the body of it unless I
                    am asked to.

                         Paragraph 1 asked the Club to consider the
                    introduction of membership schemes.

                         Paragraph 2 asks the Clubs to explain their position
                    in relationship to memberjhip schemes.

                         Over the page, at 517, information is called for - a
                    little way down the page:

  q                              "In addition to the following, the above points are
                                 also agreed between the League and the Government:-

                                 a) All Clubs are required to submit detailed local
                                 plans, dealing with the management and control of home
                                 and away supporters, as per the attached document.
                                 These plans must be produced as soon as possible and
                                 must be drawn up in consultation with the local
    H


                                                                    11.
D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                                 Police, local British Transport Police", and various
                                 other bodies.

                    And over the page is the brief for the local plan, at 518.
                    This starts off by saying:

                                 "Each Club is required to submit details of its own
                                 plan for dealing with crowd control before, during and
B                                after matches.  This should be determined after due
                                 consultation with the Police and local authority and
                                 take account of the following points:-”

                    Then it says, "Ground Plan", which is self-explanatory and
                    concludes under HGround Plan" narrative:

                                "Submit copy of Safety Certificate issued by local
q                              authority and provide details of any revised
                               requirements", which we say would certainly include
                               these new pens.

                                 2. Stadium Operation

                                "Determine policy for policing and stewarding,
                               including match categorisation, and provide
D                              appropriate details.   Provide details for turnstile
                               operation in relation to ground capacity, including
                               counting system."

                    Does your Lordship have that paragraph 2? We submit that
                    it is of quite considerable importance because it is spot
                    on with what we say the Club ought to have been doing
                    anyway, and in fact had done during the Eastwood exercises
E                   in 1985, when your Lordship remembers those drawings and
                    schemes that he drew up - plans 1 to 4 - which showed a
                    particular number of turnstiles being allocated to a
                    particular area of the pen.  So that each pen was served by
                    its own turnstiles.  Here is the Club being reminded of
                    exactly that point by the Football League two years later.

P                              Over the page, at 519, under 4. Stewarding

                                 "Determine instructions for stewards and how these are
                                 given and provide appropriate details.  Give details
                                 of stewards' training.  Determine policy for
                                 communicating to stewards on match day and provide
                                 appropriate details."

G                        My Lord, then there are passages dealing with
                    segregation and various other topics.   I am not going to
                    ask your Lordship to read them in detail, unless I am asked
                    to, but your Lordship sees all the topics which fall within
                    the scope of management are being particularly addressed
                    and the Club is being reminded, in very clear terms, of
                    what its functions and duties are, and the Club did respond
                    to that circular, as your Lordship see, at 523.
 H


                                                              12.
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                       Your Lordship sees here a letter from Dr. Eastwood to
                  the Club on the 13th March, 1987, and it is purely what the
                  Club has done is to send the memorandum that your Lordship
                  has been looking at to Dr. Eastwood.  He has responded to
                  it and has pleasure in letting the Club have his comments.
                  The material comments, which we think, are on the next
                  page, at 524, where a little way down the page it says:

g                      "Turning now to the various items in the document
                  headed "Local Plans" - so he has seen the document that
                  your Lordship was just looking at and has seen the
                  significance that was being attached by the League to the
                  appropriate number of turnstiles for the separate areas of
                  spectator accommodation.

                              The points that he deals with are 1. Ground Plan:
C
                              "We will prepare the necessary drawings and details
                              and you will provide a copy of the safety
                              certificate."

                               Stadium Operation:

                              "It may be that you can deal with the whole of this
D                            item but we will provide a plan showing the location
                              of turnstiles and if you so wish, a description of the
                              counting system."

                               5. Segregation:

                              "We will provide the necessary drawings showing the
                              way in which fans are segregated at the Leppings Lane
E                            end with the access routes clearly marked both inside
                              and outside the ground."

                       My Lord, we make a comment about this that this is two
                  years after Dr. Eastwood's plans were not accepted on cost
                  grounds by the Club and he is accepting the situation as it
                  is.  There is no word of caution or warning here in this
P                letter saying that what was done was against his advice or
                  contrary to his recommendations or anything to that effect.
                  My Lord, that is that letter and that exercise.

                       My Lord, the next document which draws the attention
                  of the Club to its responsibilities is in the bundle at
                  697; also in 1987, a letter.  This is from South Yorkshire
                  County Council to the Secretary of the Sheffield Wednesday
G                Football Club - October, 1987 - headed: Guide to Safety
                  atSports Grounds - 1986 Edition:

                              "I refer to the revised Guide which was recently
                              published by her Majesty's Government following the
                              Popplewell Report.  I would like to draw your
                              attention to the new Guide, and in particular to
                              Chapter 2, entitled, "Management Responsibility."
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                                This chapter sets out in detail the sort of matters
                                which ground management should be responsible for and
                                I regard it as essential that the management or
                                designated stadia should be entirely familiar with it
                                and follow its guidance.

                                Would you, please, therefore confirm in writing:-
                                (a) that you have obtained and intend to retain on the
g                               premises a copy of the Guide;"

                                (b) that your Company and its officers are familiar
                                with the Guide and intend to form management duties
                                outlined in Chapter 2 of the Guide; the Company should
                                also take immediate steps to appoint a Safety Officer,
                                as defined in Chapter 2 and confirmation of that
                                appointment should be sent to the Council as soon as
C                              possible."

                         My Lord, over the page the Club replied.         Your
                    Lordship has that at 698:

                                "Thank you for your letter.

                               I confirm that I do have a copy of the Guide to   Safety
D                             at Sports Grounds - 1986 edition and I have had    such
                               for many months.

                                With regard to the appointment of a Safety Officer, my
                                duties encompass those of Safety Officer and I will be
                                grateful if you could amend your records to note that
                                I am responsible for all matters of safety within the
                                ground."
 E
                         My Lord, while your Lordship has those two letters
                    before you, may I draw attention to the position of the
                    Club and the Engineers, as we understand it, before the
                    Court today, which is that the Club's case - certainly as
                    we understand it all this year has been - that they had
                    effectively handed over their responsibilities for the
 P                  safety of the visitors to the Leppings Lane end to the
                    Police and accordingly that they are not responsible for
                    what happened.

                         My Lord, your Lordship sees the date on this letter -
                    October, 1987 - which is about eighteen months before the
                    disaster?  If that were the case, then our comment is that
                    clearly they ought to have said so at this time but far
 G                  from it. They were stating that they were responsible.

                         My Lord, when the ground was selected by the Football
                    Association to hold this event, the Club had to certify
                    what the capacity was at the Leppings Lane end and did so
                    in the bundle at 976.


 H


                                                            14.
D.L. S E L L E R S & CO. / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




\                        My Lord, the importance of this letter, apart from the
                    fact that it does actually contain a statement by the Club
                    of what it believed the capacity was, is to emphasise the
                    importance of capacity which was being attached by the
                    Football Association to the ground and to the particular
                    sections of the ground, and the importance which the Club
                    itself was attaching to that.  I do not need to read the
                    letter; your Lordship sees the table at 976.  It is a
B                   letter from the Club to the Football Association, which
                    includes a statement of the capacity of the various
                    sections of the ground including (at the bottom of the
                    page) Leppings Lane 10,000.

                         My Lord, that completes that exercise of asking your
                    Lordship to look at those documents, identify management
                    responsibility---
C
           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  Just help me about the significance of
               those documents.  They cannot be regarded, save for the
               Safety Certificate, can they, as being decisive as to what
               management responsibilities are, but they provide ....
               (inaudible) .... on which you can say that would be
               appropriate standard?

D          MR. PAYNE:                 Yes.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  They cannot be looked at as requirements
              that "You must do this, you must do that".

          MR. PAYNE: What were the duties of the management will depend
              upon the state of the evidence at the end of the trial, but
              we submit that at the moment in the course of the opening
              those documents collectively include a description of the
              duties of management as accepted by the Club up to just
              over 18 months before the event.

          MR. JUSTICE                  JOWITT:  The        point I make is simply this. These
              letters                  are not such        as to pose the duties spoken, they are
              letters                  one looks at        to see whether they give assistance in
F            deciding                  what is the        ambit of the Club's responsibility.

          MR. PAYNE:                  Yes.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  If the conventional wisdom is that the
              club should do this, that and the other, that may provide
              cogent evidence of the extent of their duties, in the same
              way that the Health and Safety Executive may provide cogent
G             evidence of what a prudent employer does in certain
              circumstances.

          MR. PAYNE: Yes.   The way we would put our case is that we say
              that the documents are descriptive of the duties of the
              Club and nowhere, when those circulars went out, is there
              any response from the Club saying "These are not our
              duties".  When particularly challenged by the County
H            Council about the Green Guide in 1986 and who was


                                                            15.
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




.                    responsible for the safety, they quite properly accepted it
                     fair and square with no qualification. So we say
                     collectively those documents are accepted by the Club as
                     descriptive of their duties.

                          My Lord, on page 12 of the skeleton I go on to the
                     third aspect of the topics that I am asking your Lordship
                     to look into, "Unsafe System of Escape". We are conscious
B                    of what your Lordship said yesterday about the significance
                     of the lack of assisting the escape in the events which
                     occurred.  As can be seen in the photographs, in fact, when
                     the perimeter gate was opened people still could not freely
                     move out because of congestion in the pen.

                          My Lord, I think what we would say in response to the
                     comments your Lordship made are that the Club should have
C                   had an either/or system:    Either they should have had a
                     system of control of capacity of numbers entering the pen,
                     or they should have had an easy means of escape from a pen.
                     Either of those would have created a safe situation because
                     if they counted the numbers in and only allowed the numbers
                     to reach a capacity which had already been worked out and
                     ought to have been put in the Certificate so that everyone
                     knew what it was, then that number would not be exceeded,
D                   in which case the cage nature of the pen might have been
                     tolerable.   But if you have not got a system of counting
                     numbers in, then the cage became a trap and was
                     intolerable.   That is the way we put it.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  Where do you say, in that event, should
                the means of escape be?

E           MR. PAYNE:                   In the event that it is a trap?

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                             Yes.

            MR. PAYNE:                   And that there is no control of numbers going in?

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                             Yes.
F
            MR. PAYNE: Then if that were addressed, that really is a
            matter of engineering expert evidence, but I expect the answer
            is that there ought to have been a collapsible front fence.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  The ....(inaudible)..... of this case was
                a proper means of escape sideways and rearwards are going
                to be of no utility; there is only one way, if there is to
G               be escape, and that is on to the pitch.

            MR. PAYNE:                    That a description of what the situation was.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  So criticism that there were not adequate
                means of escape sideways or to the rear, whether
                well-founded or not, had no causative value.
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




^           MR. PAYNE:   My Lord, we say it does have a causative value.  I
                am sorry to find ourselves at odds with your Lordship; it
                may just be a matter of approach.   What we say is once you
                have got a pen into which an unlimited number of people can
                 go, or limited only by the overall capacity of the pen--

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                            How many you can squash in.

B            MR. PAYNE:   Yes, as many as you can squash in, thereby leading
                  to a foreseeable danger of the risk of overcrowding.  Once
                 you recognise that that is the system, then the next step
                  is that some very safe means of escape must be devised. As
                  I say, I prefer to leave this to the engineer, because it
                  is a matter of engineering practice as to what the scheme
                  should be.

C          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   I am not sure whether it is not just a
               matter of commonsense.    If you have people squashed into
                the pen and they are facing forward and the people in
                greatest difficulty are those nearer the front, commonsense
                suggests that they if are going to escape in that situation
                it is not going to be possible to it sideways or backwards
                -          it has got to be from the front.   That is why I say that
                an easy means of access from the pen in the event that it
D              becomes dangerous and overcrowded is a matter of
                commonsense.

            MR. PAYNE: My Lord, as a matter of commonsense I think I would
                 be very happy to say that there should not have been a
                 fence in front of those people at all but a railing or some
                 form of restraint, which could be overcome in the event of
                 an emergency by people climbing over it or passing under
k               it.   There ought to have been something of that sort.   Once
                 you have got the situation that the pen can become
                 overcrowded because of the lack of control - I mean, one
                 has to bear in mind the difficulties of the Club and the
                 Engineer and the problems that clubs have in trying to
                 address the hooligan behaviour of football supporters.
                 This, of course, was what has led to this tragedy, because
 p              the Club and the Engineer have tried to cope with the
                 advancing tide of hooliganism but in doing so they have
                 lost sight of the need to nrcvide for the safe means of
                 escape of people in the event of an emergency.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   Suppose you have a state of affairs - and
                 it seems to me that this is, for whatever reason, a state
                 of affairs which came about - in which people are so
 G              tightly packed in pens 3 and 4 that if they were to make
                 their escape the only way in which those in greatest need
                 of deliverance could have gone would have been forwards on
                 to the pitch.  If that is the pattern, then albeit there
                 may be failures to comply with the Green Guide in that
                 there is not an adequate means of access to the side or to
                 the rear, or people are more than 12 metres from an exit;
                 that may be all very well in looking to see whether your
 H

                                                                   17.
    D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                           stadium complies with the Green Guide.  None of that is
    A
                           causative of ....(inaudible)       is it?

                 MR. PAYNE:  That is why we agree - a safe means       of escape ought
                     to have been provided, and the only one one       can envisage,
                     in the situation which the Engineer and the       Club had
                     constructed, would be some means of getting       rid quickly of
                     the front part of the cage.
    B
                 MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  That is why I put questions to you at the
                     end of yesterday and why I intervene again now. Your
                     engineer's report goes on at some length about the fact
                     that people were more than 12 metres from the point of
                     access, criticism of the gates and the radial fence, and so
                     forth.  It may be - I do not know - that those are valid
                     criticisms if one says "Is there compliance here with the
®   C                Green Guide?" But I am only interested, am I not, in any
                     matters which are causative of the deaths that we are
                     looking at?

                 MR. PAYNE:                   Yes.

                 MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  It does not seem to me that criticisms of
                     that nature are causative of those deaths.
    D
                 MR. PAYNE: My Lord, I think your Lordship is right.    I would
                     like to put what the Engineer says in the context of your
                     Lordship's observation in this way, that he in his report
                     identifies a number of the breaches of the Green Guide in
                     respect of no gangways and distance which people have to go
                     to the exit which are in breach of the provisions of the
                     Green Guide. Your Lordship is observing that those in the
     E               event may not have been causative of the deaths and
                     injuries.  I think the comment that we make is that these
                     breaches are illustrations of the way in which the
                     Engineer, unhappily, lost sight of the need to provide
                     adequate means of escape for people in an emergency.

                                 This particular emergency would require means of
                            escape by going on to the field so that some form of
     F
                            collapsible barrier or openable gates would have been
                            required across the front, but they would only have been
                            required because of the rest of the structure - and I am
                            repeating an argument that I made a few moments ago - they
                            are only required because of the situation which had been
                            created---

     G            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  In other words, you say although they may
                      not have been causative, they are indicative of a failure
                      to apply ....(inaudible)      properly to what was required
                      in the way of safety.

                  MR. PAYNE:                   My Lord, yes.


      H
                                                                18.
D.L. S E L L E R S & CO. / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




^           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: We will bear that in mind when we consider
                that section of the evidence and the depth we need to go
                into it.

            MR. PAYNE:                  Certainly, my Lord.

                          My Lord, under this topic of system of escape, the
                     main object being to ask your Lordship just to work through
B                    the Green Guide and see the emphasis which is placed upon
                     the need to provide a means of escape - in other words, to
                     raise the importance or significance of that point as it
                     ought to have borne on the mind of the Engineer and the
                     Club when they were considering the dangerous situation
                     which had been created.  That is the purpose of the
                     exercise.

C                          Under this, I have asked your Lordship to first of all
                      look at the Taylor paragraphs and then to look at the Green
                      Guide. Unless anybody wants me to, I am not going to take
                      your Lordship through those Taylor paragraphs, which are
                      listed under 13 in my skeleton.  All they do is provide a
                      dreadful description of the way in which people were in
                      fact trapped in the pens and did in fact have no means of
                      escape, being unaware of the existence of the gates in the
D                     radial barriers because they could not see them as soon as
                      they got a little way down the terrace, and obviously those
                      at the front had no means by which they could leave the
                      ground.

                           Unless your Lordship would like me to, I have put the
                      references to the Taylor Report in paragraph 13 of the
                      opening, but I have summarised their effect, which I think
 E                   is well-known - your Lordship has read the report.   Taking
                      that as read, that there in fact was no means of escape
                      -          that is what it boils down to and that is the important
                      point - in fact for the people any small distance away from
                      the back of the terrace, there was in fact no means of
                      escape, then the significance of that and the breaches of
                      the Green Guide are set out at Paragraph 14 in my opening
 F                   in this list of paragraphs, in the Green Guide beginning
                      at 16.




 G




  H
                                                          19.
D.L. S E L L E R S a C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




^                              My Lord, here this section begins at 14, which
                          describes four types of safety problem.  Paragraph 16:

                                      "The second type of safety problem is far more
                                      important and involves crowds pressures.   When large
                                      crowds are present and densities are high, pressures
                                      build up within the crowd either through motion or
                                      swaying which make it difficult, or even impossible,
B                                     for individuals to control their own movements.   Under
                                      these conditions crowd pressures can escalate to a
                                      dangerous level and if a person stumbles or falls the
                                      crowd cannot adapt to avoid him or to stop to help.
                                      Since this type of danger arises from crowd pressures,
                                      its remedy lies in their removal or restraint within
                                      safe limits.   These dangers arise in particular on
                                      terraces ...."
C
                          This is a little way down page 9, my Lord:

                                       "These dangers arise in particular on terraces and on
                                       exist routes and so careful attention must be paid to
                                       restraining surges and similar pressure on the
                                       terraces and to ensuring free movement throughout the
                                       exit systems.  Such free movement is dependent upon
D                                      the capacity of all the various sections of the exit
                                       systems and interactions between them."

                           21:

                                       "Although controlling crowd numbers may serve to
                                       reduce some risks to an acceptable level, remedial
                                       work is likely to be necessary to overcome others.
 E                                     Obvious defects such as trip hazards (especially at
                                       the head of stairs or steps), loose or weak handrails
                                       on stairs, and obstructed exits or exit routes, should
                                       be rectified as part of the general care and
                                       maintenance of a ground.  Structures should be sound
                                       (see Chapter 3) and inspected by suitable qualified
                                       persons (see Chapter 4).  Design, layout and
 P                                     signposting of exits and exit routes require
                                       particular attention to ensure that they can safely
                                       cope with the number of spectators who will use them
                                       at the end of an event or in an emergency."

                            66, my Lord ---

                  MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I suppose, while we are on paragraph 21,
 G                    "Similarly, the condition of terraces or viewing slopes and
                      presence or otherwise of crush barriers, correctly sited
                      and meeting the strength tests of this Guide are important
                      factors."

                  MR. PAYNE:                   Quite, my Lord.          66, my Lord ---

                  MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                       29?
  H

                                                                  20.
    D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




    ^             MR. PAYNE: Yes, that is a mistake.   May that be crossed out?
                      I have got it again in a minute.  I will have to go back to
                      29 in a moment.  I beg your Lordship's pardon.  This is 66:

                                       "Where exit gates have to be secured against outside
                                       intruders they should be fitted with panic-type bolts,
                                       but all exit gates, unless secured in an open
                                       position, should be manned at all times while the
    B                                 ground is used by the public and be capable of being
                                       opened immediately from inside by anyone in an
                                       emergency."

                           Your Lordship is quite right, I ought to look at 29 xiv.
                           This is "Management Responsibility":

                                       "To ensure that all gangways and exit routes are
    C                                 unobstructed and capable of being used to their full
                                       capacity at all time when the public are in the
                                       ground."

                           My Lord, the next one is 58.  It repeats the same point,
                           that exit routes should be kept clear of obstructions.   I
                           do not quite know why the numbering has gone backwards
                           here.  53:
    D
                                        "Care should be taken in the planning of exit systems
                                        to ensure that in the event of an emergency which
                                        blocks the usual exit route spectators will be able to
                                        use an alternative exit route (including, where
                                        appropriate, forward evacuation on to the pitch)."

                            Then 67:
    E
                                        "Facilities should be provided to enable people to

•
                                        leave the ground at any time.  For this purpose a
                                        number of reversible turnstiles or, preferably, pass
                                        doors, so operated as to limit the opening to the
                                        passage to one person at a time, should be
                                        considered."
    F
                  MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I think that is for non-emergencies.              I do
                      not think it bears on this case, does it?

                  MR. PAYNE: My Lord, I think that comment could be made about a
                      number of these paragraphs.  The purpose of the exercise is
                      merely to show your Lordship that throughout the Green
                      Guide one keeps on coming across paragraphs which draw the
    G                 attention of those responsible to the need to provide
                      systems so that people can be free to leave the ground.
                      The relevance of it to this case is that when one actually
                      sees what they did, which was to create this inescapable
                      cage, then it completely overlooked the whole drift of the
                      Green Guide, which keeps on saying that you have got to
                      bear in mind the importance of people being able to leave
                      the ground at any time and have safe means of exit without
     H                outside assistance.  So it has got a bearing on the


                                                                21.
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L D Y D W O O D L A N D




A                       thinking and the blind spot that they had to the danger
                        which was being created by the construction of these pens.
                        My Lord, that is the purpose of this exercise.

                            My Lord, 96 is the paragraph that your Lordship has
                       had in mind, so I will not read it in detail.

              MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                           Yes.
B
              MR. PAYNE:                   178 reads as follows:

                                    "Means of Escape
                                    'Means of escape' is the structural means whereby a
                                   safe route is provided for people to travel from any
                                   point in a structure to a place of safety without
                                   outside assistance.   In a sports ground, the means of
C                                  escape in the event of an emergency will usually be
                                    the same as the normal egress routes plus any
                                   additional 'route' of forward escape to the playing
                                   area.   The kind of emergency most likely to occur at a
                                   sports ground is fire but other types of emergency,
                                    such as bomb threat, may arise which might necessitate
                                    the evacuation of spectators from all or part of the
                                   spectator accommodation.   It is the management's
D                                  responsibility to ensure that all axit routes for use
                                    in an emergency are capable of being safely and
                                   effectively used at all times when the ground is
                                   occupied."

                        My Lord, 186:

                                    "Where the playing area of perimeter track is
 E                                 accessible to spectators and is considered suitable as
                                    a place of safety, evacuation on to it can be taken
                                    into account in calculating the emergency evacuation
                                    time. Where there is a pitch perimeter fence or wall
                                    it should have access points in accordance with
                                    Chapter 15, paragraph 215, which can serve as exits
                                    and which can be taken into account in the calculation
 P                                 of emergency evacuation time."

                        My Lord, the repetition of the word "emergency" which keeps
                        on cropping up throughout the Green Guide attracts this
                        comment by the Police: that by its very nature, an
                        emergency is something unexpected and one cannot exactly
                        forecast what it is going to be.

 G             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                          Unexpected does not mean unforeseeable.

               MR. PAYNE:  Unfortunately, my Lord, what happened here was not
                   foreseen by the Club and the Engineer who designed the
                   ground and, as I have already admitted, the Police allowed
                   themselves to make use of this unsafe system themselves
                   without foreseeing what was going to happen.  Certainly we
                   say that the Club and the Engineer ought to have foreseen
  H                the danger that they were creating,  the point is that they
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




 .                     ought to have been aware that the Green Guide, constantly
                       harping as it does on the need to provide emergency exits,
                       ought to have drawn their attention to the fact that the
                       pens - and I will not say anything more about the pens
                       because your Lordship knows about those - in fact provided
                       no means of emergency escape, in whatever the emergency
                       happened to be;  that is the point.  The Green Guide
                       mentions a bomb scare, and one sees elsewhere in other
B                      documents something described as "maniac behaviour."

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  If anyone applied his mind to the problem
                 of overpacking pens 3 or 4, he would at the same time
                 realise that if that happens, there is no way out.

             MR. PAYNE:                   Quite.

C            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  And that applies whether it is a police
                 officer applying his mind to it or the Club or anyone else.

             MR. PAYNE:  Quite, we do not dissent from that.  My Lord, I
                 have done 186.  My Lord, 195 is in relation to the
                 stewards' duties which your Lordship has seen before.

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                            Yes.
D
             MR. PAYNE:                   206 is the Chapter on crowd control:

                                   "Crowd movement on terraces should be strictly
                                   controlled in order to give the Police the fullest
                                   opportunity for crowd control.  Less problems occur
                                   when terraces are subdivided as far as possible into
                                   sections by both radial and lateral barriers or
E                                  railings which should comply with the strength
                                   requirements.  Each section should ideally be self-
                                   contained and should be serviced by its own
                                   entrance/exits, refreshment facilities and toilets
                                   (in keeping with the principles of general ground
                                   division described... Special care is needed to ensure
                                   that sections and subdivisions are provided with
 P                                 sufficient exits for use in an emergency."

                       My Lord, in this context about what should ideally be
                       provided, may I just ask your Lordship to divert from the
                       Green Guide for a moment to look at two documents in the
                       core bundle, first in bundle 1 at page 73. These are two
                       comments made either by or certainly in the presence of and
                       acceded to by the Engineer at the two ends of the period
 G                     which your Lordship is looking at, which is the Safety
                       Certificate era of 1979 up to the disaster in 1989.   Here
                       is a comment in 1978, made in the presence of Dr. Eastwood,
                       about the appreciation which the Club and the Engineer had
                       of the status of the ground.  Your Lordship sees this at
                       paragraph 3 of this memorandum, where Dr. Eastwood was
                       present representing the Club together with two directors
                       and the secretary.  At paragraph 3 this is said:
 H

                                                                   23.
D . L S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




^                                   "During the course of the discussion, the following
                                    points were made.  The stadium had been used for many
                                    capacity matches over the years and its safety record
                                    was the equal of any in the country."

                        That is the beginning of the decade.  At the end of the
                        decade, exactly the same view is still being held, my Lord,
                        at page 476.  This is a letter of July 1986 from Dr.
B                       Eastwood to the Secretary of the Club which says:

                                    "I have read through the part of the document which
                                    deals with sports grounds.  I do not see any grounds
                                    for objecting to any of the recommendations.   There
                                    will be little, if any, change in the procedure
                                    already established at Hillsborough.  The document
                                    envisages that far more grounds for various sports
C                                   will be designated, but in appropriate circumstances
                                    the procedures will not be so onerous as those
                                    relating to Hillsborough.  However, as it is a top
                                    ground, we cannot expect that there will be much
                                    relaxation compared with the present arrangements."

                        My Lord, looking at those assessments of the status of the
                        ground which the Club and the Engineer are assuring each
D                       other about in those documents, when one looks at that in
                        the context of 206 in the Green Guide, in the middle of
                        206, the Guide is recommending that "each section" - that
                        is a sub-division of a terrace - "should ideally be self-
                        contained and should be serviced by its own entrance/exits,
                        refreshment facilities and toilets.  Special care is needed
                        to ensure that sections and sub-divisions are provided with
                        sufficient exits for use in an emergency.
E
                             Looking at it now - and I know it can be said that
                        this is with the opportunity of looking at all these
                        documents over the years, but it is something which clearly
                        was known to the Club and Dr. Eastwood during all the
                        documents which your Lordship has been looking at - it
                        ought to have been clear to them that this recommendation
                        in the Green Guide was not being followed and there
                        certainly were not sufficient exits for use in an emergency
                        in pens 3 and 4.




G




 H
                                                             24.
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




                     My Lord, at 209, there are just two more paragraphs in this Green
                Guide which deals with the same point. At 209:
                          "Access to the pitch must be made as difficult as possible in normal
A                         circumstances, while at the same time ensuring that the police have
                          effective access to the terraces for the purpose of crowd control,
                          and enabling the pitch tobe used (where appropriate) in the event of
                          serious emergency."
                          At 215.
R MR. JUSTICE 30WITT:                           Perhaps you should just read on.   Leaving aside the spikes
       and barbs.
                          "One alternative to fencing is the construction around the pitch of
                          a wall with a smooth surface which should not be less than 1.22 metres
                          in height on the terrace side."
                I suppose that is                       4.6 or 3'9.
C
      MR. PAYNE:              3'9" is about a metre, so it would be about 4'6"
                          "The boundary wall should have gates or access points to the pitch
                          which could be manned by the police or stewards. A walkway between
                          the boundary wall and the terraces, which would be solely occupied
                          bythe police, first aid and official club personnel, has been found
                          tobe effective as regards safety and security.”
D
                My Lord, the comment makes itself, that there are different methods of
                crowd control being canvassed. At 215: I ought to read 214, starting
                about half way down. No, I will read the whole of that paragraph:
                          "The type, strength and height of a pitch perimeter fence or wall
                          will vary according to its location and required function. At one
                          extreme, at a certain type of ground or small stadium used by vepy
E                         few spectators, there maybe no need for a perimeter fence or wall
                          at all; or if such a wall or fence exists it may need to consist
                          of little more than a rail to mark the playing area. At the other
                          extreme, at some major soccer stadia, where restriction on crowd
                          movement forms a necessary part of the safety measures, it may be
                          necessary to have a fence which prevents access to the pitch in
                          normal circumstances but allows for access in emergency. Even at
 F                        these grounds however specification of the pitch fence may vary for
                          different parts of the ground."
                 The point from the point of vi^ • : f uhe Engineer and the Club is that the
                 Green Guide is not a statute and it is for guidance. It is drawing their
                 attention to the need to allow for access in an emergency in the particular
                 circumstances, so when one applies that to pens 3 and 4 one can see what
                 the circumstances were. Then 215:
 Q
                           "For most major soccer stadia whether used for association football
                          or other sports, the pitch perimeter fence will be required either
                          to prevent access to the pitch as mentioned above, or at least to
                          discourage attempts by spectators to enter the playing area. Gates
                           or other access points (minimum width 1.1 metres) should nevertheless
                           be provided for use in an emergency and, at those grounds where a
                           perimeter track is used as part of the exit system, for the departure
 H                        of spectators at the end of an event. Provision of such gates or

                                                                      25.
D.U. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                          access points is particularly important to allow full access to
                          the playing area or track where it is likely to be used as a place
                          of safety in an emergency. Such gates or access points should be
A                         properly stewarded and clearly marked so that immediate access to
                          the playing area or perimeter track can be ensured."
  MR. JUSTICE 30WITT: Of those various paragraphs you have referred to in the
       Green Guide, perhaps the most important are paragraphs 53 and 178 because
       they refer to using the perimeter gates as an emergency exit. That may be
        somewhat watered down by paragraph 215 which is content with a gate of
        1.1 metre wide. It does not on the other hand say how many gates you might
B      have. I wonder whether an appropriate way of looking at this -- of course
       one can decide later, but I invite counsel to think about it — is this:
       for practical purposes there was no way out if the pen became hopelessly
       overcrowded. In those circumstances anyone who was caught in allowing
       pens 3 and 4 to become hopelessly overcrowded was the more blameworthy.
        If that is an appropriate way of looking at it, detailed consideration
       of means of access may be of less importance.
C MR. PAYNE: Our case is that all those who made a material contribution to the
       situation which existed, i.e. that it could become grossly overcrowded
       as occurred, are responsible for the damage which ensued. My Lord, that is
       the case. It occurs to me that it might be helpful at this point to divert
       from the skeletonjust to ask your Lordship to look at the train of
       authorities which identify what we say are the material issues as to
       causation which your Lordship will have to try. My Lord, I do not intend
D     tomake this a big exercise. We think it is a veryshort and simple point.
       My Lord, there are three authorities which we think will be helpful to
       your Lordship, starting with what is described in the most recent
       authority as the starting point which is a case called Bonnington Castings
       Limited v Wardlaw 1956 A.C. 613. The second of the trilogy is McGhee v
       The National Coal Board 1 WLR 1973 1. My Lord, the finally Wilsher v Essex
       Area Health Authority 1988 1 A.C. 1074. My Lord, I hope your Lordship has
       copies of those authorities and I just briefly refer to the points which
E     we say identify the test which we say your Lordship should apply.
      MR. JUSTICE 30WITT:                        Do you want me to look at the authorities now?
   MR. PAYNE: My Lord, we think they are in your Lordship's bookcase. The first
        one your Lordship is looking at is 1956 Appeal Cases. This is Bonnington.
        It is a breach of statutory duty case about a pneumoconiosis injury, and
        for the purposes of this case we think only the decision is helpful. In
 F     the headnote it says:
                          "Held: that the onus of proof lay on the plaintiff, that is to
                          show by the ordinary standard of proof in civil actions at least
                          that on a balance of probablilities the breach caused or materially
                          contributed to the injury, and not merely that it was possible
                          that the injury might have been so caused."
G              Then there is a finding about that particular case. The extract from the
                judgment of Lord Reid which is subsequently described in the authorities
                as a starting point in the identification of causation at page 620. He
                says:
                           "It would seem obvious in principle that a pursuer or plaintiff
                           must prove not only negligence or breach of duty but also that
 H                         such fault caused or materially contributed to his injury and there
                           is ample authority for that proposition both in Scotland and in
                           England."

                                                                    2 6 .
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




                     My Lord, I do not ask your Lordship to look at anything else in
                Bonnington because we say that is the nub of it. I go on now to McGhee.
                One has gone up now to 1973 and there are two passages which are helpful.
                In the judgment of Lord Simon at page 8, my Lord, this also is a personal
A               injury case and I am not going to trouble your Lordship with the facts
                unless I am asked to because it is only really the statements of principle
                in the judgments which we think are helpful. At page 8 at letter C, Lord
                Simon is in the course of discussing the effect of the authorities and he
                refers to Bonnington Castings, and says that Bonnington Castings and another
                case called Nicholson v Atlas Steel Foundry:
                          "Establish in my view that where an injury is caused by two or
B                        more factors operating cumulatively, one or more of which factors
                          is a breach of duty, and one or more is not so, in such a way that
                          it is impossible to ascertain the proportion in which the factors
                          were effective in producing the injury, or which factor was decisive
                          the law does not require a pursuer or plaintiff to prove the
                          impossible, but holds that he is entitled to damages for the injury
                          if he proves on a balance of probabilities that the breach or
                          breaches of duty contributed substantially to causing the injury.
c                        If such factors so operate cumulatively it is in my judgment
                          immaterial whether they do so concurrently or successively."
                My Lord, on the same point later on in the report, the judgment of Lord
                Salmon at page 11 G:
                          "I, of course, accept that the burden rests upon the pursuer to
D                        prove on the balance of probabilities a causal connection between
                          his injury and the defendant's negligence. It is not necessary,
                          however, to prove that the defendant's negligence was the only
                          cause of injury. A factor by itself may not be sufficient to
                          cause injury but if with other factors it materially contributed
                          to causing the injury, itclearly is a cause of injury."
                One can think inthe context of this case about that very useful summary
E               in the report by Lord Justice Taylor where he identifies the build up
                of the overcrowding and identifies the causes of the overcrowding up to
                opening gate C and then the consequences of opening gate C.
      MR. JUSTICE 30WITT:                       The overcrowding outside the turnstiles in Leppings Lane?
   MR. PAYNE: No, he is talking about the overcrowding in the pens, and he says
        the overcrowding was caused up to that point by a lack of system of
 F      counting and control and lack of fixed capacity for the pens. My Lord,
        it might just be helpful — it is page 20 of part 2, chapter 116:
                           "The overcrowding up to 2.52 p.m. was due to a number of factors."
                 I know this is not accepted by the opposition, but we state this as our
                 case:
 ^                        "The overcrowding up to 2.52 p.m. was due to a number of factors
                          which can be considered broadly under three heads:
                           (i)          The layout at the Leppings Lane end.
                           (ii)        Lack of fixed capacities for the pens.
 H                        (iii)         Lack of effective monitoring of the terraces.

                                                                27.
AT   D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                                117. The crushing and fatalities after 2.52 p.m. must be considered
                                under a number of headings.
     A                          (iv)           The build-up at the turnstiles.
                                (v)            The blunder on opening the gates.
                                (v i )         The barriers in pen 3.
                                (vii)          The crushing not recognised.
                                (viii)         The response of the police.
                                (ix)           The perimeter gates were too small."
                      What we say about it is that if there had not been overcrowding up to
     B               2.52 the opening of gate C by itself probably would not have caused any
                      injuries, certainly nothing on the scale of what happened. Your Lordship
                      has that point. If the pens had been empty or sparsely populated up to
                      that time then gate C would not have had a causative effect on anything,
                      so the two are cumulative. They have already become overcrowded by the
                      lack of a system of counting and control and it is our c a s e — and we are
                      interested to see that it is everybody's case -- we all agree that the
                     entry to pens 3 and 4 ought to have been closed whether gate C were
     c               opened or not. We all agree about that. They say it is all the police's
                      fault because they should have kept a better eye. They should have had
                      a visual impression of the crowd and realised it was overcrowded. We
                      say it is their fault because they did not provide the police with any
                      system of counting and control.
             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: By overcrowding, you have to say, do you not, that over­
     ly          crowding before 2.52 p.m. which was in itself a danger to safety.




      E




      F




      G




         H
                                                                   28.
    D.L. S E L L E R S 8t C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




    A          M R ‘ PAYNE:  No, I do not think I have to say that my Lord.  I have
                     to say overcrowding so that when one adds some more people it
                     then becomes dangerous.  It does not have to be a danger to
                     safety before 2.52.  The two events together, i.e. the
                     overcrowding plus the addition of the crowd— --

              MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                                The overcrowding must be culpable.

    B         MR. PAYNE:                    Yes.

              MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  It can only, it seems to me, be culpable if,
                  because of the way the stadium was managed, that overcrowding
                  would simply, by continuance of the normal method of entry, be
                  converted into a danger to safety.  I do not know about that,
                  but that is a matter one may have to consider.  I do think you
                  have to show that the overcrowding was culpable, not just
•   c             culpable in that people ought to have been counted in, but
                  culpable in the sense that it either was then and there a
                  threat to safety or possibly a potential threat to safety if
                  admission continued under the same system.

               MR. PAYNE:  Yes.  My Lord, we make the point, and I would like to
                   deal with your Lordship's point and I will deal with that
                   before making the comment I was going to, my Lord, the opening
    D              of gate C would not have added to the crowding in those pens if
                   there had been what we say there should have been, that is to
                   say a system of counting and control, because nobody more would
                   have been allowed in those pens.  If there had been a fixed
                   capacity for the pens it would have shown on the television
                   screen in the club control room and in the police box so
                   everyone would have known that that capacity had now been
                   reached.
    E
               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  That is a slightly different point.  What you
                   are saying there is there should have been a proper
                   certification, proper monitoring and a proper shutting off of
                   the pen when the necessary numbers had been reached.

               MR. PAYNE:                   Yes, my Lord.
     F
               MR.       JUSTICE JOWITT:  Consequently, if all that had been done the
                         opening of gate C would not have had the effect it had.  I
                         don't know, it may be that it is not in issue, or it may be
                         that it is not going to be difficult to prove that by the time
                         gate C was opened there were already enough in pens 3 and 4
                         such that if there had been that proper monitoring  and closing
                         system, pens 3 and 4 would already have been closed off.
     G
               MR. PAYNE:  My Lord, they would have been because Lord Justice
                   Taylor found, and this is an admitted fact, that they were
                   overcrowded, so they should have been shut.

               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                               Yes.


     H

                                                                            29
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




          MR. PAYNE:   So they should have been shut.  My Lord, that is our
^             case.   But, my Lord, on the point that your Lordship is
              referring to, that is our answer to your Lordship's point, but
              we adopt what is being said in MaGhee by Lord Salmon.    May I
              ask your Lordship to look at it again.   Page 11G where he is
              saying,

                                "I, of course, accept the burden rests upon the pursuer to
                               prove, on a balance of probabilities, a causal connection
B                              between his injury and the defender's negligence.   It is
                               not necessary, however, to prove that the defender's
                               negligence was the only cause of injury."

                    Now this is the sentence which we rely on coming up now:

                                "A factor, by itself, may not be sufficient to cause
                               injury but if, with other factors, it materially
C                              contributes to causing injury, it is clearly a cause of
                                injur y."

                    I was inviting your Lordship to apply that,           taking the worst
                    case against myself.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  It has, though, before anyone can be held
              responsible for it, to be culpable.
D
          MR. PAYNE:                    Yes,        certainly.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   What you are saying here, you seem to be
              suggesting you do not have to go as far as that but in fact the
              evidence seems to establish, the agreed evidence, on the Green
              Guide criteria, by the time gate C was opened pens 3 and 4 were
E             already overcrowded to the point at which there was then and
              there a danger to safety from the overcrowding in them.
              Whether that is what the evidence establishes we will have to
              wait and see.   I said according to the Green Guide, but it may
              be said, well, that is what the Green Guide says, but that is
              not necessarily right.

           MR. PAYNE:  Yes.  My Lord, the admitted findings of Lord Justice
               Taylor, I am helpfully reminded, are at paragraph 63.  Your
               Lordship sees it.

                                 "Serious discomfort to many well used to enduring pressure
                                 on t e r r a c e s ."

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  The only underlining in that paragraph is red.
               Do you emphasise the red underlining?

           MR. PAYNE:  No, I don't think I do, because I think the comment of
               the police is that it was not clear to them, but that is part
               of our case, that visual impression does not work, so we say it
               is not clear.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                              I see.
 H

                                                                     50
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




^         MR. PAYNE:  But the rest of the findings are common ground.
              Serious discomfort is getting pretty close to dangerous and we
              have got two comments really.  One is that if there had been a
              counting system then they would have been shut off long before
              that, and that situation is allowed to arise we say through the
              negligence of the Club and the Engineer.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:    It may be that the issue on this point about
B             causation is not the overcrowding in accordance with the Green
              Guide standards, whether the overcrowding was itself at that
              stage a matter of danger.    It may be said, well, you can go
              beyond the Green Guide and you still do not have a dangerous
              s it u a t i o n .

          MR. PAYNE:   My Lord, I come back to material contribution and what
              Lord Salmon is saying in MaGhee.   If you apply Lord Salmon's
C             dictum to this case, and I am not dissenting from the fact that
              serious discomfort is approaching danger, but even if you have
              not got danger you have got overcrowding to a serious extent.
              What we say about that is that even if the fact that that could
              be the kind of thing Lord Salmon has in mind, I mean he can
              anticipate this situation, it fits the concept that he is
              describing, a factor by itself may not be sufficient to cause
               injury, i.e. overcrowding so as to cause serious discomfort,
D             but if with other factors, i.e. the entry of some more people,
               it materially contributes to causing injury, which it did
              because the more people coming in would not have created a
              dangerous situation had it not already been overcrowded---

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   Mr. Payne, I do not want to prolong this
              discussion more than I need.   I merely say this, so that you
               know it is something you have to deal with later, it is not
              enough if something is a causative factor, taken along the
              others it has to be a causative factor for which someone is to
               blame.

           MR. PAYNE:                   Certainly.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  If overcrowding is said to be something for
               which someone is to blame, it is not enough to say it could
               have been avoided or it is in excess of the Green Guide.   The
               fact that it is in excess of the Green Guide may be very cogent
               evidence that it is unsafe, but the overcrowding has to be
               such, I would have thought, as to then and there be unsafe and
               in that sense culpable.

           MR. PAYNE:                  Yes.  I do not really think I seriously disagree with
               that.                  Serious discomfort is unsafe.

           MR. PAYNE:  I think you have to go the length of showing that the
               overcrowding that existed in the pen before 2.52 was at that
               stage a danger to safety.



 H

                                                            31
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




          MR.        PAYNE: My Lord, I do not think, and my respectful submission
^                    is that we do not have to go as far as that.

          MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT:                       I say that so that you know.

          MR.        PAYNE: I am grateful, my Lord.  I will pass on now, my Lord,
                    but may I leave it with the words, "material contribution." It
                    is caused or materially contributed, that is what is said, and
                    my Lord, those words are echoed in the most recent authority of
B                   Wilsher in which MaGhee was discussed and there is an echo back
                    to Donnington.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:    Mr. Payne, I must say that it is not enough
                that it makes a material contribution, it has to be culpable.
               The issue is what fault does there have to be for it to be
               culpable.   Is it enough that it is uncomfortable or that it is
                in excess of the Green Guide standard.   Does it have to be
C              dangerous.   I think that is the issue that has to be
               considered.    I do not want to interrupt you further but that is
               a point where I shall want help.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:    My Lord, we will prepare arguments to deal
               with that.    My Lord, we say fault is established by the failure
               to allocate particular numbers to the pens and all the
               consequences that follow from that, having nothing to control
               and so on.    That is the fault, that is the negligence which
                creates a foreseeable risk of injury by people who have a
                sufficiently proximate relationship, sorry to use the word,
               with the visitors to the ground, so that that creates the
                negligence, they were negligence in not allocating particular
                numbers to these pens and not providing any means of
                controlling them except visual impression which is a hopeless
 £             system.   That is the negligence.   Then the causation is that
                there being no means of controlling numbers into the pens an
                unlimited number was then allowed in relying upon the
                ineffective system of visual impression which did not work and
                that is then what caused the overcrowding.    By 2.50 that
                overcrowding was such as to cause serious discomfort, meaning
                that the safe capacity of the pens by the 54 people per 10
                square metres had been exceeded.   We have now got a dense crowd
 F              in there.   Now more people go in so that cumulatively the
                original people in there, plus the more people going in,
                together materially contribute to the happening of the
                disaster.   That is the way we put the case.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  It may be that another factor one will have to
               consider is this, if a responsible person from the Club knew of
               the decision to open gate C, query whether that person should
 G             have said either you must cordon off the tunnel or taken his
               own steps to get the tunnel cordoned off.

            MR. PAYNE:                  Yes,        certainly.

            MR. .JUSTICE JOWITT:  I am not saying the Police should have
              / realised.   It may be that equally a responsible officer of the
    D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                        Club,           if he knew of the decision---
    A
              MR. PAYNE:  The opening of gate C was in fact seen on the Club's
                  close circuit television in their control room by the security
                  officer Mr. Lock and we will direct our minds to giving
                  evidence to your Lordship of that.

                             My Lord, may I just complete this exercise of inviting
                        your Lordship to look at the authorities so that your Lordship
    B                   has them in mind.

              MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                                Yes.

              MR. PAYNE:  It is simply to refer briefly to Wilsher which as far
                  as we know is the latest leading authority on this point.   The
                  leading judgment is given by Lord Bridge with which all the
                  other Lords of Appeal agreed.  My Lord, this is in 1988, first
®   C             volume of the Appeal cases.

                              Lord Bridge, with his usual clarity, at page 1090 makes a
                         statement which is, we submit fairly easy to understand.

               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                               Yes.

               MR. PAYNE:                   At letter D:

                                     "The conclusion I draw from these passages,"

                         and then he is referred to various authorities leading up to
                         this conclusion, my Lord, this is the judgment of the House of
                         Lords,

    E                                "McGhee laid down no new principle of law whatever.  On
                                     the contrary, it affirmed the principle that the onus of
                                     proving causation  lies on the pursuer or plaintiff.
                                     Adopting a robust and pragmatic approach to the undisputed
                                     primary facts of the case, the majority concluded that it
                                     was a legitimate inference of fact that the defenders'
                                     negligence had materially contributed to the pursuer's
                                     injury.  The decision, in my opinion, is of no greater
     F                               significance than that and to attempt to extract from it
                                     some esoteric principle which in some way modifies, as a
                                     matter of law, the natire of the burden of proof of
                                     causation which a plaintiff or pursuer must discharge once
                                     he has established a relevant breach of duty is a
                                     fruitless o n e ."

                         My Lord, that is really about the only passage which we think
                         hits the nail on the head for your Lordship's purposes in this
                         case, although it is possible of course to refer to other parts
                         of the judgment.

                              My Lord, just bringing to mind for a moment that this is
                         an action for contribution under the 1978 Act and bearing in
                         mind what we have got to prove, which is that if the plaintiffs
     H
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                    are bringing this case against the Club and the Engineer, the
                    plaintiffs would prove that what we say is the negligence of
                    these people materially contributed to the plaintiffs* injury.
                    That is what we say the case proves, that their negligence, as
                    I have attempted to describe it, materially contributed to the
                    disaster.



B




D




 G




 H

                                                             54
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




A
         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: Yes.    I will just pose this problem for
             you to think about.   Suppose you have no way of checking
             ingress into pens 3 and 4. By the time you have the gate
             opened, you have 85 per cent fill up; that is 85 per cent
             of the Green Guide limits.   There is, at that stage, no.
             danger in pens 3 or 4, albeit you could say pens 3 and 4
B            are not being operated properly in accordance with the
             Green Guide standard.   I suppose you could say that?  The
             fact that you have got that state of affairs at that
             moment, is not causative of anything, albeit you have only
             got to get another hundred or two in and you are going to
             have an unsafe situation.   The fault will be in not saying,
             "If you open Gate 'C' and you do not shut off the tunnel,
             we are going to have trouble."   In other words, it is not
C            enough to say, "You are filling up pens 3 and 4 otherwise
             than in accordance with the Green Guide standards, if you
             have not yet reached the danger level."

         MR. PAYNE: My Lord, we rely on the findings of Lord Justice
             Taylor that they were overcrowded to a point which caused
             serious discomfort.

D         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I think you may find that you will have to
              go back and check on that but I think by 2.52 there was
              already a dangerous situation with pens 3 and 4. That is
              quite separate from anyone saying - looking, scanning the
              terrace - "If you open the gate and you do not shut off the
              tunnel, the state on the terraces in general is such that
              you are going to have trouble with pens 3 and 4." That is
              an entirely separate matter?
E
          MR. PAYNE:  Quite. My Lord, this does touch upon the problem
              about visual impression.  Of course, it can be said now and
              it can easily be seen looking at the photographs, and one
              can readily say, "They are full and no more people should
              go in." The fact is that those responsible at the time did
              not observe that.  The system of visual impression did not
              work.
 F
          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  That, you see, I think, is something you
              are going to hava to grasp.  I do not think visual
              impression is restricted to simply looking at pens 3 and 4
              and saying, "Are they full or not?" Look at the wings and
              observe a simple deduction?

 G        M R - PAYNE:                 Yes.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  A lot of people are coining in. There is a
              lot of space left on the wings.  It follows that pens 3 and
              4 may be about full.  At all events, you have to make sure
              that the inrush, which is going to be a major drama, gets
              diverted?
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




         MR. PAYNE:  My Lord, quite.In the emergency,    as I have
A            already said, it may be said that mistakes were made under
             the pressure of the emergency.   Our case is that the system
             ought to have been such that the safety and lives of people
             did not depend on the right decision being made in an
             emergency.  That is our case.

                        My Lord, I am grateful for those alterations and when
B                  I come to make my closing speech, I will endeavour to
                   return to it.  I hope that was a helpful little digression?

         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  If only that you know where you have got
             to try and put me right.

         MR. PAYNE: Your Lordship is   not wrong very often. My Lord, I
             have completed the topic now about systems of escape.     I
C            asked your Lordship to do that little exercise through the
             Green Guide and I now turn to the last aspect of the ground
             safety system, which is unsafe system of inspecting and
             testing of barriers.  Now, I know that my learned friends
             will be relieved to hear that I will not be saying very
             much about this at this stage - if only to relieve them of
             the sound of my voice - because this really is a matter for
             expert evidence and what I intend to do, my Lord, only is
D            to ask your Lordship to look briefly at the relevant
             paragraphs in the Taylor report, and then very briefly to
             indicate the nature of the case but not go into it in
             detail because I am going to do that with the expert
             Engineer when he gives his evidence.

         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  Then you will not just read their evidence
             but you will explain it to me?
E
          MR. PAYNE: My Lord, what I intend to                     do, if I may say so, is
              to take it in topics?

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                               Yes.

          MR. PAYNE: My Lord, in the Taylor report the paragraphs which
              deal with this subject are at 139.  Perhaps your Lordship
 F
              will bear with me, going through these paragraphs, then
              your Lordship will have them when the expert gives his
              evidence?

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                               Yes.

          MR. PAYNE:   "In pen 3, four out of five gaps in the line of
 G                 crush barriers do not conform with Paragraph 115 of
                   the Green Guide.   In pen 4, nine out of ten do not
                   conform.   In particular, the spans taken out of the
                   barriers in pen 3 in 1985 left gaps well in excess of
                   the maximum of 1.4 metres prescribed.   One gap was 57%
                   wider than the Green Guide maximum.   Moreover, that
                   gap was in direct diagonal line from the mouth of the
                   tunnel to the barrier which collapsed.   Dr. Eastwood
                    justified these larger gaps by the absence of
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                               gangways.  Fans had to be able to get in and out and
                               standard gaps tended to get blocked up."

                   This is our case now:

                               "The effect of his reasoning was that the absence of
                               gangways, recognised as having a safety function, led
                               to the sacrifice of a second safety feature, namely
g                              gaps of strictly limited width.

                               Again, the removal of barrier 1444 was bound, as Dr.
                               Eastwood conceded", and we rely on his evidence, "to
                               affect the capacity.  In fact it did more, as I shall
                               indicate later."

                         Then paragraph 141, I do not think, helps on this
q                    point, and 243, my Lord?

         MR.         JUSTICE JOWITT:                        233?

         MR.        PAYNE: No, I might come tothatlater.    I have taken out
                   141, 142 and 233 out of this part and go straight to243.

         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                                Thank you.
D
         MR. PAYNE: At 243: Causation, and this is the chapter dealing
             with barriers in pen 3 - 1 come straight to the nub of it:

                               "Tests done by the Health and Safety Executive suggest
                               that although barrier 124a passed the loading test in
                               1988" - we do not agree with that and your Lordship
                               will hear expert evidence about that. We accept the
E                              HSE tests do suggest that but we do not agree with
                               their conclusion - "and probably would have been able
                               to sustain a force which did not exceed the test load"

                   and he goes on, and we accept this part of it:

                                "it was unable to resist the load imposed upon it by
                                reason of the numbers in pen 3, the excessive gap in
                                the barrier higher up the pen and the absence of
                                barrier 144."

                    So Lord Justice Taylor is saying that, if I can summarise
                    it, the test load did not have anything to do with the
                    collapse.  Those are the findings of the Taylor report but
                    he does say that the other factors, i.e. the overcrowding,
 G                  the excessive gap in the barrier and the absence of 144,
                    collectively caused the barrier to collapse.

                         Then, he makes a reference that corrosion probably
                    played a part, "but the effective cause of the collapse was
                    the excessive and unanticipated pressure to which the
                    barrier was exposed."

 H


                                                                     37.
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                       My Lord, as I say, I am               taking this quite shortly and
A                I think I asked your Lordship                then, just for the purpose of
                  illustrating our point under               barriers, to look at the
                  familiar drawing in appendix               4 of the Taylor report.   Just
                  to indicate to your Lordship               the areas that we draw
                  attention to.

                       First of all, the layout of the barriers and the gaps
g                between them.   These were excessive and exceeded the limits
                  prescribed in the Green Guide, in particular, if your
                  Lordship looks at pen 3, your Lordship can see barrier 124a
                  and it is the right hand two spans of that, as we look at
                  it, which collapsed.

                       Now immediately up the terrace from that there is a
                  gap in the line of barriers marked with a few dots,
q                indicating that they were removed in 1985. Now the width
                  of that gap is 2.32 metres, which exceeds the prescribed
                  width in the Guide, and if your Lordship now goes through
                  that gap and turns right towards the tunnel, the dotted
                  line represents the barrier 144, which was removed in 1986,
                  and the consequence was that immediately inside the tunnel,
                  in that area of the pen, there is effectively more or less
                  a square area which is completely without any barriers at
D                all.  The dimension of that square is 6 metres, front to
                  back (that is barrier to stand) and width is 6.3 metres
                  (that is from the end of the back line of barriers to the
                  central fence).   That is a very large area unprotected by
                  barriers altogether and that is what Lord Justice Taylor is
                  saying contributed to the collapse of 142a; those two
                  factors together.   I will ask Mr. Byrne to deal with that
                  in more detail when he gives his evidence.
E
         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: As I understand it, the role of the crush
             barriers is this; that they have a role as well to guide
             them, but the role of them is this: you calculate what
             kind of pressure, first of all, the human body can stand.
             Then you calculate what kind of pressure row upon row on
             people behind one another would transmit to the man in
 P           front. You must not have more rows than produce a pressure
             which is bearable.  That is a pressure against the barrier
             and the effect of having a series of barriers is that the
             pressure is contained within that barriered section.   So
             having built up to your acceptable limit, the man in front
             of that barrier is free of pressure and you start again
             with the build up of pressure down the next barrier?

 G                PAYNE:  My Lord, yes.   In a nutshell, your Lordship has it.
                  I am going to ask Mr. Byrne to look at the Green Guide and
                  in deciding how strong the barriers should be and what
                  force they should be able to withstand, there are tables
                  provided which take into account the steepness of the
                  terrace and the gaps between the barriers and the distance
                  between the barriers themselves; that is to say, gaps in a
                  line of barriers.  That is a factor which is included in
 H                the calculation and also gaps up the terrace, between lines
D.L . S E L L E R S & C O . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                    of those.  So one takes into account all those factors and
                    then decides what pressure has to be applied to see if the
                    barrier is safe.  There were breaches of all those
                    provisions which will show up when Mr. Byrne gives
                    evidence.  My Lord, we adopt Lord Justice Taylor's findings
                    that this caused the collapse of the barrier - this aspect
                    of it really.

B                        My Lord, I do not intend to say any more in opening
                    unless your Lordship would like me to elaborate upon it
                    because it would be repetition when Mr. Byrne gives his
                    evidence?

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  The absence of barriers higher up the
              terrace may have produced an excessive load on barrier
              124a, excessive in this sense; it is beyond what the human
q             frame can reasonably stand.  The fact that that barrier
              collapses may be neither here nor there because if it
              stands, it is going to cause injury?  If it fails there is
              going to be injury?

          MR. PAYNE: Yes.   I suppose one has to say "injury to who?” ,
              because it seems fairly clear that when the barrier
              collapsed, quite a number of people who were in front of
D             the barrier were then affected by that, by the surge
              forward by those who were behind it. My Lord, that is
              obviously a significant matter in the case.

                         My Lord, I do not know, I am looking at my note, and I
                    was not intending but if your Lordship would like to pursue
                    this point, then I am in a position in effect to show your
                    Lordship what the Engineer's evidence will amount to on
 E                  this point but I think it would be better to stick ----

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: I think it would be better to wait.    May I
               just say this; I am going to have to construe and accede to
               the Green Guide about the way of testing barriers because
               there is a difference between the Engineers as to what is
               required?

 F          MR. PAYNE:                  Yes.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: I am not sure that that is simply a matter
               of construction for me, unenlightened by the Engineer’s
               views, because it is a matter of technicality and I think
               the parties are entitled to put before me expert evidence
               to assist the construction?
 G
           MR. PAYNE: Yes.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                               As long as they say so.




    H


                                                                      39.
D.L. S E L L E R S & C O . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




^           MR. PAYNE: My Lord, may I just anticipate the examination of
                Annexe C so that when the evidence gets to it your Lordship
                may see it in the context of what we say is the cumulative
                effect of the faulty examining inspection and testing of
                the barriers.  If your Lordship has the Green Guide still
                at Chapter 9, your Lordship will see that this chapter
                deals with crush barriers and handrails and it prescribes
                various dimensions.  If your Lordship's eye runs down that
B               page to, first of all, 110, which prescribes the height of
                the top rail and says that it should be between 1.02 metres
                and 1.12 metres above the nosing of the step immediately
                behind the barrier, with a preferred height of 1.1 metres.

                           Our case is that a significant number of barriers were
                    lower than that, the point about it being that when there
                     is a strong crowd pressure, the pressure can be transmitted
C                   over the top of the barrier by people being pushed forward
                     so that their bodies press against the people in front of
                     them.   That is the significance of the low height of the
                    barriers, so that greater pressure is then transmitted down
                     the terrace and the barrier does not stop the pressure from
                     going over the top of it.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                             It stops only part.
D
            MR. PAYNE:                   That is right.            My Lord, further down this page, at
                113:

                                  "Ideally, crush barriers should be provided along the
                                  full width of a terrace, with gaps only at the radial
                                  gangways."

^                   Then over the page at 115:

                                  "Where there are gaps in the line of crush barriers
                                  these should be at least 1.1 metres and not more than
                                  1.4 metres in width."

                      Then 116:
 p
                                  "Column A in Table 1 opposite provides the maximum
                                  distances between barriers conforming to the greater
                                  strength requirements of crush barriers as described
                                  above; column B provides the maximum distances between
                                  barriers conforming to the lesser strength
                                  requirements."

 G                    Actually, it has to be said that it is not terribly easy to
                      construe, this paragraph 116, and it takes a little work,
                      but having done so the upshot of it really is very easy to
                      understand.   What it boils down to is that Dr. Eastwood
                      construed Table 12 and Table 2 over the page together (as
                      he correctly should have done) and he decided to apply a
                      maximum test load, which arrives by the combined
                       construction of these two tables.  So your Lordship does
 H                    not need to worry about whether he chose the right test
a ! ^
        D.L. S E L L E R S a C O . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




        ^                   load up and down the column of figures, because he chose
                             the maximum.

                                  However, the point which we put against him is that
                             that only works when you have got a proper layout of
                             barriers, because Table 1 and Table 2 are drawn up to
                             prescribe test loads which should be applied in the context
                             of the rest of the provisions of Chapter 9. The rest of
        B                   the provisions set out rules about the maximum gaps that
                             there should be between a line of barriers and the maximum
                             distance they should be moving up the terrace between
                            barriers, and there were significant breaches of ;both
                             those rules.

                                 If your Lordship still has Appendix 4, your Lordship
                            will see the significance now of the 2.3 metre gap
        C                   immediately upwind of 1240 (which collapsed) and of the
                            6 square metres of totally unprotected area immediately
                            inside the pen on entry from the tunnel - completely
                            unprotected.  My Lord, I will return to that when Mr. Byrne
                            gives his evidence.

                    MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  You do not solve that problem by
                        stiffening your barriers, because that simply means that
        D               the unfortunate squash against the barriers, if the
                        distance between barriers is too great, are going to get
                        hurt. You solve that by putting in more barriers.

                    MR. PAYNE:  That is our case.   Our case is that even though he
                        applied the maximum test, it was not relevant because the
                        layout of the barriers was so different from that envisaged
                        by this chapter of the Green Guide that the applied test
        E               load prescribed did not apply and the only way to have
                        solved it would have been to have made the barrier so much
                        stronger (as your Lordship says), and that would not have
                        solved the problem caused by the other breaches of the
                        layout of the barriers.   My Lord, I think it can be said
                        that once one gets to the stage that people are being
                        compressed against a barrier so much that they are likely
        P              to suffer injury, then something has gone wrong with the
                        layout of the barriers further up the terrace.

                                  I               pass on from that topic and that completes my
                             of the topics which we say are at the centre of the case
                             all reverting to the words "Unsafe System".  At page 13 of
                             the skeleton opening at paragraph 17 we make an overall
                             comment, which is that the issue by the engineer of the
        G                   unqualified safety certificates as required by the 1979
                             Safety Certificate was negligent by failing to draw
                             attention to any of the above defective systems.

                                  My Lord, we do not want to take a bad point by
                             appearing to pick simply upon the Safety Certificate, but
                             what we say about it - that is to say Dr. Eastwood's annual
                             safety certificate - is that it reflects his thinking, and
         H                  indeed the Club's thinking, about the safety of the ground


                                                                    41.
D.L. S E L L E R S & C O . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




 »                      repeated annually despite what we say are these numerous
                        defects in the layout of the ground which made it dangerous
                        for visitors.  So the Safety Certificate is merely a
                        convenient focus repeated annually of the mistaken belief
                        of the Club and the Engineer that the ground was safe, when
                        they quite clearly ought to have realised that what they
                        designed was not.

g                             My Lord, the opening now goes on to ask your Lordship
                        to look at the rather daunting prospect of the 45 issues
                        and the various comments which the parties have made about
                        them.   In response to your Lordship's helpful analysis
                        yesterday and suggestion of those three topics into which
                        the whole case could be divided, the parties have applied
                        their minds to this and I have to say that under the
                        stimulus provided by your Lordship I think we have at least
C                       been able to reach an informal agreement about the
                        usefulness of your Lordship's suggestions.   The first
                        comment, of course, is that they are welcome, and what we
                        have done is to look at the list of issues to see how they
                         can be collected and how they bear upon the three points
                        mentioned by your Lordship.

                              Looking at the three questions posed by your Lordship,
D                       what I am able to give you is a list of the issues which I
                         think we are agreed can be collected under each of the
                         topics, so then they can be dealt with in batches.    Under
                         topic 1 "Why did pressure build up at the turnstiles and in
                         Leppings Lane to cause the need to open Gate C " , the issues
                         which bear upon that are as follows: numbers 6, 7, 14, 15,
                         16, 17, 19, 20 and 25.  I ought to have given your Lordship
                         a trigger word for each of those paragraphs, which then
                         provided an index really to the 45 issues.  Paragraph 6 is
                         planning.

                               Would your Lordship prefer that this be typed out?   It
                          is quite short, but my learned friend Mr. Glasgow is
                          suggesting we might do that.

 F              MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                        Yes.

                 MR. PAYNE:  I will proceed to do that.  The exercise has been
                     done with the other topics as well.

                               Then what I will do, my Lord, is embark then upon the
                          list of issues.   The first few of them are introductory and
                          cannot be collected under any of these topics, but I think
 G                        that only applies to the first five.   The first one is the
                          one which deals with the Occupiers Liability Act, and the
                          issue is "Were the police acting as occupiers of the
                          stadium within the meaning of the Occupiers Liability Act
                          1957 on the 15th April 1989?"   So this is a mixed matter of
                          law and fact.   The short answer from the Police is "No"; in
                          support of that answer we ask your Lordship to look at a
                          number of documents and at, I think, three authorities.
D.L . S E L L E R S & C O . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




                           My Lord, altogether in answer to this we make eight
                      points and here they come:  The first point is that the
                      Police were not regarded as occupiers (this is in the
                      skeleton at paragraph 18) of the stadium in the context of
                      either of the Popplewell or Taylor enquiries.  Nobody
                      thought for a moment to suggest that the Police were
                      occupiers.  If your Lordship would just be kind enough to
                      look at the paragraphs in Taylor, at 292 - your Lordship
B                    has seen that paragraph already.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                             Yes.

            MR. PAYNE:   If it had crossed Lord Justice Taylor's mind for
                 a moment - or if it had crossed anyone's mind at the
                 Enquiry - to suggest that the police had any legal
                 liability under the Occupiers Liability Act, then this is
C               something which would have been ventilated and would have
                 found its way into Lord Justice Taylor's report somewhere,
                 and this would have been a convenient place.  Clearly, it
                was common ground - and nobody suggested otherwise at the
                 Enquiry — that the Club was the one who had a duty to its
                visitors, not the Police, in the sense of a statutory duty
                under the Occupiers Liability Act.   In the Taylor Enquiry
                Report also , at paragraph 160 or thereabouts---
D
            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I cannot help wondering, Mr. Payne,
                whether this is the most helpful way of formulating this
                issue and whether the more useful approach is to say "What
                responsibilities did the Police assume?"

            MR. PAYNE: Yes. We have thought about this - I am sorry if I
                am interrupting your Lordship---
E
            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                             No.

            MR. PAYNE:  The way I think the Police view it is this, that so
                far as negligence is concerned it will not make any
                difference to the case; either the Police were guilty of
                some culpable negligence or they were not, and whether or
                not they were occupiers will not make any difference.   The
                only way it will affect the case is if if they were found
                to be occupiers under the Occupiers Liability Act then they
                would owe a common duty of care to visitors and, as we
                understand the Act, that means a duty in respect of the
                state of the structure of the ground.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  In other words, whatever duties they
 G             assume, if they were to be regarded as occupiers that might
               extend those duties.

           MR. PAYNE:  Certainly, if that is right.  We say that only has
               to be formulated for it to be seen to be wrong, because the
               Police plainly were not responsible for the state of the
               structure of the ground.  For example - to take an example
               quite away from this case - suppose one of the spectators
 H             had fallen into a pothole or tripped on a loose stair rod
D.L . S E L L E R S & C O . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                       or something of that sort; that is the kind of thing that
                       the Occupiers Liability Act is concerned with - with the
                       structure of the ground.  No-one would suggest for a moment
                       that the Police had any responsibility for that under the
                       common duty of care.  So we say that the whole idea is
                       fallacious, to think that the Police can be treated as
                       occupiers, but since it is put against us we have to deal
                       with it.  So my Lord, that is our first comment, that---
B
             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: Actually, the issue is not were they
                 occupiers but were they acting as occupiers - it is
                 slightly different.

             MR. PAYNE: Yes.   My Lord, what we say, when one looks at the
                 Occupiers Liability Act, is that the whole context of that
                 Act is to do with the state of the structure and the common
C                duty of care owed to visitors by the person who has
                 responsibility for the state of the structure - it does not
                 apply to the Police.




D




E




 F




 G




  H
                                                             44.
D.L. S E L L E R S   a Co.   / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




A                                 My Lord, I am making these eight points so that your
                             Lordship has them.   I had looked at 292, and I was going to
                             ask your Lordship to look at another.   I was going to ask
                             your Lordship to look at paragraph 161 in the Taylor report
                             where Lord Justice Taylor is addressing a question which
                             has a direct bearing on who is the occupier.   He says this:

                                        "Who should monitor the Terraces?   Should it be the
g                                      host club via its stewards?   Should it be the Police?
                                        Should it be both? Or should it be by arrangement,
                                        depending upon the ground or section of the ground in
                                        question?

                                            In principle, a football club which invites the
                                        public to a match on its premises for reward is
                                        responsible for securing safety at that event."
C
                             So by the use of the word "invites", the learned Lord
                             Justice in our submission has it in mind that they are the
                             occupiers who are able to offer invitations to visitors.

                                  Then the quotation from the Popplewell Report is at
                             164 at the bottom of page 28 of the Report which your
                             Lordship has.  Your Lordship has seen this paragraph
D                            before.  The material part on occupation comes over the
                             page at page 29, where I am picking it up part way through
                             the quotation, about four lines down.

                                         "It cannot be too strongly emphasised that it is upon
                                         the club or the occupier of the ground who is putting
                                         on the function that the primary and continuing
                                         obligations rests."
 E
                             So he is, we say correctly, asking who is putting on the
                             function.  He is taking it for granted that the club is the
                             occupier of the ground.  If there is somebody else putting
                             on the function, then that other person would be the
                             occupier, but in neither case would it apply to the Police.
                             In the next paragraph, which is helpful to put it in
 P                           context, he says:

                                         "There remains, however, the question whether there
                                         are some grounds or parts of grounds where the club
                                         may need to rely upon the police (whom they pay to
                                         attend) to control filling of pens and monitoring them
                                         for overcrowding.   In other words, while the duty in
                                         law to ensure safety rests upon the club, they may
 G                                       need, and by agreement be entitled, to employ the
                                         police to act as their agents in certain
                                         circumstances."

                             This is the grey area that he said he would review in stage
                             2 of the Inquiry.

                     MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   I think Mr. Justice Popplewell is saying,
  H                      is he not, that clubs ought to realise that it is their


                                                              45.
D.L . S E L L E R S & C O . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




A                      responsibility? How they discharge that responsibility may
                       differ from case to case.  Paragraph 166 raises, it seems
                       to me, in relation to the role of the Police, the crucial
                       point.

             MR. PAYNE:                   Yes, my Lord, ji crucial point.

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                            Yes, quite.
g
             MR. PAYNE: A crucial point being, "What were the Police
                 actually doing there?", to which our answer is "The Police
                 were operating the system which had been provided for them
                 by the Club and the Engineer, by the design and layout of
                 the ground.   There was nothing else for them to do.    The
                 system was "find your own level." There was no separate
                 access to control separate pens.   It was all down to visual
c               impression and find your own level.   So what the Police
                 were doing was putting into effect the system which had
                 been designed for them by others.   That is what they were
                 doing, my Lord.                                     J

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:    Of course, if the Police had de facto
                 accepted responsibility for control of the pens, that does
                 not necessarily exclude others, that others ought to be
D               warned that "these pens are full or about full, and if you
                 open the gate, you must shut off the tunnel." The fact
                 that the Police have assumed responsibility for the pens
                  u ln§i t i would not, I would have thought, have absolved
                 the Club from the responsibility of giving that kind of
                warning, if they were in a position to give it.

            MR. PAYNE: My Lord, that is our case.   In fact, our case goes
                beyond that.  Our case is that the dangerous situation was
                created by the layout.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                             Yes.

           MR. PAYNE:  And the Police tried then to make the dangerous
               situation work, and their fault, as I have conceded, was in
               failing to realise that what they were trying to do was
               unsafe.  They failed to realise that what they had been
               given to work was a dangerous system.  So as to
               apportionment, it is for your Lordship to decide where the
               contribution line falls.

                          My Lord, those are the paragraphs in the Taylor Report
                     and the Popplewell Report which touch upon the question of
 G                   occupation.  This subject is not the most interesting in
                     the case but I am bound to deal with it because it is
                     raised against me by the other parties.

                          I make the next point of the eight points.  Your
                     Lordship will bring to mind the terms of the Safety
                     Certificate and the terms of the Certificate itself which
                     your Lordship looked at a little while ago.  It is issued
 H                   to the holder and occupier of the ground who is identified
D.L . S E L L E R S & C O . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




A                  as the Club.   The Safety Certificate is not a lightweight
                    document.   It is issued by statutory authority and one
                    which has to be complied with by numerous rules, and of
                    which the Club was reminded, as your Lordship knows, over
                    a number of years;   so it is a statutorily binding
                    document.   No-one for a moment would suggest that that
                    Safety Certificate was issued in any sense to the Police.
                    It is issued to the Club in the Club's capacity as the
B                  occupier.  That is our next point about occupation.

                          My Lord, the third point                          is to ask your Lordship to
                     look at the case of Wheat -v-                          Lacon. I hope your Lordship
                     has a copy of that report.

           MR.         JUSTICE                  JOWITT:     I have.

C          MR.        PAYNE: My Lord, this is the case where the manager and the
                     owners of the pub were both indicted as occupiers and it is
                     a case which is often cited.   My Lord, we say that it is
                     helpful in the context of this case because both of them
                     were responsible in different ways for the condition of the
                     structure of the premises.

                          The passage which we think might be helpful to your
D                    Lordship is at 589, beginning a little way down the page
                     under the citation where Lord Pearson is addressing himself
                     to the puzzle:

                                 "The puzzle is created by the references in three
                                 places to 'an occupier' and in one place to
                                 'occupational control'."

^                    My Lord, that is in the Statute, which I should have taken
                     your Lordship to already.  I will come to it immediately
                     after this reference.

                                  "I think the solution is to be found in the cases
                                 decided at common law, in which occupier's liability
                                 has been attributed or envisaged as attributable to
 p                               persons, such as building or ship-repairing or road-
                                 working contractors, who were or might have been in
                                 temporary control and therefore for this purpose 'in
                                 occupation' of premises or parts of premises of ships
                                 or roadways or road verges, although they would not be
                                 held to be 'in occupation' for the purposes of rating
                                 or tax law.   The foundation of occupier's liability is
                                 occupational control, i.e. control associated with and
G                                arising from presence in and use of or activity in the
                                 premises."

                           He then goes on by citing from Duncan v. Cammell
                      Laird, which is the dreadful submarine case:

                                  "It seems to me that the importance of establishing
                                  that the defendant who invites is the occupier of the
 H                               premises lies in the fact that with occupation goes


                                                                      47.
D.L. S E L L E R S & C O . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




^                                control.  The importance of control is that it affords
                                 the opportunity to know that the plaintiff is coining
                                 on to the premises, to know the premises, and to
                                 become aware of dangers, whether concealed or not, and
                                 to remedy them, or at least warn those who are invited
                                 to the premises."

                    My Lord, our general comment about that is that the whole
B                  gist of what is being said here is that it is all directed
                    to the state of the premises and that the occupier is the
                    person responsible for the structure, using the word that I
                    used.  The best example which illuminates the whole thing,
                    we submit, is the pothole, and the question of whether for
                    a moment anybody could say that the Police were occupiers
                    so that they were responsible in failing to afford the
                    common duty of care to a visitor who injured himself by
C                  falling into the pothole.

                         My learned friend has drawn my attention to the fact
                    that the Section is set out on the page, but I would in
                    fact prefer to the go to the Act, if your Lordship would be
                    kind enough to turn to the Occupier's Liability Act.

           MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT:                       Do I have this in Halsbury?
D
           MR.       PAYNE: Yes, I hope your Lordship does, under                           the
                     "Negligence" volume.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                               I do not know that I have got it before
               me.

           MR. PAYNE:    I hope we are in a position to give your Lordship
k               another copy.

           MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT:                       Wait a minute.

           MR.        PAYNE: I wonder if it would be a convenient moment to
                     break off, my Lord, so that we can make sure --- Does your
                     Lordship have it?

F          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                              No, I do not.

           MR. PAYNE:  I am so sorry.                              May we make sure that your Lordship
               has it?

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                               Will you do that?   Thank you very much.

G         MR. PAYNE:   I do beg your pardon.   We will make sure that that
               is available after the adjournment.   The point that we will
               be asking your Lordship to look at in the construction of
               the Occupier's Liability Act is that it is directed to the
               duty which is owed by an occupier to his visitors, meaning
               people who he has invited to come on to the premises, and
               what we say is that the central point to be observed is
               that the Police have not invited anybody to come on the
 H            premises at all;    the invitation has been issued by the

                                                                    48.
D.L. S E L L E R S & CO . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




^                     occupier, which is the Club, and the Police themselves have
                      been invited by the Club, in accordance with all the
                      various rules and publications which your Lordship has been
                      looking at, to come along and help with the management of
                      the crowd, so that the Police themselves are visitors of
                      the Club, having been invited by the Club to be there.
                      There is no further invitation issued by the Police beyond
                      the invitation which has already been issued by the Club.
B                     The Police merely have functioned for them, whereas the
                      visitors are there in response to the invitation by the
                      Club.  So that is the interpretation that we are going to
                      ask your Lordship to put upon the Occupier's Liability Act
                      after the short adjournment.

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I must say I wonder whether the real
                 question to be considered is what control did the Police
C                assume over the Leppings Lane end and pens 3 and 4.   I
                 cannot help thinking that that perhaps relates more
                 directly to what it was the Police were assuming
                 responsibility for.

             MR. PAYNE:                   Yes.

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  Rather than whether they were the
D                occupiers, because even if they were not the occupiers, it
                 does not mean that they have not assumed certain
                 responsibilities for themselves.

             MR. PAYNE:  My Lord, that will go to negligence, which is back
                 to the topic that most of this opening has been concerned
                 with.

E            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                           Yes.   2.15.

                                                           (Luncheon Adjournment)




F




G




 H
                                                                  49.
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




        MR. PAYNE: My Lord, I was about to ask your Lordship to look at the Occupiers'
              Liability Act 1957 which I hope your Lordship now has to hand. There is a
              volume of statutes which I think is flagged. My Lord, a clear indication
             of the application of this Act to the Police comes straight away in Section
\            1(1) which says:
                          "The rules enacted by the two next following sections shall have
                          effect in place of the rules of common law to regulate the duty
                          which an occupier of premises owes to his visitors in respect of
                          dangers due to the state of the premises or to things done or
                          omitted to be done on them."
B              Our submission is that there are two points to be noticed in that Section.
               First of all, the duty with which the whole of the rest of the statute is
               now going to go on to deal is the duty which an occupier owes to his
               visitors, not someone e lse!s visitors. So, these spectators were not
               visitors of the police. That is the first point that is made. The second
               point is that the dangers are related to the state of the premises or to
               things done or omitted to be done on them. The proper construction which
               we submit is that the Act, as certainly it is commonly applied in all the
C              authorities, relates to the structure and condition of the fabric of the
               premises and not to behaviour of people in them. That is what we submit
               the Occupiers' Liability Act is concerned with.
        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                     It would not appear in any event to extent to Leppings   Lane.
        MR. PAYNE: I do not think that even the Club goes as far as saying that.
® MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: I say that because      what was happening at Leppings Lane
       may be quite important when it comes to apportionment.
        MR. PAYNE: Yes. My Lord, I do not think the Club is saying that. They are
             merely saying that somehow we are occupiers of the ground. The identity
             of the relationship between the visitors and the occupier is repeated again
             in Section 2:
E
                           "Extent of occupiers ordinary duty. 2(1) An occupier of premises
                           owes the same duty, that is the common duty of care, to all its
                           visitors except insofar as he is free and does extend, restrict,
                           modify or exclude his duty to any visitor or visitors by agreement
                           or otherwise."
                Once again the occupier of the premises owes this duty to his visitors,
 F              and not to anybody else's. My Lord, this reflects the point I was
                endeavouring to make this morning which is that the invitation to the
                visitors to attend upon the premises was issued by the Club and the Police
                did not do anything in addition to add to the invitation which had already
                been issued. The spectators attended in response to the invitation issued
                bythe Club, not in response to anything done by the Police, and the function
                of the Police had nothing whatever to do with the structure or fabric of
                the premises.
    G
                      My Lord, may I ask you on the next point which we say is helpful to
                 determine the question of occupation, which is touched upon in the case
                 of Holden v White 1982 1 Q.B. 679. The headnote is helpful and perhaps
                 I can be forgiven if I read it:
                           "The only access to a row of five terraced houses was on foot
                           over a pathway which had been conveyed to the first defendant's
                           predecessor in title together with the first house in the row.
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                          Subject to a private right of way for the benefit of the other
                          houses. The first defendant who is the owner of the serviant
                          tenant let the first house to a tenant who lived in the second
                          and third houses. The plaintiff delivering milk to the fourth
                          house in the row trod on a defective manhole cover in the
                          pathway in front of that house and it broke, causing him to
                          injure his foot. He brought an action against the first
                          defendant claiming damages for negligence and breach of the
                          common duty of care. The Judge found the first defendant liable
                          under the Act and awarded damages."
3               There was an appeal by the first defendant who conceded that she was the[
                occupier and it was held allowing the appeal that the owner of land over
                which there was a right of way owed no duty of care at common law to those
                using the right of way, and that the 1957 Act did not extend common law
                duties to an occupier, and the first d e f e n d a n t s liability under the Act
                was restricted to her visitors. Although the plaintiff was lawfully using
                the right of way he was not the first d e f e n d an t s visitor and therefore
                his claim against her failed.
C
                      My Lord, in the judgment of Oliver L.J. at page 683 H, the Lord
                 Justice made a statement of general principle. Beginning at that
                 paragraph so that I take it in context:
                           "Certainly it was well established that in the absence of contract
                           the serviant owner had no duty at all to the dominant owner himself
                           to keep the way in repair and it is difficult to see any logical
D                          reason why he should have been burdened with a duty to the licensee
                           or invitees of the dominant owner."
       MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                        This is the visitors point.
       MR. PAYNE: It is. The rest of that paragraph emphasises the same point. We
            hope your Lordship finds that helpful. My Lord in a case which has come
            to life again in the course of the Inquiry and Lord Justice Taylor's report
E           Harrison v Sheffield United Football Club, this point also was touched upon
            and that is reported in I Q.B. 87 p.77. My Lord, the relevant passage —
            your Lordship will be familiar with the nature of this case which is referred
            to in the report of the Taylor Inquiry.
       MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                        Give me the reference again,
 p     MR. PAYNE: 1987, my Lord 1 Q.B. Does your Lordship                          not have that?
       MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                        I do not think I do, but anyway read it.
       MR. PAYNE: My Lord, this is the case in which the Police brought a claim against
            Sheffield United Football Club for payment for special police services which
            they were providing at a football ground as your Lordship knows. As far as
            this occupation point is concerned — I am sorry your Lordship has not got a
 G         copy. May I hand up a photocopy.
        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                        It is in fact 1988, not 1987.
        MR. PAYNE:               The passages in the judgment are at 92 D:
                            "Bearing these considerations in mind I return to the present
                            case. The club has responsibilities which are owed not only to
 H                          its employees and spectators who attend, but also to the football
                                                                    51.
    D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                              authorities to take all reasonable steps to ensure the game takes
                              place in conditions which do not occasion danger to any person or
                              property. The attendance of the police is necessaryto assist the
                              club in the fullfilment of a duty."
    \
                   If the question of occupation had arisen in that case, which nobody for a
                   moment thought that it did, but     if the question had been posed at that
                   moment, well it is not only the     club who are the occupiers    of the football
                   ground, but also the police, our submission is that it is quite clear that
                   the answer given by Lord Justice Neill would have been certainly they are
                   not. That is not the context in which the Police are attending the ground.
                   It is the Club who have these responsibilities in their capacityas the
    B              occupier.
                         My Lord, finally, I am sorry to    be tedious about this         exercise, at
                    page 93 over the page at B, the    Lord Justice said:
                              "If the club is to hold matches at Bramall Lane it is necessary
                              for police officers to attend inside the ground. Their presence
                              is necessary to enable the club to meet its responsibilities to
•   C                         the players, the staff and the spectators as well as to comply
                              with the rules imposed by the football authorities. It is not
                              necessary to determine what steps could be taken and by whom to
                              stop a match taking place if the club authorities declined to
                              allow the police to attend, but there is no likelihood that the
                              club authorities who have acted with a great sense of
                              responsibility throughout would take such a course. It maybe
                              that the request for the police services can only be implied
    D                         from all the circumstances, and it is made without enthusiasm.
                              If the police attend in order to enable the match to take place,
                              then in the circumstances existing in this case, I consider a
                              request to be implied."
                    So that is in the context of what the police were doing there at the
                    football ground in the circumstances of that case, but the judgment
    E               is plainly proceeding on the basis that it is the club who are the
                    occupiers and they are offering the invitation to the police and in
                    this case the learned Lord Justice is construing it as an implied
                    invitation.
                         My Lord, two more points just to complete this catalogue. They are
                    in the skeleton at page 14 at the bottom for your Lordship's note. The
                    point is made that the right of the Police to enter the ground — I
    F               perhaps rather optimistically said here — was conferred by law to provide
                    special police services under Section 15 of the Police Act 1964, so that
                    the Police were not occupiers. My Lord, the way in which that works is
                    under Section 2 of the Act, if your Lordship still has a copy of the Act.
                    I am sorry I did not refer to it earlier.
          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                        The Occupiers' Liability Act.
    G MR. PAYNE:                   Under Section 2(6) my Lord, it says:
                               "For the purposes of this section persons who enter premises
                               for any purpose in the exercise of a right conferred by law
                               are to be treated as permitted by the occupier to be there for
                               that purpose whether they in fact have his permission or not."
                     The authorities under that Section make it clear that the way it has been
     H               applied is in the case for example of a gas inspector attending somebody's

                                                                      52.
ii y
 \     D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                       house to read the meter and accordingly is allowed to be on the premises
                       and is treated as an occupier under this Section whether in fact he has
                       permission or not.
       A
            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: As a visitor.
            MR. PAYNE:                As a visitor.
            MR. JUSTICE OOWITT: Bringing these people within the          scope of his visitors.
            MR. PAYNE: Exactly, and the same would apply to a police officer executing a
       B         search warrant.




       D




       E




        H


                                                                    53.
    D L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




    ^         MR. PAYNE:  The situation here I recognise is not on all fours with
                  the two examples which are from authorities decided under that
                  section, but the fact is that the Police here were able to
                  attend to do whatever they did because of the power given under
                  the Police Act, 1964, Section 15 to provide special police
                  services.  They cannot .just do anything they like, but they are
                  empowered to provide these special police services and it is on
                  that basis then that they attended at the ground.   So, although
    B             I accept that Section 26 may not catch that notion fair and
                  square, it does, in my submission, lend support to the argument
                  that somebody providing special Police services, as the Police
                  were here, should not then find himself being treated as an
                  occupier of the ground, but on the contrary he is a visitor and
                  been invited there by the Club for that purpose.   That is the
                  argument about it.

•   C                        My Lord, that in fact completes the list.  I am not quite
                        sure if it came to eight, but that completes the list of
                        submissions that we make about the Occupier's Liability Act
                        which we say quite plainly does not apply for the principal
                        reasons which I said earlier in referring to the first
                        submissions I made under that head.

                              Now I go on to the agreed issues,       the first of which
    D                    fortunately is now out of the way.

                              My Lord, under these issues the next batch that has to be
                        looked at will be numbers two to five and they can generally be
                        described as introductory, so what I propose to do is to read
                        out the Police comments under the issues and then I don't know
                        whether my learned friends would care to read out their own
    g                   comments.   I am not inviting them to make speeches at the
                        moment or to amplify their comments, but since they are their
                        own comments it might be appropriate.

               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   I have read the list of issues text already.
                   Unless there are some special points you want to make to me at
                   this stage could we take them as read.   It strikes me it may be
                   more useful if, when a witness is called, when evidence is
    F              referred, I am told, well, this goes to issue so and so and at
                   that stage I can look at the issue and see what is contended.

               MR. PAYNE:   I am very happy to accept your Lordship's invitation to
                    abbreviate the exercise by not reading out the whole list.  I
                    say in parenthesis that this is an agreed list of issues to
                    which we have all, as it were, pleaded.   I express my own view
                   which is that I am very happy to address your Lordship
    G              selectively in the course of this opening on only those issues
                    which we regard as most significant.

                              Before embarking on that I would be grateful for a short
                         adjournment so that I can organise what I would like to submit
                         under that abbreviated form.


     H

                                                                 54
    D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   I would like to ask this question:  suppose I
    ^              come to the conclusion that the Police were not acting as
                   occupiers but the evidence leads to the conclusion that they
                   were in charge, are there issues which deal then, or is there
                   an issue which raises that question?   Are there issues that
                   deal with liability there?

               MR. PAYNE:  My Lord, my immediate response is that many of the
                   issues deal with that sort of question because they touch upon
    B              what was the responsibility of the Police in the situation with
                   which they were presented.

               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I ask the question for this reason: of course
                   I have heard only what you say about it, but I do wonder
                   whether it is somewhat artificial to ask if the Police were
                   acting as occupiers.  On the other hand, the matter which Lord
                   Justice Taylor refers to at paragraph 166, the factor of
•   C              accepted responsibility, if that is right, it does seem to me
                   to be important.  Leaving aside the first issues do the other
                   issues require that I make a finding about that.

               MR. PAYNE:  My Lord, I don't think this is contentious because I
                   have conceded in opening that the Police did accept
                   responsibility for trying to make the system work and that is
                   what we mean by the concession that the Police accepted the
    D
                   duty of monitoring the pens.  We accept it in the context of
                   the Police were trying to make the system work and in the sense
                   that that involves accepting responsibility then they did
                   accept responsibility.  We further concede that they were
                   mistaken in doing so because they should have realised the
                   system was dangerous.  That is our concession, so that I do not
                   know whether we need to go further than that.
    E
               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  You may like to consider whether some of the
                   red underlining in paragraph 166 can now be excised, even if a
                   caveat by way of explanation is to be added.

               MR. PAYNE:  My Lord, the only reason for the underlining was so
                   that your Lordship would understand.   If we left it open then
                   it might be open to misinterpretation.   We merely wanted to put
    F              the colour upon it now which I have in opening.

               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  Yes.   I will rise for a few minutes.                         Let me
                   know when you are ready,

               MR. PAYNE:                    Thank you, my Lord.

                                                                  Short adjournment)
    G
               MR. PAYNE:  My Lord, I am very grateful                         for that adjournment and I
                   think I have been able to reduce it                         by about two thirds.  My
                   Lord, may I say, of course, that by                         not referring to any
                   particular comments I am proceeding                         on the basis, as your
                   Lordship has kindly indicated, that                         you have read the comments,

    H

                                                                       55
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                   and I am only going to draw attention to those which may be
^                 helpful.

          MR. JUSTICE                     JOWITT: Yes. As I say, I                shall be happy to read them
              when we                     come to the evidence which              bears upon them.

          MR. PAYNE:   Yes.   My Lord, the first one then I think I need to
              refer to, although I am going to need a little help just to
              find the page in the bundle, is Mr. Chapman, issue 4, "Where
B            was Mr. Chapman when he sustained his injuries."       Page 15, my
              Lord.   I am not quite sure to what extent this is in dispute.
              It is not in dispute between the Club, I think, and the Police
              but I think the Engineer has reserved his position and from
              what he says in these issues it is not quite the same as what
              he says in his pleadings.     I hope I am going to be able to find
              the place.    I know that in the bundle now there is a document
              prepared by a policeman called Police Constable Coller which
C            shows the whereabouts of Mr. Chapman when he was      found in the
              pen.   That is shown by a coloured dot.    My Lord, it has gone
              into the bundle at 1238A and I hope therefore it is in your
              Lordship's bundle at that page, 1238A.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                                You are luckier than I am.     I have 1236 and
              1239.
D         MR. PAYNE:                    My Lord, we rapidly supplement your Lordship's bundle.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                                Thank you.

          MR. PAYNE:  My Lord, this is a document produced at the Inquest,
              part of the evidence of Police Constable Coller, who identified
              the position where he found Mr. Chapman by placing it on this
E             diagram and indicating by a dot.

                             As we understand the position this evidence presented to
                     the Inquest was agreed by all parties and accordingly our
                     answer to the issue "Where was Mr. Chapman when he sustained
                     his injuries," is in the position shown on this diagram, page
                     12 3 8 A .

F        MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT:                          May I enquire,    is that common ground.

           MR. TOULSON:  My Lord, I do not know.  I hear what my friend says.
               I imagine it is an acceptable agreement if the evidence is that
               that was where the body was found when dead.   I don't imagine
               we will be disputing that is the evidence that that is where
               the body was found when dead.

G        MR.         JUSTICE JOWITT:                         You are looking to see what the evidence is
                     and t h e n ...

           MR. TOULSON:                       Absolutely.

           MR. PAYNE:  That is helpful progress, my Lord.  The next issue has
               got a less complicated problem about it, number 5, "Where was
 H

                                                                          56
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                    Mr. Rimmer when he sustained his...
A
          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                               Just a moment,   this is pen 3 you are looking
              at?

          MR. PAYNE:  Chapman is pen 3.  The next issue, pen 5, is Mr.
              Rimmer.  Issue 5, page 18, Mr. Rimmer.   "Where was Mr. Rimmer
              ...."   Once again the Police and the Club have made an
              agreement on the basis of evidence given at the Inquest where t
B             similar blue dotted plan was produced and agreed.   The
              Engineer, at page 20 says he makes no admissions but the
              pleaded case is that it is admitted that Mr. Rimmer sustained
              the fatal injuries, and the Engineer's pleaded case, which I
              will refer to if I am called on to do so, is that he sustained
              his fatal injuries in pen 4 and the exact whereabouts in pen 4
              - I do not think really anything in this trial will turn upon
              it, so that if that is admitted then this is a convenient
C             moment for it to be recorded.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  What is it that you are asking for an
              admission of, simply that he was in pen 4?

          MR. PAYNE:  Yes,                          that he was in pen 4 when he sustained his fatal
              injury.
D         MR. TOULSON:  As my friend has said that has always been admitted
              on the pleadings.

          MR. PAYNE:                    Thank you very much.

          MR.       JUSTICE JOWITT: Does that mean I am not invited                              to go any
                    further in deciding whereabouts he was.

          MR. PAYNE:                    We are not asking you to.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                               May be others are.    We will see.

          MR.       PAYNE:   My Lord, that deals with those two issues. Now the
                    next issue is issue 6 which I need to just ask your Lordship to
                    look at simply to make a note of some page references which may
                    become material at some time during the trial.

           MR.       TOULSON: I do not want to recoil on the last point.   We have
                     absolutely no knowledge where Mr. Rimmer was and there is
                     nothing up my sleeve that I will be asking you later to find
                     that he was in a particular part---

           MR.       JUSTICE JOWITT:  It comes to this, if there is evidence,                            you
                     are not in a position to challenge it.

           MR. TOULSON:                      Absolutely.

           MR. PAYNE:  I think the point is that all the parties have the same
               evidence which is the evidence that was given at the Inquest.


 H

                                                                       57
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   You will be able to draw                Mr. Toulson's
^             attention to that.   Issue 6.

          MR. PAYNE:                   At page 21, My Lord.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                               Yes.

          MR. PAYNE:   This question is, in broad terms, and really our answer
               to this is the whole of the submission that I have been making
B             so far in the course of this opening so I am certainly not
               going to repeat that, but in comment (1) by the Police we list
               the various preparatory documents which were produced in
              advance of the hearing and they are all in the bundles now.
              For your Lordship's note the first document, Standing
               Instructions for Policing Football Matches is in the bundle at
               394.  The Association of Chief Police Officers' Guide is at
              699.   The Operational Order is at 942.  The Emergency
C             Evacuation Procedure is not in the bundle   and the debriefing
               reports of the 1988 match are at 869.

                         Your Lordship has seen the police comments which then go
                    on the next page, but as I say they actually are the Police
                    case which I have been trying to explain in the opening, so I
                    will pass on now to the next issue which we ask your Lordship
                    to look at and that is 8, issue 8 which is at page 31.




 G




 H

                                                                   58
    D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




              MR. GLASGOW: My Lord, I do not want to interfere but I wonder
    A             if my friend could just direct our minds towards issue 7.
                  We would like to know whether it is still the Police case
                  that is being opened, that the Police could have been aware
                  of flow rates, in view of the opened allegation that Mr.
                  Mole was told what the flow rates were.  I do not know
                  whether my learned friend can help us on page 28?

    B         M R * PAYNE:                  Mr. Mole was told of the flow rates?

              MR. GLASGOW:                       Yes, as the unchallenged finding of Mr. Justice
                  Taylor.

              MR. PAYNE:  If that is in the Taylor report and it is not
                  challenged, then I accept.  I cannot actually bring to mind
                  whereabouts it is but if that is so, then obviously we do
0   C             not dispute it.

               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I have no doubt you will be able to draw
                   my attention to any amendment on this issue, tomorrow
                   perhaps?

               MR. PAYNE: My Lord, 8, at page 31. This is an issue which it
                   emerges as having quite significant importance:
     D
                                     ’’Were the Police and/or Club and/or Engineer
                                     responsible for monitoring the control of numbers
                                     entering each pen on the 15th April 1989?"

                              My Lord, this again, really is answered by the whole
                         of the opening and is summarised under the Police comments
                         that the Police were not responsible because they did not
     E                   have a duty as specified by the Club.   There was no
                         mechanical or other system of counting.   No particular pen
                         had been allocated by ticket to any particular spectator.
#                        There was no certified capacity for each pen and the
                         primary responsibility for management is that of the Club."

                         And the negligence of the Club, I have already tried to
                         explain, so I will not do it again.  I pass over that.  To
     F                   go on, my Lord, with issue 9 ----

               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  Just before you do, this perhaps has some
                   relationship to issue one.  Ergo, that is why issue one
                   appears as an issue, I do not know, but bearing in mind the
                   acceptance, with the emphasis you place upon it, of 166 of
                   the Taylor report, it seems to me - if this is wrong you
     G             must tell me - that if the Police were in de facto charge,
                   albeit as you say operating an inadequate system, if there
                   were deficiencies in that system of which they knew or
                   ought to have known, then they would have a duty, would
                   they not, to take reasonable steps to avoid, so far as
                   reasonable practicable, the problems caused by that system?

               MR. PAYNE: My Lord, it is implicit that, as I have said, they
      H            ought to have realised that what they were being asked to


                                                                  59.
D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




                   work was a dangerous system.  If they had realised it was
                   dangerous, they would have done something about it, i.e.
                   they would have drawn the attention of the Club and the
                   Engineer to the dangerous system which had been devised for
                   them, and they themselves, the Police, would then not have
                   worked it. They would have said, "Well, we are not going
                   to police this ground until the ground is made safe."

g        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I am afraid my approach is a little
             different from that.  I would have thought that if in the
             terms of 166 of the Taylor report, de facto the Police had
             accepted responsibility for the control of the pens at the
             Leppings Lane end, then if there was, as you say, an
             effective system; if there were features of that system of
             which they knew or ought to have known, it is no answer to
             say, "Well, it shouldn't have been there", as they have
C            done. As it was there, they would have a duty, would they
             not, to take responsible steps to cope - so far as was
             reasonably practicable - with the dangers of safety which
             that system created?  So, for example, if they knew or
             ought to have been aware of the danger of overcrowding in
             pens 3 and 4 because there was no proper system of
             monitoring, that is something they would have taken on
             board in deciding, once the gates ceased to be open, that
 D           they would first take steps to see that the tunnel was cut
             off?

         MR. PAYNE: Yes. My Lord, our response to that is that it is a
             matter of degree.

         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                                 Yes.

 E       MR. PAYNE:   Those with the primary duty to design a safe system
             and those with the specialist knowledge and the statutory
             responsibility imposed through the mechanism of the safety
             certificate and charged with the guidance given in the
             Green Guide, they are the Club and the Engineer.    They are
              the specialists.  They own the ground.   The Club owns the
             ground.   The Engineer is employed as a specialist, as it
              says in his statement (which your Lordship has seen) with
              special experience in the design and layout of football
              stadia.  These are the specialists and the experts.   They
             have designed what the Police now recognise was a dangerous
              system.  I have conceded that the Police ought to have
             realised that the system was dangerous but their duty so to
              realise it and so to do something about it, is very much
              lesser in degree than their fault in failing to realise
 G           that it was a dangerous system.   It is very much less in
             degree than the substantial degree of fault of the
              specialists who created the dangerous system in the first
              place.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                                That would be a matter for argument on
              apportionment?

  H       MR. PAYNE:                    My Lord, that is what the case is.
    D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




    A        MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  Similarly, if the Police knew or ought to
                 have known because of the restrictive number of turnstiles,
                 that lots of people were not coming in on time - there was
                 going to be a build up - then they would have a duty to
                 apply their minds to the way that might affect crowd
                 control and safety in Leppings Lane?

             MR. PAYNE: My Lord, if your Lordship were to find that the
    B            Police had that duty, then that would be your Lordship's
                 finding.  Our submission about it would be that their duty
                 was very much lesser in degree than that of the Club who
                 were responsible for the decision for the allocation of
                 turnstiles and for ticketing arrangements and for layout of
                 the structure and the systems by which the crowd could then
                 get through the turnstiles and into whichever pens there
                 were.  So that is, in fact, discounting control.
•   C
             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  Referring now to apportionment: if the
                 Police knew or ought to have known that the turnstiles
                 could not cope, and the people were not coming in, so they
                 were more likely to be coming late; if they knew or
                 appreciated the consequences of that and a build up in
                 Leppings Lane, then they would have a duty to consider what
                 sensible steps should be taken to deal with the crowd
    D            control?

             MR. PAYNE: If they have that duty, I accept what your Lordship
                 says. My Lord, as I say, this is a case of apportionment,

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I had not really (inaudible) they had the
                 duty though. What I am suggesting to you and I would like
                 your comment, is this: if they were aware or ought to have
                 been aware of the effect of the late arrivals and the
                 inadequate number, you say, of turnstiles and the ability
                 to admit people, that should suggest you may have problems
                 where there is a build up of numbers in Leppings Lane, and
                 that knowledge would then impose upon the Police a duty to
                 consider how to cope with that and take reasonable steps to
                 cope with it?
    F
             MR. PAYNE:  Perfectly correct, my Lord.  If they were aware or
                 ought to have been aware of those problems, of course they
                 should do something about if,

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                                So it is a matter of what then you ought
                 to have known?

    G        M R « PAYNE:  Quite. My Lord, there is no argument about that.
                   My Lord, I make the comment that once one gets to that
                   stage, one is only looking, in your Lordship's question, at
                   the liability of the Police, and I appreciate that I keep
                   trying to expand it in the questions.  We would say that
                   the duty of the Police in that context, i.e. turnstiling,
                   ticketing arrangements and design and layout of the ground,
                   the burden is much more substantially upon the Club and the
     H


                                                                         61.
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                    Engineer - particularly with regard to ticketing and
A                   allocation of turnstiles - than it is upon the Police.

                          My Lord, what apportionment your Lordship arrives at
                    is, of course, a matter of judgment but our submission is
                    that the greater burden - in the light of the documents and
                    the things which we have shown - falls on the Club and
                    indeed the finding of Lord Justice Taylor, who says that
g                   the Club ought to have made the Police aware of the
                     ticketing arrangements, is a finding which we accept.  That
                    part of his finding is not disputed and we accept it and
                    adopt it as part of our case.

                          My Lord, I was asking your Lordship to look at Issue 8
                    and I was saying that I do not intend to repeat the
                    Police's case against the Club, which I have been trying to
q                   explain, but I do ask your Lordship, please, to look at the
                    comments made by both the Club and the Engineer in response
                    to Issue 8 because they are, we submit, very revealing.

                          My Lord, at page 34, the Club's comments appear, where
                     at the bottom of page 34, in answer to the question:

                                  "Were the Police responsible?":
D
                                 "Yes.  There was an agreement between the Police and
                                 the Club that the Police would be responsible for
                                 filling, monitoring and control of the Leppings Lane
                                 terraces.  This agreement had been reached in 1982,
                                 shortly after the installation of radial fences (at
                                 the request of the Police) in 1981.  Even if there
                                were no formal agreement, there was in any event a
 E                              clear understanding between the Police and the Club
                                 and a longstanding practice that the Police would
                                 fill, monitor and control the Leppings Lane terraces."

                                  I will finish it off:

                           "There is no practical distinction to be drawn in this
                           context between a formal agreement and a clear
                          understanding.   The Police accepted that the proper
                           filling of the pens and the monitoring for
                           overcrowding could not and would not be carried out by
                           Stewards (see Taylor reference).  The Police had
                           accepted de facto responsibility for the control of
                           the pens at the Lepping Lane end" (again referring to
                           Taylor).
 G                        Now what the Club is saying here is that the safe
                     capacity system was left to the Police to administer by
                     visual impression only.   The Club is making a virtue of its
                     own case but it has handed over to the Police entire
                     responsibility for filling, monitoring and controlling this
                     ground, giving it tools to do so only by lookout, and that
                     is our case against the Club. Your Lordship has it?
D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: Yes.   It is a question which may admit a
A             "Yes/No" answer; it may have to be commonised.  For
              instance, one might have to say, "Well, the Police were
              responsible for monitoring and at a given stage should have
              controlled the fans entering"?  In other words, need on
              their part is not triggered off until you reach a certain
              level?

g        MR. PAYNE: Yes.   The Club would like your Lordship to go along
             that road but our submission is that if a system is being
             designed which is dangerous, and which depends on lookout
             only, then it is not very appropriate for the person who
             has designed that dangerous system then to complain when
             the lookout does not work.  If lookout itself is not a
             satisfactory thing to do and we are told to do a lookout,
             then having taken on the burden of doing something wrong,
C            we are now being told, "Ah, well, you have done it wrong.
             You have not worked our defective system properly."  That,
             effectively, is what the Club is saying but we say that
             that rebounds vigorously against the Club for devising a
             dangerous system in the first place.

         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   I asked the question I did for this
             reason:  if there is an issue which does not admit a
D            straight "Yes" or "No", is it accepted that I may have to
             give a qualified answer and proceed to judgment on the
             basis of the qualified answer, if it is relevant?

         MR. PAYNE:   The answer to that question is that your Lordship's
             findings would depend upon your Lordship's assessment of
             the strength of the arguments that are put and your
             Lordship may make a finding part way between the two
E            arguments.   Certainly, we accept that.   That is a matter
             for your Lordship.    Our submissions are that we have been
             given a dangerous system.    We have, in our inadequate way,
             not realised that.    Now we are being criticised for not
             making it work.

         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I really raised the point now, Mr. Payne,
             because it would be unfortunate if I were, on some of these
             matters, to give a qualified answer - it is not just a
             straight "Yes" or "No" - and proceed to judgment on this
             basis and the parties lauer complained that the Judge
             should have either answered, "Yes" or "No." There is no
             halfway measure?

         MR. PAYNE:                    No.          We are not saying that, my Lord.
Q
         MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  In other words, if he did not answer "Yes"
             or "No", as the case may be, he could ignore this?

         MR. PAYNE:                     Oh, no.               No.

          MR. TOULSON: My Lord, I rise, it seems to ask this; that it
               seems the Issues are guides to the ultimate judicial
 H            function which your Lordship has before you and they are
    D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




                      nothing more nor less than that? This is not an action for
                      a declaration of right in the form of a particular set of
                      words, which an appellant court then says that the party is
                      wrongly advised.  They are there as an assistance to all
                      parties, to concentrate their minds on the evidence?



    B




•   c




    D




    E




    F




     H


                                                               64.
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                               To invite me to think about the   right
A              things.

           MR. TOULSON:   If at the end of the day your Lordship finds that
                the formulation of a particular issue was of no assistance
                to your Lordship at all in the judicial conclusion to which
               your Lordship arrives, that is your Lordship's judgment.

g          MR. GLASGOW:                       For the record, we agree precisely on that.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                               Thank you.

           MR. PAYNE:                    How pleasant to find us all in agreement!

                            My Lord, just completing this examination of Issue 8
                     and the answers which it has produced, we say that the
C                   Cl u b ’s comments  are most revealing (as I have mentioned).
                     The same applies to the Engineer at page 36. Here is the
                     Engineer’s answer to the question "Were the Police
                    responsible for monitoring and controlling the number
                     entering the pens?" He says:

                                 "The system for monitoring numbers entering each pen
                                was one of visual monitoring and control by Police
D                               and/or Stewards."

                     We say that is an admission of negligence by the Engineer
                     that he should say such a thing, because plainly with a
                     system of visual impression to monitor numbers going into a
                     track by pen 3 and 4 is an unsafe system.  He says "visual
                     assessment" further on.

E                         My Lord, Issue 9 provokes similar sort of responses
                     from the Club and the Engineer.  I will not read out the
                     Police comments because they have been well-rehearsed, but
                     the Club's comments, beginning at page 38, in answer to the
                     issue "Were proper measurements taken on 15th April 1989
                     to monitor and control the numbers entering each pen?" - I
                     do not take it out of context, as this is not my answer:

 ^                              "No.  On the 15th April 1989, the Police, whose
                                 responsibility it was to monitor the Leppings Lane
                                 Terraces, failed to monitor and control the Pens. No
                                 Police Officers were briefed as to their duty to
                                 monitor the pens for overcrowding."

                     Just pause there.  "What is this supposed to mean?" is the
 G                   Police comment "when nobody told the Police what the
                     certified safe capacity was of these pens, or by what means
                     they were supposed to accept the crowd going into the
                     pens." Then it goes on:

                                  "The Police Control Box provided the Officers in
                                  command with a pre-eminent position from which to
                                  monitor the Pens both by sight and by use of the
 H                                C.C.T.V. screens situated in the Control Box.  Those


                                                                      65.
    D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




     .                                 Officers should have monitored the terraces ........
                                       The Commanding Officers could see the build up of the
                                       fans on the terraces and were regularly provided with
                                       the numbers of spectators in each section of the
                                       ground by P.C. Guest who was situated in the Club's
                                       control room for this very purpose."

                               It looks here as if the club did not themselves
    g                    realise that the provision of numbers of spectators
                          entering through the Leppings Lane turnstile was of
                          absolutely no value at all to the Police because it did not
                          tell them the vital information which it turns out they
                          needed about pens 3 and 4.  So the Club here seem to be
                          advancing the case that it was quite adequate merely just
                          to give overall figures without breaking them down.  If
                          that was their state of mind and they did not realise the
    C                    danger in their system, then their culpability, we submit,
                          is substantially increased.  They are here falling into the
                          error which we submit about visual impression, by saying
                          that the commanding officers could see the build up.  So
                          they are saying the system depended upon look-outs, which
                          is the very system they are criticising.

                               My Lord, over the page at 40, the Engineer makes
    D                    similar comments.  If this is true - well, it is true,
                          where the Engineer says in answer to the question "Were
                          proper measures taken to monitor and control the numbers?":

                                       "On 15th April 1989 there was effectively no system of
                                       monitoring and controlling numbers entering each pen.”

                           Our case exactly. We say "What a disgraceful admission,
     E                     that after certifying the ground safe year by year it
                           should be said that on a full capacity crowd day when large
                           numbers were to attend---
#                 MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I think when you look at that sentence in
                      context you will see that the Engineer and you are saying
                      two different things.

                  MR. TOULSON:  Absolutely.  My Lord, my friend also - and it is
                      not my turn now to argue the case - when he drew particular
                      attention to our answers on Issue 8, read the first
                      sentence, to which I have no objections.  When one reads
                      the full answer on question 8 and the full answer to
                      question 9, I think it becomes clear what we say.

                  MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                            You say it cannot be done that way.

                  MR. PAYNE: We say actually the first sentence here is quite
                      true. His answer to 9 is perfectly true; there was no
                      effective system of monitoring and control. Visual
                      impression is no system, so we agree with the statement of
                      fact.  Fault is something which will be for your Lordship
                      to decide.  That is all I need to say about 9.
      H


                                                                          66.
D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




                                 My Lord, similar comments are made at 10:

                                 "Should a system have been instituted for informing
                                 Police and/or stewards when pens were approaching
                                 capacity?"

                    That is something well-trodden in the course of this
                    opening and it will not help me to say more about it. The
B                   Club and the Engineer will repeat their position in their
                    comments, but that is the Police's fault for not properly
                    monitoring the numbers.  I have said enough about that.

                          The next issue that I need to refer to is 11, for the
                     Club's comments at page 48:

                                 "Should the Police and/or the Club have observed that
                                 pens 3 and 4 were full or at least approaching
                                 capacity by 2.45?"

                                 The Club says:

                                 "Yes.  The Police should have observed that pens 3 and
                                 4 were approaching capacity by 2.45 and were full by
                                 2.50."
D
                     What do they mean by full?

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  Of course, Mr. Payne, there is no doubt
               that the best way of being able to say whether a pen is
               full is if you count them in, preferably by some automatic
               device. It does not follow that anything short of that is
               useless.
E
           MR. PAYNE:                   No, we say it is unsafe, my Lord - that is our
               case.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  One might be forgiven for suspecting you
               are saying "Unless you can prove that, there is no other
               way ....(inaudible).

 ^         MR. PAYNE:  There must be a system of counting; it has got to
               come to numbers.  It cannot depend upon impression - "I
               think it looks fairly full now"; or "It looks as if it
               might be a bit full; perhaps we will let some more in,
               perhaps we won't", because it depends entirely on the whim
               or misjudgment or judgment of whoever's eyes happen to be
               looking at it on any day.  So it must depend on counting.
 Q
                          My Lord, this is an engineering matter.  An engineer
                     was employed in the first place, quite correctly, to carry
                     out the important duty of providing the figures for the
                     Safety Certificate.  So it is not a matter of commonsense;
                     it is not a matter of common judgment on which any police
                     officer who happened to be drafted in or any steward who
                     might happen to be given the job should be called upon to
  H                  discharge the burden of having to make a guess of how many


                                                             67.
D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                      people there happened to be there.  I am saying in a long-
                      winded way that it depends on numbers - counting.  I have
                      said that enough.

                           I go on now to the next issue, 12, my Lord:  I draw
                      attention to this one only because it is a question which
                      exactly has been asked by your Lordship, and the parties
                      have commented upon it exactly.
B
            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                               And you all agree that the answer is
                "Yes".

            MR. PAYNE:  I think we are all agreed that the answer is "Yes",
                perhaps for different reasons.  So perhaps that will help
                your Lordship about apportionment between us.

q                          I now go on to 16. My Lord, this is a new topic which
                      I have not canvassed in opening and will be dealt with by
                      Mr. Phillips in the course of his expert evidence, at
                      page 67:

                                   "Were proper measures taken to prevent the build up at
                                   the turnstiles?"

 D                    The Police comments about this are as follows:

                                    "1.         Police planning and operation measures were
                                                reasonable and not negligent and similar to 1988
                                                when they had worked well.

                                      2.        Measures to check the advance of the crowd at
                                                places on the approach to the ground."
 E
                      Your Lordship will have this idea in mind which has been
                      canvassed in expert evidence, and it is being said against
                      the Police that they ought to have had a sort of filtering
                      system or a holding system at various stages along the road
                      to hold back the crowd so as to prevent the build up at the
                      turnstiles.  We understand that is what is going to be
                      said. We do not accept that for a moment. Here in
                      paragraph 2 is a digest of    the Police case,although it
                      will be given in more detail by Mr. Phillips.

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  A couple of Land Rovers across the road
                 form an effective barrier.

             MR. PAYNE:  I am not sure they mean Land Rovers;  I think they
 q               are suggesting those crowd control barriers  that you see at
                 royal functions.  I do not know what they want, but they
                 are saying that we ought to have done something like that.

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                              That, or you could get those very quickly.

             MR. PAYNE: Yes.   Perhaps they should have some Land Rovers
                 standing by.  But Mr. Phillips, who is very experienced at
    H            policing football matches - and your Lordship will hear


                                                                       68.
D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                     from him of his own experience and his experience on other
                     occasions - says that he has never known this to be done in
                     a ground such as Hillsborough, and in general to have done
                     it on this occasion, particularly when one calls to mind
                     the very sudden congestion which developed outside the
                     turnstiles after half-past two and onward to three o'clock
                     and large numbers of people arrived at that time - I am not
                     saying late, but they all arrived at that time.
B
                          When one looks at the behaviour of certain sections of
                     the crowd, the Police view is that if there had been an
                     attempt to hold up the progress of the crowd further back
                     along the road, then all this would have done would have
                     been to push the problem a little bit further away from the
                     ground to cause even more turbulence in the crowd at that
                     distance from the crowd, as people were anxious to get down
q                   to the turnstiles knowing that the time for kicking off was
                     approaching.  In due course the Police could not have held
                     them up indefinitely and had they let them advance in
                     batches (which I think is being suggested by their expert,
                     Mr. Stalker) the behaviour that one can see and the anxiety
                     to get to the ground, the Police view is that this would
                     have been a dangerous and unsafe thing to do and would have
                     foreseeably have led to the risk of people falling over and
D                   being trampled and injured as large sections of the crowd
                     surged forward.

                          If they were to be let forward in a trickle, this
                     would have been of no attraction because of the very large
                     numbers who arrived at one time.   So the idea of holding
                     them back away from the ground, although superficially is
                     attractive when it is first stated in practice it would not
 E                  have worked at all.   In practice, such a notion is never
                     used on an occasion such as this at other similar grounds.
                     My Lord, in a nutshell that is what the case is.

                           So it is boiled down in paragraph 2 to these comments,
                      that such a system had not been required on previous
                      occasions and that it would not have worked against the
                      behaviour of a large number of late arrivals and would have
                      caused the risk of crushing and injury at the point where
                      the crowd was held up, and had the risk of trampling where
                      the crowd was allowed to mcrT_ jn. I nave made the comments
                      that the reason for the build up is something which I have
                      dealt with about ticketing and turnstiles in the course of
                      opening.  That is 16.

 q                                 My Lord, I go on now to 21 at page 84:

                                   "Should precautions to avoid an influx into pens 3 and
                                   4 have been taken before or at the same time as
                                   opening Gate C?"

                      My Lord, I stop on this issue because this really is one of
                      the other issues which your Lordship expressly stated and
  H                   it does act as an umbrella for many other aspects of the


                                                              69.
D .L . S E L L E R S & C O . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                    case.  The Police comments are that at the time, the lack
A                   of precautions by the Police was not negligent because
                    there was no one in authority, and then we make a list of
                    the people not in the same authority as the Police but in
                    positions where they did have a duty to take an interest in
                    what was happening in the crowd, which are the Police, the
                    Club officials in the ground, Members of the St. John's
                    Ambulance Brigade, F.A. officials who attended, the
g                  television commentator who is referred to, and the officers
                    of South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service.   None of
                    those people, according to the evidence, recognised the
                    overcrowding in those pens until it was too late.   So the
                    Police were not alone in failing to appreciate that what
                    was happening was dangerous.

                         Secondly, the total number of tickets did not exceed
C                  the total certified capacity so that the overcrowding was
                    not expected.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   That cannot follow for this reason.  If
               the system says there should have been monitoring of people
               into pens - and certainly there would not have been
               overcrowding, providing the standing enclosures are small
               enough - but when you have got seven turnstiles serving one
D             area which can accommodate (or be said to accommodate)
               10,100 people and people can go where they choose, the fact
               that you are not selling more tickets than there is
               standing room for does not seem to me to lead one to say
               there will not be any overcrowding - it depends where they
               go.
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




A            MR. PAYNE: Quite, my Lord. As your Lordship expresses it,
                 everyone can understand that.

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                             You say that that is just the wisdom of
                 hindsight?

             MR.        PAYNE: The fact  is, my Lord, that at the time the Police
                       thought that the  system of 'find your own level' would work
B                      and so did everyone else - everyone else meaning the
                       parties before the court.   They expressly intended that the
                       system should be the 'find your own level' system.

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  Finding your own level involves a
                 recognition that there is no counting into individual pens.

             MR. PAYNE:                    Certainly.
C
             MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT:  People go where they like until they say
                       "It's going to be jolly uncomfortable to go in there, so we
                       will go somewhere else."

             MR. PAYNE:  Certainly;  a very dangerous system.  My Lord, that
                 is the case, and we are here to invite your Lordship to
                 apportion blame between the parties.

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   Yes.  I merely say - and the evidence may
                 persuade me otherwise - I have read all the experts'
                 reports and I do not understand why it is said that because
                 it is a ticket match there is no need to expect
                 overcrowding.   There is no need to expect overcrowding in
                 the seating areas.

®             MR. PAYNE:   My Lord, I am addressing your Lordship from the
                  point of view of the Police.    The Police knew that the
                   terrace had a certified capacity and they knew that the
                  number of tickets sold was going to be the same as the
                   certified capacity.   They knew that the system was 'find
                   your own level', not out of choice;   the Police did not
                   invent that system.

F             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                            No.

              MR. PAYNE:   They were given the structure of the stadium and
                   they merely let the structure work.   Accordingly, there was
                   nothing to direct the minds of the police officers to the
                   risk of overcrowding, and the fact that only the safe
                   certified capacity number of the terrace tickets was being
G                 sold misled the   Police into thinking that there was no risk
                   of overcrowding.   Indeed, Lord Justice Taylor in his
                   report, as your Lordship remembers, says that the risk of
                   overcrowding simply was not considered.

              MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                            Yes.

              MR. PAYNE:   When they opened Gate C, they thought it was quite
 H                safe.  They did not realise that there was this danger, the
D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




^                    reason being that the Police are not the specialists here.
                      They have been given the system and they are merely letting
                      it work.  My Lord, the system depends on lookout, which is
                      a dangerous system, and lookout did not work.  My Lord,
                      that is what we say in answer to your Lordship's point.

                           At 21(iv) we make the same point that I have just been
                      endeavouring to explain, namely that "visual impression was
B                    not effective and apart from visual impression, there was
                      no system to indicate that the pens were full."

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  It may be that a point of consideration
                may be that there was no need to anticipate this because
                there had not been any trouble since 1981.   I think there
                was some overcrowding in 1981.

C           MR. PAYNE: Yes, there was an overcrowding incident and that
                led to the introduction of the first radial fences.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                               That is a point that can be argued both
                ways.

             MR. PAYNE:                    Yes.

D            MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT:                       That may be a point of some significance.

             MR.        PAYNE: Quite.   Your Lordship has in mind the specialist
                      point, i.e., "Who is it who has the responsibility to
                       consider these things in advance?" The comments which your
                      Lordship is making now about how dangerous it was are
                       something that could easily be understood now by the man in
„                     the street.   The point is that there are specialists here
                      who are running the ground and who are employed to give
                       this sort of advice, whose job it is to foresee these
                       things and to provide for them in advance.   Regrettably,
                       that has to be our case, and it is.

                            I ask your Lordship to look at Issue 22 at page 90.                           I
                       ask your Lordship to look at it because it reflects
 p                    something that you mentioned this morning.

             MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT:                       Yes.

             MR.        PAYNE: "Were all the relevant individuals warned of the
                             opening of Gate C so that appropriate precautions
                             could have been taken?

 G                                  Police Comments:

                                    1. The opening of Gate C was shown on the CCTV
                                    screens in the Club control room where it was seen by
                                    the Club's Chief of Security, Douglas Lock, who was in
                                    radio communication with the Club's stewards."


 H


                                                                       72.
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




^                     We will make sure that your Lordship has this evidence
                      during the trial about Mr. Lock's response to the opening
                      of Gate C.

                                  "3. The appropriate precautions against the emergency
                                  which should have been taken were in the design of the
                                  layout of the structure, certification of the capacity
                                  of each pen, and the provision of a system of counting
B                                 and control of numbers going into each pen.   These
                                  were the responsibilities of the Club and the
                                  Engineer.

                                  4.   Any mistakes by the Police made under the
                                  pressure of the emergency by failing to warn anybody
                                  were not negligent."

C                   My Lord, that is 22.  I ask your Lordship to look at 23.              I
                     ask your Lordship to look at this Issue, which says:

                                  "Did the opening of Gate C without taking appropriate
                                  precautions cause or contribute to the disaster and
                                  the death of the deceased?"

                     I pause on this because it is a subject which your Lordship
D                   has touched on in the course of the opening, and perhaps
                     there is something which I failed to mention last time that
                     your Lordship raised this topic.  It is this:  that it
                     should not be forgotten that Gate C itself did not lead
                     directly into pens 3 and 4.  So all that opening Gate C did
                     was to let people into the concourse.

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                            Yes.
E
             MR. PAYNE:   So there was a reservoir area, as it were, on the
                 concourse where the people could have been allowed to
                 congregate to relieve the pressure outside the turnstile,
                 and if there had been a counting system into pens 3 and 4,
                 that would have had two advantages:   (1) The number who
                 had already gone in would be known on the television screen
 P              and (2) when some more went in, having come through Gate C,
                 then they would have been counted, so the capacity would
                 not have been exceeded in those pens.   I hope that is
                 helpful.

                            My Lord, I do not think 24 adds anything to the
                       arguments which your Lordship is now familiar with.

 G                          I go on then to 35. My Lord, this is repetitive.    It
                       is merely setting out points with which your Lordship is
                       very familiar and I do not have to trouble your Lordship
                       with that.  I am sorry to be a little bit disjointed in
                       this exercise, but I am trying to avoid repetition.

                                   At 36, my Lord, page 144, the Club comments

 H


                                                                   73.
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




^                                  "Did the c e r t i f i e d c a p a c ity o f  the t e r r a c e cause or
                                    contribute to the disaster and the deaths of the
                                    deceased? Answer, yes.                The lack of certified
                                    capacity for each pen caused the disaster because the
                                    whole certified capacity crowd on the west terrace of
                                    7,200 could attempt to enter any one of the pens
                                    without a breach of the certificate and without a
                                    certified capacity for each pen, no-one knew when it
B                                  was full."

                        My Lord, 43, at page 171, is a new topic.  To get the facts
                        which this issue is founded upon, it is necessary just to
                        look back at Issue 41 at page 165.  The point about the
                        gradient in the tunnel is that it is said by the Police, as
                        your Lordship will have seen in the photographs, that as
                        one goes through the tunnel, first of all there is a slight
C                       rise, and then shortly before one comes out into the open
                        there is, we submit, quite a noticeable downward slope
                        which would have the tendency of accelerating the progress
                        o f ---

              MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                           It   i s ju s t over two metres lo n g , i s i t
                  not?

D             MR. PAYNE: I t i s v e ry s h o r t .   My Lord, the p a r t i e s v e rs io n s
                  about the gradient are set out in their answers to 141.                      My
                  Lord, this is not a major point in the case, so I do not
                  spend a great deal of time on it. When the issue was posed
                  to us by the Club and the Engineer, we accept without
                  arguing that it is an issue in the case, but at 171 the
                  Police give their comments on the question of whether the
                  gradient caused or contributed to the death of the
                  deceased.  I hear what my friend is saying.                  This is an
                  issue which was originally raised by the Police, so I am
                  taking this opportunity now to put it in context and to say
                  that it is not a major issue in the case that your Lordship
                  will be troubled with.            A small victory there for the Club
                  and the Engineer!

p                            My Lord, the last topic now is tickets, which is Issue
                        44 at page 174.  The issue was "Did the tickets or signs at
                        the Club cause or contribute to the death of the deceased?"
                        The Police comments are, "Yes, negligence of the Club and
                        Engineers by failing to comply with the Green Guide."   I am
                        so sorry to ask your Lordship to go back one last time to
                        the Green Guide in the course of this opening.   This is a
                        paragraph which has been passed over but not landed on
G                      several times, at 57.   It is self-explanatory and it says
                        that there has got to be a good system of signposting.    So
                        we say that there is a breach of the Green Guide here, and
                        we say that the effect of that was "preventing dispersal of
                        the crowd and it caused a concentration of spectators in
                        pens 3 and 4 attracted by the only significant notice,
                        'Standing'." Has your Lordship seen a photograph of what
                        confronted the spectators as they came through Gate C and
H                      headed
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




             MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT: I have not got the photographs,                         no.

             MR.        PAYNE: It might be convenient at the moment for your
                       Lordship to look at a photograph which shows the prominence
                       of that 'Standing' notice.  Might I ask your Lordship to
                       take the exhibit bundle to the Plaintiff's engineer's
                       expert report?  It is one of the white bundles and it is
                       the bundle with Tabs A, B, C, D.

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                             Yes, I have got that.

             MR. PAYNE:                    The photograph is at Tab D3.

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                             Whereabouts in Tab D3?

             MR. PAYNE:  If they are like ours, it should look like that.
C               (Indicating).

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                             Yes, I have got it, thank   you.

             MR. PAYNE:                    It is the first one.

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                             Yes, I have it.

D            MR. PAYNE: Your Lordship sees the entrance to the tunnel with
                 the word "Standing" over it.

             MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT: Yes.

             MR. PAYNE:  Does your Lordship also have a bundle of
                 photographs called West Midlands Police Composite Album 2?
                 To save your Lordship searching, I wonder if I might hand
E               this one up?  It is photograph No. 17.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:    Wait a minute, I have got a whole pile of
                 photographs here.   Which one are we looking at?

             MR. PAYNE:                   17 in Album 2, please, my Lord.
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




      MR. PAYNE: My Lord, I do not know whether the numbering of the bundles quite
           corresponds. Is it called West Midlands Police?
      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: No, South Yorkshire.
A
  MR. PAYNE: My Lord, may I abbreviate this by asking your Lordship to look at
       this photograph. My Lord, this is a view. The photographer is just inside
       gate C which is behind him to his right and the turnstiles behind him. This
        is a view available to poeple coming through the turnstiles and also through
       gate C at the back of the west stand, and the only obvious notice which
       directs them to go anywhere is that standing notice under the tunnel. There
        is in fact over to the right and out of the photograph a very small and
B      another notice which indicates that people can go round the corner, but that
        is certainly not obvious and not shown in any of the photographs. The only
        one which anybody could easily see, especially as kick-off approached, was
        that one.
      MR.       JUSTICE JOWITT: I suppose one problem is that once they call come on to
                the same concourse, however well you label it, those who know what football
                grounds are like may say well, the tunnel is the best place because we shall
^              be behind the goal and that is I read where the crowd like to be.
      MR. PAYNE: My Lord, and that would apply to the people who come through gate C
           or whether they had continued to come through the turnstiles if they continue
           to operate.
  MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: You are only going to avoid the attractiveness of the tunnel
D     if when you are full up you shut it off.
      MR. PAYNE: Certainly. My Lord, that is our case, there should have been a
           system to prevent.
      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: While I can see the importance of good labelling, I am not
           sure that it really has much bearing on causation inthis case.
E MR. PAYNE: Well it is certainly subsidiary to the other things I have explained
      to your Lordship. It is a factor in the case. We say it is part of the
      system of control. It directs people where to go. The system of control
      does not just consist of having turnstiles and counting mechanism, but it
      also does involve directions to spectators to go to particular areas, so
       it is part of the overall system to which attention should be paid; but
       it is not so important as the counter and turnstiles. My Lord, that is our
       submission.
F
            My Lord, that completes my opening, I am sure everyone will be relieved
      to hear. With your Lordship's permission I will go on to call the evidence.
      My learned friend indicates, and he reminds me, that at an interlocutory stage
       it was discussed that after the opening statement the other parties would make
       oral responses or comment. I remember that happening.
       MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: If it was before me, what I had in mind was not oral responses
            but — in fact the opening statement did not arrive before — but very very
            brief written responses. I do not how far it is really going to be useful
            at this stage to have to take notes.
       MR. GLASGOW: My Lord, I do know if I can help you about that, probably least of
            all because I was not there. It was in Newcastle my Lord.
 H MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                             It is a long way from London.

                                                                  76.
D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




   MR. GLASGOW: My Lord, I am sorry I was not there but I think you can take it
        that almost everybody else was. I am the first who is caught by it. Your
        Lordship's idea was that we have a written opening from the Police and that
 .      thatwould be delivered within ten days and we would have a chance of replying
        to it. I make no criticism. Nobody could have witnessed what my learned
        friend has done in the last two days without having genuine admiration for
        it. It would be uncharitable to sneer about it. Of course, the difficulty
        was he was pretty badly let down. We should have had the opening long before
        he had to take over and we were getting very concerned about that last week
        and were preparing openings ourselves.
B                    The difficulty now is that we are in your Lordship's hands. I think
                for Mr. Toulson and myself, we are more than happy to give you the briefest
                of possible responses of the cuff tomorrow morning if it would help so that
                you know roughly where we stand, or alternatively we can go on with the
                evidence. If we are to move directly to the evidence I think probably both
                of us would want one or two matters clarified as to quite where we are going
                evidentially before we go further. The most important thing to say that if
                your Lordship wanted to know anything from us about how we put our case
C               now or at any time at your Lordship's convenience, you can ask and we will
                do our best to tell you.
      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: If you would both like to address me very shortly to say
           this is the way we are trying to steer, perhaps tomorrow morning at half
           past ten .
      MR. TOULSON: I am entirely in your Lordship's hands. I am happy to do that or I
D          am happy to try and get something in writing. It will not I am afraid be by
           tomorrow morning. I am in your Lordship's hands.
      MR. GLASGOW: Well perhaps my Lord if it not inconvenient could we then address
           you very briefly --
      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                           I will do whichever you find more convenient.
®      MR. GLASGOW: Could we then address you very briefly tomorrow morning. Your
             Lordship would also have the opportunity of thinking if there is anything
             that you would like clarification of we will attempt to deal with it in
            my case off the cuff. It is an opportunity for your Lordship to see where
             the real issues are. We would certainly welcome any points that you would
             like to put to you that will help clear the air.
 p     MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:     I would like you both to think about the utility of issue 1.
             It is somewhat artificial as regards the police as occupiers, and I do not
             know that it is really the best way by which to arrive at the idea of what
             Police's duty is.     They were in overall charge and I stress the importance
            of the right emphasis, which Mr. Payne accepts. Then I think one asks what
            did they or should they have known and what steps arise out of that. I
             suspect that is the way that one will arrive at the knowledge of what the
             Police ought to have done.
 G
      MR. GLASGOW: My Lord, it is a matter of no concern either to my friend or to
           myself as to the answer your Lordship comes to to the question of whether
           they are occupiers for the purposes of the 1957 Act. The issue had to be
           included because of course we did our best loyally to reflect the pleaded
           issues raised by the plaintiffs in the action and reflected by the issues
           joined between the parties, and it would have been a disservice to try to
           excise matters at that stage.
 H
     D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                       If you are content that I ignore that.
       MR. TOULSON: My Lord, it seems to me it is really a matter on that one between
            the Club and the Police on which I have no direct interest. My own penny
     A      worth of thought for what it is worth is this: my friend has indicated by
            his opening that indeed to bring himself within the Act on which he relies
            he accepts that the facts if proved against him would have caused a
            liability on his part towards the plaintiffs in this action, the estate of
            Mr. Chapman and Mr. Rimmer. Once it is accepted that the Police owed a
            duty to Mr. Chapman and Mr. Rimmer it does not appear to me that it is going
            to influence the extent of that duty, whether it arises at common law or
            under the Act, one way or the other.
     B
             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                       It is a duty of care — what they should have done.
             MR. TOULSON: Your Lordship has put your Lordship's finger on it in saying what
                  did they undertake to do in measuring the extent of the duty, but its
                  jurisprudential source is going to be a waste of time.
       MR. GLASGOW: My Lord, the last matter that you can help us on if we are going
     ^     to wait for the responses in the morning, which we are grateful for the
            courtesy. It will help clarify and put it rather more shortly than
            wasting time now — simply where we go evidentially and here my friend can
            help us. He has said, and it is very helpful to know, that he proposes to
            move to experts first, and of course neither of us would object to that.
            But my Lord we would like to know, and I think I speak for both of us. My
            Lord, may be my friend does not share it so I speak for myself and I will
     D     not tie him to it. I would like to know certainly what factual evidence
            if any will be called to support the matters at which the experts are to
            address their minds to. I have in mind one particular matter where it
            really is a question of propriety and the rules of evidence. I have no
            objection because of course I have a very minor role to play in matters of
            engineering expertise, because — rather I will try not to triplicate matters,
            because you are going to have two lots of experts anyway and it may be I
            cannot help you much on that.
      E
                          Our case will, as I will try to explain in the morning, involve a
                     denial that there was anything that was materially wrong and we believe,
40                  as I told your Lordship before, that the attack on our expert is mis­
                     conceived. We think it is most unfortunate and it lies ill in the mouths
                     of those who make it. We think that Dr. Eastwood got it right, but if he
                     did not we will say, however reluctantly, it is for him to indemnify us
                     to that extent. It does not help if we try and climb on the bandwagon
      F             which we already think is wrong.




      G




         H
                                                                      78.
    D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




    ^         MR. GLASGOW:  So, my Lord, I shall be very quiet on that.   My
                  Lord, I am concerned even more about the Police expertise in
                  the case and of course one will listen with great respect and
                  interest to anything that the Police expert called by the
                  Police has got to say.

              MR.         JUSTICE JOWITT:                        This is Mr. Phillips?

    B         MR.        GLASGOW: Yes, my Lord.   But in an extremely long and extensive
                        report it does inevitably embody his own understandings of
                        facts, some of which are a long way from any evidence that any
                        of us has heard.   If they are to be supported by evidence that
                        is fine, but we do wish my friend to be on notice that he must
                        be careful to avoid calling an expert in anticipation of being
                        able to support the facts, and then have us making complaints
                        that the factual basis for that expert opinion has not been
•   C                   laid, because it is extremely important when such matters as,
                        for example, the agony of the moment argument for Mr.
                        Duckenfield is advanced, which surprises us both.

                             We have been served in accordance with your Lordship's
                        orders, with lists of the witnesses who were to be called. As
                        we understand the position that has now been pruned to one.
                        There is no longer, as I understand it, either an intention or
    D
                        a willingness by the Police to call or even tender for cross-
                        examination any other witness other than Mr. Mole.   If that is
                        right it is a matter entirely for them, but I give this
                        warning, that if others are to explain away, or to attempt to
                        explain away, for example that Mr. Duckenfield acted in the
                        agony of the moment, when he has not been called to say that,
                        and has never said it to anybody else, and we are not to have
    £                   the opportunity of testing that, particularly in the light of
                        other dishonest statements that he made, we will be extremely
                        annoyed if that is introduced by way of expert evidence without
                        the witnesses being called.

                              I think perhaps at least your Lordship should be told who
                        we are going to hear from, if that is the end of the opening,
                        because we would like to know if we are going to move directly
    F                   to experts.

               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                               Yes.

               MR. PAYNE:   My Lord, the Police view really here is that which
                    witnesses in the event we think would assist the Court is
                    something which we ourselves have got to decide.   It is
                    perfectly true that we have each served lists of witnesses on
    G               each other and that our list did include a large number of
                    witnesses including some police officers.   We have since
                    reviewed the position and, as I have told my friends, it is
                    very unlikely, in fact, that we will be calling the bulk of
                    those witnesses on the list for the reasons which we tried to
                    explain previously, that we think their evidence is merely part
                    of the whole body of evidence which eventually is digested into
     H

                                                                            79
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




                   Lord Justice Taylor's report.  Accordingly, we do not feel that
^                  this would be of any assistance to the Court since the findings
                   in that report are agreed.

          MR.       JUSTICE JOWITT: I must tell you if excuses are made by Mr.
                   Duckenfield which turn upon what his state of mind might be
                   expected to be, I shall of course have to consider to what
                   extent that comment has some basis upon the other evidence and
                   material in the Taylor Report without hearing from Mr.
B                  Duckenfield.  On the other hand I shall, of course, be acutely
                   aware if Mr. Duckenfield has not given evidence to tell me what
                   is in his state of mind and that may affect the view I am
                   taking of such excuses.

          MR. PAYNE:  My Lord, the point my friend is making is that if, as
              may be the case, Mr. Phillips comments on the case, which he
              will do, and on the events which occurred and on the planning
C              procedures which went before it-

          MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT: There is quite of lot of,  "I have spoken to so
                    and so about it and they tell me this that  and the other."
                    Unless you serve a hearsay notice or you call evidence to
                    substantiate that, that is not admissible.

          MR. PAYNE:  My Lord, that can be said about any expert witness.
D             The position is that an expert witness's evidence is always
              based partly on evidence which has been given in the case and
              partly on his own learning and his own enquiries and what he
              has found out from other people.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  There is a difference between his expert
              knowledge, i.e. on expertise generally, and what he learns
E             about the facts of a particular case.  The facts of a
              particular case on which he relies have got to be proved.

           MR. PAYNE:  My Lord, I c e r t a i n l y for my part would not want Mr.
               Phillips to go beyond, and I wont lead from him in evidence to
               anything which goes beyond the facts which are set out in Lord
               Justice Taylor's Report without calling other evidence.          My
               Lord, I do not intend that that should be done.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  As we come to it perhaps you will remind me to
               score out the passages.

           MR. PAYNE:  Yes.  My Lord, I may say also that I do not intend,
               unless your Lordship would like me to do so, to ask Mr.
               Phillips to embark upon reading his report at length.    What I
               intend to do is to ask him to take a few topics and I think
               there are very few, to direct his evidence to what seem to be
               the material issues as to fault and causation in the case and
               ask him to deal with those.   If your Lordship would like me to
               read out the whole of his report with edited extracts, then of
               course I will ask   him to do that.



 H

                                                            80
    D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   We are in this difficulty, that if you examine
    ^              in chief and ignore his report so that that is not treated as
                   part of his evidence, then you will confine him to matters
                   about which he can properly speak.   If though you say I am not
                   going to take him through his report, all 178 pages of it, but
                   I am going to ask him about specific matters, the problem
                   remains how much of the 178 pages is in evidence.   I think if
                   you are going to adopt the second course of not going through
                   his evidence in chief but to highlight certain matters, there
    B              will have to be some editing, whether in advance or at some
                   stage (preferably in advance) so that I know who much of his
                   report is evidence in the case.

               MR. PAYNE:      I entirely accept that if he is                            reporting conversations
                   that he has had with other people about                                matters of fact which
                   have a direct bearing on the case, then                                by giving those in
                   evidence this would be hearsay evidence.                                 For our part we would
•   C              not rely upon it in submissions to your                                Lordship, and if it
                   needs to be crossed out from the bundle                                then I suppose that can
                   be d o n e .

               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I think that is something which must be done.
                   It is not satisfactory to say, well, we will leave it to the
                   Judge to understand what parts of his proof of evidence are not
                   in evidence.  The parties may not like my decision as to what
    D              it is, they may want to argue about it, but we may not know.

               MR. PAYNE:  I can see that if I embark upon this exercise there is
                   going to be an area between expert opinion based upon matters
                   which he can properly take into account as an expert to give
                   the benefit of his experience in other cases in his own
                   knowledge and learning which he can properly rely upon and give
    £              to your Lordship in evidence, there is going to be a margin
                   between that sort of evidence and evidence which can properly
                   be objected to as hearsay.   So for my part---

               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I appreciate there are grey areas, but when he
                   says, "Well, I have spoken to so and so at the Club about this
                   and that," that, unless there is other evidence establishing
                   what so and so has told him, is plainly hearsay.
    F
               MR.        PAYNE: My Lord, if he has spoken to the Club he can tell your
                         Lordship about that because that would be speaking to an
                         o pp o n e n t .

               MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                                But to such and such a policeman---

               MR. PAYNE:  Yes.                              Well,   my Lord,   we will do an editing exercise on
    G              his report.

               MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT: For example I noted Mr. Phillips spoke of all
                          the difficulties the police officers were having with the
                          unruly crowd on Leppings Lane.   Am I right?  Certainly Lord
                          Justice Taylor said that was something of a small order and
                          that has not been disputed.
     H

                                                                            81
    D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




    ^         MR. PAYNE:  My lord, that part of his evidence,                              if that were to be
                  an example which anyone had in mind---

              MR.         JUSTICE JOWITT:                       That is a slightly different example.

               MR.       PAYNE: My Lord, we would submit he would be quite entitled to
                        comment on what happened in Leppings Lane because it is part of
                        the evidence which can be seen in the photographs and on the
    B                    video film, and that is what he is commenting on.

               MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT: He is not entitled to pray it in aid if  it is
                         contrary to what are the agreed findings in the Taylor Report.

               MR. PAYNE:                   Yes.


•   c




    D




    E




     F




     G




      H

                                                                           82
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: And the agreed finding in the Taylor
A              Report is, is it not, that although of course there was
               some misbehaviour that was of a minor order?

           MR. PAYNE: My Lord, I would not ask Mr. Phillips to go beyond
               the evidence in the case, as demonstrated---

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                               Am I right in summarising the Taylor
B              Report finding?

           MR. PAYNE:  I think where Lord Justice Taylor was dealing with
               that he was dealing with the question of drunkenness and
               the effect that had on the crowd. He says that there was
               an unruly minority, or that therewere some fans
               misbehaving, but he says that in general the behaviour of
               the crowd was not in that category.
C
           MR.       JUSTICE JOWITT: If I remember rightly from my reading of
                     Mr. Phillips' report, he makes much more of it than that
                     and suggests that that kind of trouble loomed very much
                     larger.  You are not entitled to pray that in aid.

           MR.       PAYNE: No. What Mr. Phillips is dealing with in his
                     evidence is the failure of the crowd to respond to the
D                   attempts by the Police to get them into an orderly queue.
                     That is what he is dealing with principally in this report;
                     that the police were there, they were trying to form a
                     queue but the crowd was not responsive.  That is something
                     which can be seen in the films and by which I submit
                     Mr. Phillips is entitled to comment and to compare it with
                     the behaviour on other occasions.

E                         My Lord, although this is an interesting topic - and
                     it is certainly not one that I want to spend time on
                     unnecessarily - it is probably going to be quite peripheral
                     to any point which your Lordship has to decide, because the
                     behaviour of the spectators, although it might be relevant
                     in other circumstances, is not relevant as an issue before
                     your Lordship at all.  There is no doubt a lot that could
                     be said about it, but we do not find it helpful to say
                     anything about it in these proceedings and I have not said
                     anything in opening about it.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I do not discourage you from adopting this
                course.  If you wish to take Mr. Phillips's statement as
                read and then deal with one or two matters well and good,
                but there will have to be whatever editing is required as a
 G             result of objections from the other parties - and agreement
                - or rulings, because I must be in the position of knowing
                when I look in the statement what is in evidence and what
                is not.  I cannot just say "I don't think this falls within
                the rules" unless I am given proper agreement about it.

            MR. PAYNE: Yes.    I am considering the mechanism of how this
                might be done.   I can see that those parts - it is a very
 H             long report, as your Lordship knows, and it contains a lot
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




                     of interesting comments and background material which is
                     interspersed with cross-references to what happened in
                     April 1989.  So an editing exercise, in fact, may have the
                     effect of creating rather an indigestible document.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  It is a matter for you.  If you wish, you
               can ignore his report and simply adduce his evidence
               orally.
B
           MR.        PAYNE: Yes.   It is not very helpful for your Lordship's
                     note or to get the effect of what he wants to    say, and it
                     would certainly make his evidence a lot longer.     I have
                     heard what your Lordship says and what my friends say, and
                     I will give some thought as to the best way to deal with
                     it.   I quite understand the point about hearsay evidence,
                     but my answer to it is that a lot of the evidence in fact
q                    is truly expert evidence---

           MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT: What I say is this.   If it is not going to
                     be read out and agreement given on it, I must know how much
                     of it is in dispute.

            MR. PAYNE:                   I understand.

D          MR. GLASGOW:   My Lord, if I can just make my position
               absolutely plain so that it is formally on the record:     I
               am now formally objecting to the admissibility of this
               report. We thought it was obstructive to the progress of
               your Lordship's reading pattern to do so at an earlier
               stage because I thought steps would be taken to prove it,
               but I am objecting to its admissibility and he must not be
               called until it has been clarified.    It contains some very
k              important expressions of fact with appendixed witnesses who
               he is relying on which entitled him to disagree with Lord
               Justice Taylor - he says so in terms.    All that is going to
               have to come out unless those witnesses are presented.    I
               say now, quite formally, that I object to this report being
               produced formally in evidence unless it is either edited or
                the witnesses upon whom which he has chosen to base his
P              disagreement with Lord Justice Taylor are called.

            MR. TOULSON:  My Lord, may I indicate my position? Firstly, I
                understand my friend’s personal difficulties, obviously,
                and no criticism is made directly of him because he has
                been presenting the case with great skill and at short
                notice.  I am very anxious, however, that this case proceed
                in the correct way.  Your Lordship has already adverted to
G                   curious way in which the matters before your Lordship
                and the circumstances - in that one has the material in the
                Taylor Report and your Lordship has been careful to seek
                clear understanding between all parties what is the status
                of that.

                           It is important, in my submission, that when we embark
                     on the evidential stage we get off on the right tack and we
 H                   know where we are going.   I would not have known until a


                                                            84.
D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                     moment ago that my friend was intending to go direct to
A                    that evidence, nor was I aware that the only fact witness
                      (if I understand him correctly) that he is intending to
                     call is Chief Superintendent Mole - who, as your Lordship
                     knows, had ceased to have any responsibility in this matter
                     before the events which led to this tragedy and was not
                     present at the ground.   It does seem to be a matter of some
                      surprise, given the nature of the proceedings, that my
g                    friend should present his case calling no fact evidence
                      from any officer who was actually involved in the tragedy,
                     having regard to the issues and the way he has presented
                      the case - but that is, of course, entirely a matter for
                     him.

                           It does seem to me first that it is desirable that any
                     fact evidence ought to be called before expert evidence
q                    because then at least - fact evidence from a claimant, that
                     is - if Mole is going to be their only witness one has his
                     evidence about which the expert can then be tested, rather
                     than have the expert coming and giving hypothetical
                     opinions only to find that the oral evidence of Mole is
                     rather different.   There is nothing novel in this
                     proposition; that is why, as I apprehend, it is the normal
                     practice of courts to expect the fact evidence tobe given
D                    before the experts come and comment upon it.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I can see that to have expert evidence in
                advance of factual evidence which may attach upon the
                expert evidence can place the party cross-examining in
                difficulty if he does not know quite what should be the
                extent of his cross-examination.

E           MR. TOULSON:  Absolutely.  Where that affects me is this.
                There are, as your Lordship has correctly summarised, three
                principal matters for investigation:  (1) What led to the
                build up at Leppings Lane?  (2) The issues relating to the
                opening of the gate and (3) Were there other causative
                contributory matters?  So far as (1) is concerned, there is
                an allegation against me in the pleadings in relation to
                turnstiles, although that is not a matter to which my
                learned friend has referred in opening - I do not know to
                what extent he is raising a case against me or not; that is
                a point with which I will        Pt least there is
                presently a case pleaded against me on that.

                           The whole thrust of the Phillips evidence on that is
                      that the Police prepared in a proper way and that the
G                     reason why things got out of control at the Leppings Lane
                      end was because of exceptionally unruly behaviour on the
                      part of the fans.  It is the theme that comes through loud
                      and strong and it is on page 23 (among others), where he
                      talks about very strong evidence of heavy drinking and
                      there is a whole wadge of his report which is a summary of
                      that.
D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. LL O Y D W O O D L A N D




             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I have read the report, but I was invited
A                not to trouble myself with appendices, and I was happy not
                 to do so.

             MR. TOULSON:   Presumably, in relation to that, Mole is going to
                 have some useful evidence to give about the preparation the
                 previous year, and that is going to be relevant to that
                 issue.   Cross-examining Phillips on this, one does not know
n               what the Police factual evidence is going to be in relation
                 to that.

                            Then one comes to the second main issue, which is the
                      question of the opening of Gate C and what should have been
                      done.   There is a great deal in the Phillips report not
                      only about what Mr. Duckenfield told him and what he
                      understands - with lengthy citations ....(inaudible).... by
q                    way of footnote, but there are also observations about the
                      view from the control room and what would or would not have
                      been capable of being seen and what one would have expected
                      Superintendent Murray and Chief Superintendent Duckenfield
                      to have gleaned from their position and so forth.   If it is
                      being said that they in the control room quite
                      understandably failed to appreciate the situation on the
                      other side of the ground, it is more surprising if nobody
D                     from that control room was going to call---

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: He talks, for instance, of someone
                 - M r . Duckenfield or someone else - having the monitors
                 behind him.

             MR. TOULSON:                       Absolutely.

 E           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                             There is nothing in the Taylor Report
                 about that.
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




             MR. TOULSON:  There is much about what the ground commander
                 could reasonably be expected to ---

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                            He can, of course, turn round.

             MR. TOULSON:   Quite.  We are not going, it seems, to get the
B                ground commander on the occasion of the tragedy, but we are
                  going to get the ground commander of the previous year, so
                 he is going to be the only person, it seems, whom we can
                  test on those matters, but he is going to come after
                  Phillips, Phillips having commented on these matters in his
                  report.  It is a complete coach before horses way of
                  proceeding, in my submission, and that affects me because,
                  although nobody suggests that the Engineer has any
C                operational control over the ground, the case which has
                 been opened as the principal part, the main plank of the
                  Police claim for contribution is that there was an
                 unworkable and impossible system.

                            In parentheses, my Lord, I mention that there is a
                       sentence in the Taylor Report (unchallenged by anybody) in
                       which he says that he has considered the question whether
D                      this ground was incapable of being safely policed, and he
                       squarely rejects it;  that is not challenged.  However,
                       that appears to be the gravenum of the case.

                            My Lord, that is what is being put against the
                       Engineers.  It is said, "When you had your role in relation
                       to the structure, you knew that the contemplated use of the
                       ground was one which was an impossibility and such that
E                      there was a burden upon you to draw to the attention of the
                       Police and the Club that sooner or later a tragedy was
                       going to happen."

                            Then one has to go into that area and one has to
                       explore with   the only fact witness one can test  it with,
                       Mr. Mole, those issues, and again we are going to be doing
p                      that after the expert.    It does seem, with the greatest of
                       respect, a wholly unsatisfactory way of dealing with it and
                       one which puts difficulty in the way of the cross-examiner
                       in preparing   his cross-examination.

                            That is   thepoint about the order in which the
                       evidence is called, expert before fact.

 G                           The other point which has been touched on is "What is
                        the status of the report?"  I have put on my list - and my
                        friend had notice of this point ---

              MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT:                    This is the Taylor report?

              MR.        TOULSON: No, the status of the Phillips’ report as                  far as
                        it relies upon these other matters.
 H


                                                                     87.
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




A           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                              Yes, I am sorry.

            MR. TOULSON:  The two principal authorities on the point, which
                I gave to my friend last week, are a fairly recent decision
                of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division), which is a case
                of R v. Abingdon, and an earlier decision of the then Vice-
                Chancellor Megarry in a landlord and tenant case, English
                Exporters, and I believe that they are on the court's list,
g               In summary, what they say is that an expert is entitled to
                have regard to what you might call the general weight of
                expert knowledge and, of course, he can have reference to
                the textbooks and so on - only an arrogant man would say "I
                can speak without reference to the learning and the works
                of other people - but in so far as he is going into
                specifics, then there has to be a proper factual foundation
                for that.
C
                           Now, it is a very unsatisfactory state of affairs for
                      those seeking to cross-examine if they are either presented
                     with a report which has a mass of this and it goes in en
                     bloc and then we find out afterwards how much is relied
                     upon, or we have it abandoned and oral evidence given,
                     which really rather destroys the point of serving experts'
                      reports in advance so that one knows what it is that one is
D                    going to.   The whole purpose of an order for exchange of
                      expert reports is that one knows what is the substance of
                      the expert evidence to be given.   The way we have got into
                      this position is through a case being presented on the
                      Pleadings which effectively is a wholesale effect on the
                      Taylor findings, the service of a report which is
                      effectively an attack on the Taylor findings, bolstered by
                      copious citations from the evidence, and then an opening
k                    which indicates that a lot of Taylor but not all is
                      accepted, and then we are in the sort of no-man's land in
                      between of how much is in dispute, and therefore that
                      uncertainty of what the expert case is.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   If Mr. Payne decides that he will simply
                 not produce the report but will obtain only oral evidence-
 P              in-chief from Mr. Phillips, there is no reason why he
                 should not do that.

             MR. TOULSON:                      No.

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   But he will be confined, unless he makes
                  an application to me which is granted, to matters which are
                  dealt with in his report.
 G
             MR. TOULSON:   Yes.  My Lord, the other aspect of this - and I
                  am sorry to be difficult but I am merely facing the
                  difficulties which exist and not creating them - is where
                  that leaves us and what is the status of other evidence
                  which was before Lord Justice Taylor.  There is, of course,
                  a mass of Police evidence which was given before Lord
                  Justice Taylor, and that leaves us with the question of to
 H               what extent one can use that as a basis for cross-
D .L . S E L L E R S & CO . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                       examination.  This is a point which I think has not been
                       fully explored until now.  For example, there is Police
                       evidence that on each of the two preceding semi-finals,
                       1987 and 1988, the tunnel was closed off by the Police when
                       pens 3 and 4 became full.  In respect of the 1987 semi­
                       final, the evidence came from Inspector Creaser;  in
                       respect of the 1988 semi-final, the evidence came from
                       three police officers and various lay witnesses.
B
             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                             Is that dealt with in the Taylor report?

             MR. TOULSON:  Partially, my Lord;                              not the 1987 match, but 1988
                 is touched on.

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  It seems to me that what is sauce for the
                 goose is sauce for the gander.  To the extent that it is in
                 the Taylor Report, you can rely on it;   to the extent that
                 it is merely evidence which was before Lord Justice Taylor,
                 you will have to call evidence about it.

             MR. TOULSON: We have served on the Police the lists of
                 witnesses upon whom we intend to rely, including those
                 officers.  It appears that there was some degree of
                 misunderstanding between counsel when we appeared before
D                your Lordship on the pre-trial review just over a week ago,
                 that was an understanding that one could not counter-notice
                 a witness who was your own witness.  I have put that badly.
                 One should not be in the position of being forced to call
                 the opposing party's own witness - in other words, that ---

             MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                             This is all dealt with by the serving of
                 notices.
E
             MR. TOULSON:  Yes, because under Order 38 Rule 39(2) there is
                 express provision that if a Civil Evidence Act notice has
                 been served and a counter-notice is served, the court may
                 permit the party who has served the notice to put in the
                 statement if the statement is the statement of the witness
                 of the opposing party, so that he should not be forced into
                 the unrealistic position of calling the opposing party's
                 witness and being confined by the rules of examination-in-
                 chief in order that the opposing party can, on a friendly
                 basis, cross-examine his own witness.  It was not raised
                 because I thought we had an understanding, but it appears
                 that there was a misunderstanding on the point.

              MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  You can always serve a hearsay notice
                  another time and ask me to exercise my discretion.

              MR. TOULSON:  We have served our notices.  This matter can
                  perhaps be dealt with tomorrow morning when my friend has
                  had an opportunity to consider his position, but I will
                  certainly be wishing to use that evidence in cross-
                  examination and to put it forward.

 H


                                                                      89.
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




^           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  Have you received any counter-notice
                requiring you to call evidence?

            MR. TOULSON:                      Yes, we have.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                             You have.   Then I shall have to rule on
                it.

B           MR. TOULSON:  Your Lordship will have to rule on that.      That is
                the other procedural matter which will need to be dealt
                with.  There are therefore, it seems to me, those three
                separate points, namely whether fact evidence should come
                before expert evidence and the difficulties that it
                presents one if it does not;    the status of the expert
                report if fact evidence is not being called which forms the
                foundation of it, about    which I have heard your Lordship
C               and would not seek to persuade your Lordship otherwise;
                and the third point which is really notice of any
                application which will    follow shortly.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   Yes.    There may be logistical problems if
                I do not rule on the counter-notices until you are a.bout to
                call the witness.  I suppose you could invite them to take
                steps to have the witnesses here.
D
            MR. TOULSON:                       Yes.

            MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  That may involve needless costs.    If the
                parties are agreed, I could deal with the counter-notice
                applications at an early stage.   Would there be any
                difficulty about that, Mr. Payne?
F
^            MR. PAYNE:  I personally was not aware of the service of
                 notices under the Civil Evidence Act, and my instructing
                 solicitor does not know about the service of these notices
                 either, but they may have found their way into some part of
                 the files that he has not seen. However, I think that over
                 the adjournment it ought to be possible to reach some
                 agreement about the status of this evidence because if I
p                understand it correctly, what is sought to be done is to
                 read out the evidence of these witnesses that was given
                 before Lord Justice Taylor.
D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




      MR. TOULSON:                  My Lord, that is right.
      MR. PAYNE: I have understood it correctly and I think this is something which
           is capable of resolution.
      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: If it is not and there has to be a ruling, is there any
           reason why I should not give that ruling at an early stage.
      MR. PAYNE:               No, it would be preferable.
      MR. TOULSON: My Lord, the notices we gave were notices pursuant to directions in
           this action.
B
      MR. PAYNE: My Lord, in dealing with one or two other points that have been raised,
           what I will do with Mr. Phillips is that I will call him and I will ask him
           to deal with parts of his report without putting the report in evidence,
           which are relevant to issues of fault and causation.
    MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:    I am not sure that I am entitled to require that you call
c your witnesses as to fact first, but I           think in this particular case,
         especially having regard to those whom you are at present minded not to
         call. It would be unfortunate if you call your experts before your witness
         to fact. You might need to recall your witness.
  MR. PAYNE:    I did not want to interrupt what your Lordship was saying and the
       position with regard to calling evidence is something which has exercised
       us a lot and your Lordship knows the considerations which have been
D     influencing the Police in deciding what evidence it would be appropriate
       to call for a lot of reasons. The conclusion we have reached as my friend
       Mr. Toulson correctly says with regard to the evidence of the senior police
       officers who were present on the day is that they will not be called to give
       evidence before your Lordship, and we rely upon the findings and the admitted
       findings of the Taylor Report as regards what happened.
                      Sofaras any other evidence is concerned, it is quite true that we gave
 E              notice of our intention to call Mr. Mole. We have had reservations about
                 that for the very reason that Mr. Toulson has correctly touched upon a moment
                 or two ago, namely that although Mr. Mole was in charge of the 1988 match and
                 was in charge of this match until two or three weeks before the event, he
                 was not actually present at the ground or responsible at the time, so his
                 evidence is certainly open to criticism on that basis that it is not very
                 helpful to deal with the Police operation on that day.
 F                    What we have been considering is whether his evidence would be helpful
                 to your Lordship on other matters dealing with the 1988 event and there are
                 some things that he might have been able to help about. On balance we feel
                 that his evidence really does not take the case any further and our decision
                 with regard to him is that he will not be called either. So that that relieves
                 Mr. Toulson of any anxiety about cross-examination.
 q      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: For your factual evidence you rely simply on what is       to be
             taken from the agreed parts of the Taylor Report.
    MR. PAYNE: We do, my Lord, with these two qualifications. In the course of
          opening your Lordship made two observations which have prompted us actually
          to look out statements of witnesses made either to the inquest or to the
          Taylor Report, and I have got in mind in particular the evidence of the
          witness Mr. Locke, the club security guard. Your Lordship will remember
  H       his name is mentioned in answer to one of the Issues. We may want to read
          his evidence. I do not think that will cause any embarrassment with regard


                                                              91.
D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                to either of the expert witnesses, so I do not anticipate that causing
                a difficulty, but if it does then my friends will tell you. The other
                point that emerged in opening upon which we would like to read evidence
A               to you is the state of some members of the crowd before 2.50 in pen 3
                and there is evidence that some of the members of the crowd were in
                distress. I do not want to anticipate the evidence any more until we
                are in a position to call it before your Lordship, but we may want to
                call evidence or read evidence about that.
                     Those are the two areas at the moment of as it were civilian evidence
                or non-expert evidence that we intend to rely upon. Otherwise our
B               witnesses are going to be Mr. Byrne and Mr. Phillips orally dealing with
                parts of his report. My Lord, that I think tidies up those points.
      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: It may be in the light of that that there can be no real
           objection to your calling Mr. Phillips before that factual evidence which
           is restricted to a narrow compass.
c     MR. PAYNE: I would ask your Lordship to accept that. In case my friends have
           any comment about it, before they do so, the batting order in fact is more
           likely to be Mr. Byrne the engineer first followed by Mr. Phillips. I do
           not know whether your Lordship would like to start on Mr. Byrne this evening.
      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                         We will break off there.
  MR. GLASGOW: My Lord, I am afraid there are some problems and I will have to
D      raise them whenever convenient. The worst is I am afraid that Superintendent
       Mole. It is an unhappy situation professionally, but we have given an open
       assurance in writing that he was being called in any event, and that was
       despite there being many variations to the witness letters we have had and
       people coming and going off that list, but the one letter that was quite
       clear and has been followed up and clarified orally to make quite sure
       there is no misunderstanding so that there was at least one police officer
       to whom we were entitled to put these various matters which have been
E      discovered recently, and we were assured that he was being called. I
       cannot ask your Lordship to order a party to call a witness.
      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                         It is a matter of professional propriety and not for me.
      MR. GLASGOW:                 My Lord, it is.
      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: I expect you have taken Mr. Payne by surprise who had no
 F        knowledge of this.
   MR. GLASGOW: My Lord, the heading to the letter       was that Chief Superintendent
        Mole would be called in any event and the difficulty is I think that my
        friend and I will have to review the position of how on earth we are now
        going to serve the various notices in order to put in evidence before
        your Lordship, evidence which would otherwise have been appropriately put
 r     to the only police officer who was going to be produced. I have the letter
        in front of me and perhaps my friend should read it before I hand it up,
        25th September, "Chief Superintendent Mole will be called in any event."
   MR. PAYNE: My Lord, I will read the letter but my submission is that whatever
        may have been said, and I take the decision myself about whether or not
        Mr. Mole should be called in the light of my own assessment of what will
        be helpful to your Lordship on fault and causation. Well, it is a letter
 H     merely giving a list of witnesses and it says at the bottom "Chief
D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                 Superintendent Mole will be called in any event."   That is what is says
                 in the letter. Now he will not.
  MR. GLASGOW: My Lord, we will have to deal with the professional propriety
A      of it elsewhere and I will not     sour the atmosphere now when we have all
       got on so well together in taking it further tonight, but if the position
        is now to be radically altered, then I am afraid we will require time, and
        I am afraid my team will certainly require time, to take appropriate measures
       to put evidence which would otherwise have been admissible to Chief
       Superintendent Mole.
  MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: The position about that is this: if Mole had been called,
B     then you have a duty to put your case in cross-examination. You do not
        know whether he is going to agree to it or not, so you would need as a
       matter of prudence to be in a position to call the evidence yourself if
        need be. If Mole is not called then you cannot put it to him in cross-
       examination and you cannot be criticised. No-one can say "this was never
        put." But there still is the fallback that you can call your own evidence.
        I do not read the brief sentence that has been read out to me as an
c      undertaking to call Mole. That is not a matter for me.
      MR. GLASGOW: No, my Lord, it is not a matter for you. We will have to consider
           where it leads us overnight, because the evidence has got to he called before
           your Lordship in whatever is an appropriate way. If it cannot be done through
           Chief Superintendent Mole we may have to subpoena the other officers to call
           it. I fear the position may well be that we will subpoena Mr. Mole but we
           will tell your Lordship where we get to on that in the morning.
D
      MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: If you think you are going to have the opportunity to cross-
           examine someone and therefore y o u : a r e / j 0 ^ . ;tp^t../irw,hiin the evidence
           you are going to need, and you do not have it to call yourself you take a
           chance on your cross-examination being successful. I do not think your
           position is prejudiced.
      MR. GLASGOW: With the greatest respect, it is not as simple as that. I think
E         your Lordship will find that we need a police witness and now not a single
           one will be called who can produce at least the Police evidence which is
           not before your Lordship and was not before Lord Justice Taylor, and that
           is a matter of serious concern and we shall obviously have to subpoena a
           police officer to do it. We shall do so, but we.may need your Lordship's
           indulgence as to time.
       MR. PAYNE: My Lord, my learned friend is making guarded references to evidence
 F          that he would wish to put to Mr. Mole. Quite frankly, speaking for myself,
            I have no idea what he is talking about and, of course, this is a perfectly
            proper procedure. He can keep hi? p:wder Jry until he can cross-examine one
            of our witnesses, and if by deciding not to call Mr. Mole for the reasons which
            Ihave told your Lordship, that has put him in difficulties, then it is entirely
            open to him to call other evidence to prove whatever it is.
 r                     If this involves documents or something which has not previously been
                  disclosed, certainly for our part it would be helpful if disclosure were to
                  be made about it. This is the way in which the litigation has been conducted.
       MR. JUSTICE JOWITT: One never knows, but had the matters Mr. Glasgow wishes
            to have before me been by way of agreement — I do not suppose he wants to
            lose the element of suprise.
 H MR.GLASGOW: My Lord, there is no surprise. The difficulty is they are Police
        documents and when we asked for them to be produced we were told and we
M   Y
        D .L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                        were somewhat surprised to be told that since the litigation in respect
                        of which they had arisen was litigation against the Police Authority and
                        not the Chief Constable there was no obligation upon my friend's
                        instructing solicitors to disclose it.
        A




        B




        D




        E




        F




         H
                                                                      94.
D.L. S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




^         MR. PAYNE:  If my friend would like to let me know what these
              documents are I would not be at all surprised if this could be
              resolved.

          MR. TOULSON:   Before your Lordship rises, I am sorry, there is one
              different kind of difficulty I now find myself in and that
              relates to Mr. Byrne's evidence which I gather is now going to
              be called tomorrow morning.   We have had to make our
B             dispositions in the context that we do not have a long list of
              witnesses who are going to be called.   The current list has
              been served.   The estimate for the case as your Lordship knows
               is six weeks.  We anticipated, I hope not through our fault,
              that it was not going to be certainly this week, the expert
              evidence, and probably would be next week.

                         My expert witness is in fact out of the Country and
C                  arrives back today.   He was not going to be here in any event,
                   he is in Camberly(?) tomorrow.    I am not in a position, in the
                    light of the expedited course that the case has now taken,
                   properly to go through certain matters with him and with my
                    client and cross-examine tomorrow.   I have to therefore make an
                   application for indulgence in that way.    There is obviously
                   material for us to deal with tomorrow in the form of my
                    friend's indication of how he puts his case and how I deal with
D                   any procedural matters, but that is not going to take up the
                   whole of the day.   To be plain speaking I need a working day
                    and I wonder if I could ask your Lordship's indulgence in that
                   matter as it does appear that the time table is going to be
                   very much shorter than it would otherwise have been.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   Ordinarily I would not have a great deal of
g              sympathy with an application of this kind but I bear in mind
                that a very great deal of money is at stake here and I grant
                you that indulgence.

           MR. TOULSON:                      My Lord,       I am grateful.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  That really means we are going to ask you not
               to call Mr. Byrne tomorrow.
 F
           MR. PAYNE:   My Lord, may I mention one thing to my learned friends
                and to your Lordship.  The idea has been canvassed, the
                possibility of a meeting between the expert engineers to
                resolve one particular point of fact, which is the estimated
                pressure at which barrier 124A in fact collapsed.   Now the
                engineers have given their various estimates about it and our
                suggestion is that there should be a meeting between the
 G             engineers to see whether, as a matter of engineering opinion,
                they can in fact reach common ground, or, if not, then they can
                at least identify the difference between them.   As I read the
                two experts who have actually dealt with it, there is not a lot
                between them so I mention this for the consideration of my
                friends to see whether, in fact, a meeting can be arranged to
                resolve that.
 H

                                                                     95
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                               It is unlikely that any harm will come from
               it.

           MR.        TOULSON:               My        Lord, I am very happy with the suggestion.

           MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT: The other matter, while we are talking about
                     the engineering experts, is, is it possible to detach the
                     barrier 124A, that is the one that collapsed---
B
           MR. TOULSON:                      Yes.

           MR.        JUSTICE JOWITT:   ...from the other issues and hear both sides
                     on that and come to a conclusion about that?

           MR.        TOULSON:  I would have thought,                       my   Lord,   yes. Leave   that over
                     and get on with other matters.

           MR.       JUSTICE JOWITT:   That does seem to me to be a matter which does
                     stand on its own entirely.

           MR.       TOULSON:               My Lord, I should have thought one could leave                that
                     over and               deal with it in a separate compartment.

           MR.       PAYNE: I would be keen to agree that the case could be divided
D                    in that way.    What passes through my mind immediately is this,
                     of course one important point about 124A is whether the
                     engineer in his inspection and testing of the barrier was
                     negligent.   That is an issue for your Lordship's decision.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:                               Yes.

           MR.       PAYNE: There   is another aspect to it and that is whether it
                     was causative of any particular injury.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  I was thinking simply of whether the testing
               of the barrier 124A was negligent.

           MR. PAYNE:       My Lord,                         I would agree that that issue can be
               s e pa ra t ed .

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:              And that seems to depend, doesn't it, (a) on
               the adequacy of the test method and the test rig, and (b) on
               t h e ...(i n a u d i b l e )...construction of the test method in annex C
               to the Green Guide and if I came to the conclusion it was other
               than that which Dr. Eastwood considered it to be, whether he
               was at fault in interpreting it in the way he did.              Those are
               the three matters, aren't they?

           MR. PAYNE:  My Lord, yes.  My Lord, that will involve looking at
               whether the test load were appropriate  in the light of the
               layout of barriers in the pen, whether the test load in fact
               chosen was a proper test load.  As I endeavoured to explain
               earlier on, as your Lordship remembers the chapter in the Green
               Guide which prescribes the test load of 6 KN per metre, he
 H

                                                                       96
D.L . S E L L E R S & C o . / W. L L O Y D W O O D L A N D




                   arrives at that in the context of a particular kind of layout of
^                  the barriers and gaps between lines of barriers and gaps
                   between barriers, (your Lordship remembers that).  So that in
                   order to decide whether the Engineer, whether the system of
                   testing barriers were negligent, one of the questions to be
                   addressed will be whether he ought to have chosen the test load
                   of 6KN in the light of the defects---

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   In other words, it ought to have been stronger
B             so that people would not be crushed to death so easily.   Isn't
              that the reality of a stronger barrier?   I am afraid I would
              have thought the way one looks at it is this, was the barrier
              fit for its purpose within the Green Guide, unless the Green
              Guide is shown to provide the wrong criteria.   Quite separately
               is whether the barrier of that strength would be effective in
              that location having regard to the spacing of the other
              barriers.   That is another aspect of negligence alleged against
C             Dr. Eastwood, I would have thought.

          MR. PAYNE:                    Yes.

          MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  However, I shall only try it, deal with
              something as a separate issue if all parties are agreed that I
              should and that will be a matter for discussion among you.
D         MR. TOULSON:  My Lord, for our part we are happy to deal with that
              separately.  I agree and respectfully adopt your Lordship's
              formulation of the three issues with perhaps only this caveat,
              that the two and three are really we would submit, the question
              is did Dr. Eastwood adopt an approach to the construction of
              that document which was untenable applying the Bolan test.   I
              am not sure your Lordship is required as  it were to make an
              engineering judgment what it should be.

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:   I did say what was its construction and if Dr.
               Eastwood had arrived at a different construction was that one
               to be criticised.

           MR. TOULSON:  I was only querying whether, in fact, (it is perhaps
               a matter of wording ) your Lordship is actually required to go
               through the first exercise and whether

           MR. JUSTICE JOWITT:  You would not complain if I went through it
               and found in your favour, would you.

           MR. TOULSON:        I don't think your Lordship would                                 have   me quick to
               com p l a i n .

           MR.       JUSTICE                 JOWITT: I can see difficulties either way.

           MR.       GLASGOW: My Lord, we consent to it being hived off as well,                                      if
                     that helps.

           MR.       JUSTICE  JOWITT: I shall do what the parties agree can be done.
                     10.30.  We shall be sitting at 10 o'clock on Friday.
 H                                                           Adjourned until the following day
                                                                           97
