                  Sheffield Archives Ref: F o i- f r JIJ bio2S                             M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                  Date and tim e raised
                                                                               n   < r i                Number



T itle
                             Pf*
                               cum e
(Inclu d e source an d a n y docum ent num ber i f relevant)


                                                                             ffc        /'J l ULC.
                                                               u UkTlU
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No        ±L
                                                                                                                     Receiver
                                                                                                    ~

                                                                                                                     Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised         A4I4#                                                                             1044 .
                                                                                                                 Statement Reader
Statem ent reader's instructions



                                                                                                                     Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                     SIO




                                                                                                                     Indexer
F urther action No(s)


When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other D ocum ent Master Num ber Form
                             Merseyside




24 April 1989

Sir Peter Taylor
The Right Honourable the Lord Chief Justice of England
C/o The Chief Constable, West Midlands
Lloyd House
PO Box 52
Colmore Circus
Queensway
BIRMINGHAM B4 6NQ


Sir
I am writing this letter to yourself and to the Chief Constable, Geoffrey
Deer, of the West Midlands.
I was at Sheffield on Saturday afternoon for the semi-final and I thought
that if I gave you my experience of part of Saturday afternoon it might
help in compiling your information.
I will introduce myself as being a forty three year old married man with
two teenaae dauahters. I am a
                         in                    I am also a footbal1 fan
and have been since I first watched Liverpool from the boys pen in the
mid fifties.
I travelled to Sheffield on Saturday with some friends; we met other friends
that we had previously arranged to meet at a city centre pub. We travelled
by road and the others by rail. They used the service trains from Liverpool
via Manchester to avoid the football specials.
Our general concensus was that there was a hostile and aggressive attitude
shown by the police to people if they thought they were football fans.
We disguised ourselves by not carrying any football favours; we also think
we are now too old for them. I will not tell you what was said by the
others as that would only be second hand gossip. I will only tell you
what happened to me.
We parked our car at about 2.25pm in Far lane, which is about a ten minute
walk from the gates in Leppings Lane. We arrived near the gates just after
2.35pm and I can only say that the scene looked chaotic. To get to the
turnstiles you had to go through a set of blue gates and into an area that
was surrounded by the perimeter walls of the ground and an iron fence.
There was only one way into this area and that was through the gates which
opened inwards. Then, when inside, because of the crowd coming down the
hill of Leppings Lane and trying to get through these gates, the only way
out was through the turnstiles. These gates acted like a valve. The
pressure inside this area was very heavy and with no organised queues it
was a total hit and miss situation as to how and when you reached the
turnstile.
It was 2.50pm when I went through the turnstile and I was going through
gates 1A ' - these being the nearest gates, yet it took fifteen minutes
to travel that short distance.
Going through the turnstiles in front of me was a middle aged man. As
we got through you could see a number of policemen just standing round
in groups watching the fans coming in. The man shouted across, "You want
to get outside and sort that f         lot out before someone gets hurt."
Upon this a huge policeman who stood over six feet tall pounced at this
man. The policeman repeatedly threatened him, saying that he knew what
sort of person he was and what he would do to him if he opened his mouth
again. This seemed to go on. He was taunting the man to speak again and
my opinion was that if the man was to say anything else he would have been
evicted or arrested and labelled a soccer hooligan.    The man cowered and
walked away. I then pleaded with another policeman that in the name of
God to do something about the chaos outside, at the same time trying not
to fall foul of the police like the other man. I hung around that area
a little longer so tha^— K c ould get the other policeman^sjiumber. I did
this and the number ii
Whilst I was standing there many more people came       in and complained of
what was happening outside.     I then went to my      seat   reflecting the
threatening and hostile attitude of the officer.       I decided then that I
would write a letter of complaint not realising then   what events were about
to unfold.
I took my place in the north stand which was in line with the penalty area
at the Leppings Lane end. You could see then that there was massive
crushing in the area behind the goal. At first, and this was around kick-
off time, one youth climbed over the fence. As he landed on the perimeter
track he was restrained by the police, and by their actions you could tell
that they obviously thought he was trying to invade the pitch. The young
man could be seen from the stands repeatedly pointing frantically into
the crowd.
The next person to come over was also restrained by two policemen and
escorted away. You could also see that this man was in some sort of
trouble. More came over and were falling to the ground once they were
over. With the crowd in the north stand shouting to the policemen who
were escorting the man that he was in trouble and that there were further
problems behind them. The police let go of the man and he fell to the
ground and then started getting some assistance.
The game was underway now and the crowd behind the goal was getting bigger
and spreading onto the pitch. People were climbing up into the stands
and it was obvious from where we were that there was serious trouble behind
the goal.     When the policeman went onto the pitch and asked the referee
to stop the game many more policemen went down to that end. By their
actions they still gave the impression it was a crowd invasion. They were
turning people back towards the fence and off the pitch and seemed to be
indicating to them to get back onto the terracing. By now dozens of people
were lying on the pitch.
When the ambulance came on the pitch the seriousness of the situation was
really coming through.    I could see people giving mouth to mouth
resuscitation; police and firemen were leaning over people giving heart
massages.
It was now that I noticed that people lying on the pitch behind the goal
had their heads covered. The makeshift stretchers were now carrying away
bodies. All this time the tannoy was asking people to get off the pitch
as if nothing serious was happening.
There were taunts from the terracing at the Forest end of the ground and
the crowds started running down towards them. This was all we needed,
dead fans and people about to fight; thank goodness the police managed
to intervene.      I think then the Nottingham people realised what was
happening and there was silence. Still the tannoy blurted out for the
fans to get off the pitch. Only later did the announcer ask for those
not involved to leave the pitch so that those assisting could see who needed
help.
I saw a policeman carry a child. He hadbeen helping him and he       carried
him the length of the pitch - the poor man.
It was around 3.45pm now and I left, I just wanted to go home. One by
one over the next hour I met up again with my friends, some of whom had
gone in that section behind the goal and one of them had escaped over the
fence. We listened in disbelief when the radio said that the fans had
broken the gate down - we knew it had been opened.
I sat in the car saddened and annoyed. Saddened for what had happened
to all those people, saddened for that police superintendent who had opened
the gates. He hadanswered the pleas of the crushed fans to relieve the
pressure. That man needs the thoughts and prayers of everyone.
Annoyed at the hostile and aggressive behaviour of the policeman earlier.
This part of my letter is a complaint against that particular policeman,
again his number is            I had intended writing a small letter of
complaint after I had seen his behaviour.
If all policemen behaved like this then it is no wonder we have problems.
Older people can use a wiser sense of judgement and turn their backs on
them, younger men who are less wise and maybe hot headed will respond in
a different way.
I do hope this letter is of some assistance in both your enquiries, I have
tried to keep the letter to my experience and thoughts of the afternoon,
not of others who will have their own views.
Yours faithfully
