                                                       ©J£>   £   S'

           STATSKSNT OF           John GLOVER
           AGE OF WITNESS
           OCCUPATION             Police Constable 1218*
           Address                Edlington Police office, Doncaster,
                                  South Yorkshire, Tel Thorne 0^05/812122.




 I am a Police Constable of the South Yorkshire Police presently
 stationed at Edlington Police office as the community constable.


At 10am Saturday 15th April 1989* I attended at Hillsborough Football
ground Sheffield where I paraded for duty for the F.A. cup semi-final
between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest. I was attached to serial NcA8.
My duties were to stop buses and mini buses and check that supporters
were not carrying alcohol to the football ground, I left the ground at
around 10,30am and my serial took up a position at Tankersley M1 intersection
where the random checks took place.


At around 3pm later the same date in company with my serial I attended at
Claywheels Road Traffic garage, where I was to take my meal,


I had just sat down after collecting my meal when I heard on a nearby
personal radio another officer was wearing that there was trouble at
the football ground, at the Leppings Lane stand* X returned to the transit
van we had been allocated said we left Claywheels to attend at the ground.


Minutes later in company with other officers in the van I attended at the
rear of the Leppings Lane stand. The van parked on the road, I saw that
other officers were present at this location, I saw that there m s no
fighting taking place. Mounted squad officers were present and appeared
to be holding a small crowd of football supporters back from entering the
ground, I saw that a number of the supporters were drunk.


Having left the van I was requested to assist other officers to form a
cordon across the main entrance to the Leppings Lane stand* After a few
minutes I was requested by a Police Inspector to attend inside the main
gate, I saw at this point that there was a number of football supporters
laid on the floor being attended to by the St, Johns ambulance, I saw that
one man had gone blue and was being given the Kiss of life* I then saw
other supporters walking about holding their chests and obviously in pain.


                                                                       .PC1218
                                                                  <Qp^<Z2o
                        -   2   -




 Fire and ambulance services arrived at this timeo 1 assisted with other
 Police officers to hold a crowd of supporters back to allow the services
to gain access to the rear gate.


I saw two men laid on the floor on their backs near to the tunnel entrance
to the Leppings Lane stand. I could see that they were obviously dead their
eyes were open there was no movment and the older looking man of the two
had had his false teeth placed on his chest. The younger was laid with his
arms out his clothes had almost been pulled from his body. At the request of
a Police inspector in company with other persons supporters and police officers
I assisted by moving the two bodies to a place nearby where I saw that there
were several other bodies laid on the floor. I then assisted by helping to
put injured persons into ambulances. I then assisted with crowd control as
football supporters were leaving the Leppings land gate. I saw that the
supporters were very abusive towards all Police officers stood around*
A shrtwhile later when the main crowd had left the ground I returned to the
transit van and the area was patrolled re any public order situations.


At around 6.10pm the same date I returned to Claywheels where I took my meal
and then left Sheffield to return to Doncaster, where I went off duty at 8pm*




                                                 ..PC1218
