                                                                                      M I R . 15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                          Date and time raised   -££7*>/9P _ /uss. Number                    S        '


Title                                                                            >s£p7
(Include source and any document number if relevant)   T o                        V \x J ^ P o ^ fc r (^ V \A -J C ?
                                                          WL    % tA'PvS'P-i S<?c*aPT ^ £ tC2^LLA&
Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/No __________________________________________________
                                                                                                                       Receiver




                                                                                                                       Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                                Statem ent Reader
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                       Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined     further action to be taken                                                                                       S IO




                                                                                                                       Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                               WA 70
                                               (S.O. G22)
                                 , I           (amended 9.81)

FOR COURT USE ONLY
Regina         ................................................



Exhibit No.............................

Signed .................................
Justices of the Peace/Clerk to



Date



FOR POLICE
Police Force .              ...........................................

D ivision    ...................................................................
Descriaflon of Jtem                                        .
        J e h fc
       k        6       f
       /Uh/n.
     C%
      g r S tifa i                                     //Ir /c U

                                /)
Identifying Mark . ' . . . . V. . V .................
                                                       ^     ,

 LAB. REF.
       C J. Act 1967 *.$
      M<5 Act 1980,3,102,
      MC Rules 1981, r.70

I identify the exhibit described
overleaf as that referred to in the
statement made and signed by me.



       Signature              Date
                                City of Sheffield
                       Administration and Legal Department


                         C O M M I T T E E      R E P O R T
                              F R O N T      S H E E T




REPORT TO:   General Purposes Panel


DATE OF COMMITTEE:      6th May, 1986


SUBJECT:     Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975




ORIGINATING OFFICER:               Bownes


LIST OF BACKGROUND PAPERS (As applicable and unless confidential/exempt*   ):



       1. Report of the Head of Administration and Legal Department to
       the General Purposes Panel on 3rd March, 1986.

       2.    Home Office Circular 7/1986.




                 * Full details of what constitutes confidential/
                    exempt information are available on request




                            m
REPORT OF THE HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT TO THE GENERAL
PURPOSES PANEL

                          Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

Introduction

The Panel will recall that a report was submitted to the March 1986 Meeting

covering the general safety of sports grounds legislation as it affects the City

Council.   This follow-up report aims to deal in detail with the current

situation in Sheffield as inherited from the South Yorkshire County Council*

There are 2 sports grounds currently subject to the legislation - Sheffield

Wednesday Football Club and Sheffield United Football Club; the Owlerton Sports

Stadium is likely to be made subject to the legislation shortly.

Sheffield Wednesday Football Club - Hillsborough

The Sheffield Wednesday Football Club Limited was designated as requiring a

Safety Certificate in August 1978 and such a Certificate was issued by the ~

County Council on 21st December, 1979.    The Stadium is currently undergoing

major works which, when complete, will form a roof over the Spion Kop and thus

substantially improve the accommodation for spectators.

Sheffield United Football Club, Bramall Lane

The Club was designated as requiring a certificate in August 1984 but to date

a certificate has not been issued as there are outstanding works to be

completed. The County Council took the view that the certificate should only be

issued as and when the Ground was up to the appropriate safety standard and not

before.    This procedure effectively insured that the terms of the Safety

Certificate were not breached as soon as it was issued.       It is hoped that the

Council will be in a position to issue a certificate before the start of the

1986/87 season.

Owlerton Sports Stadium

It is understood that the Home Secretary will shortly be designating the Stadium

as requiring a Safety Certificate in accordance with the Popplewell Report

 recommendations.   It will, therefore, be necessary to arrange for a f u U

 inspection of the Stadium in the next few weeks to find out what works are




                                    van
going to be required to raise the standard of the Stadium to appropriate levels.

The Panel is probably aware that the Stadium is Council owned but is currently

leased to the Owlerton Sports Stadium Limited.    This Lease will expire on 1st

November, 1987.

Safety Certificate Standard Conditions

At the moment the Safety Conditions attached to Safety Certificates are

standardised throughout South Yorkshire and both the Police and the Fire Service

have indicated that they would wish this situation to continue for reasons of

administrative simplicity.   The Conditions do, however, give some cause for

concern, as they appear to be inadequate or inappropriate in some areas.    The

drafting of these Conditions is of particular importance as it is a serious

criminal offence to contravene any of them punishable by the Statutory M axim um

Fine (Currently £2,000) or 2 years imprisonment or both.


It is proposed to re-draft the Certificate conditions, where appropriate, and to

submit them to the Panel for approval.     The Sheffield Wednesday Certificate

would then be replaced in accordance with Section 4 (1) (b) of the Act.     The

Sheffield United Certificate could then be issued with the new conditions before

the start of the 1986/87 season.     The re-drafted conditions would, of course, be

submitted to the Fire Service, the Police and Building Surveyor for comment;

other authoritiesin South Yorkshire could also be involved in this process.

Existing Administrative Arrangements

The County Council system for administering the Act is based on 2 main

 components - (a) bi-annual inspections of the Stadium; and (b) meetings of an

officer working party.   The bi-annual inspections consist of representatives

 from all the interested authorities and involve thorough inspections of the

 Stadia and the identifying of any defects.    These defects are at the time of the

 visit brought to the attention of the certificate holder and its technical

 representative if one is present.    Depending on the nature of the faults found

 (if any) steps are then agreed between the Authority and the Certificate Holder




                                   C R 3
to rectify them or so arrange matters that no risk to the public occurs.     The

Working Party consists of representatives from the Police, Fire Service,

Building Surveyors and the County Council - it considers in detail various

matters (such as the Spion Kop development at Sheffield Wednesday Football

Ground) and also any outstanding items from the bi-annual inspections.     The

Working Party is effectively a co-ordinating body which attempts to ensure that

a balanced and consistent approach is maintained to current issues at the Sports

Grounds.    Any recommendations it makes are subject to approval by this Panel.

The Health and Safety Executive

Recommendation 9 of The Popplewell Committee's Interim Report read as follows

"There should be urgent consultation between the Health and Safety Executive and

the Fire Authorities and Local Authorities as to how best to co-ordinate and

communicate their inspections and reports".    Bearing this in mind the local

office of the Health and Safety Executive was invited to participate in the

administrative system for safety at sports grounds.    This invitation was

declined.    The Executive will apparently take no direct part in the

Certification system.

In view of this problem the Home Office was contacted and the position

explained; it appears that negotiations are under way between the Home Office

and the HSE about Popplewell's recommendation but as yet there has been no

useful outcome.

In these circumstances the Council could keep the Health and Safety Executive

informed of all developments in Sheffield and to invite their comments on them.

It would then be the responsibility of the Executive to decide whether or not to

respond.

Fees

The basis on which fees may be charged is set out in Regulation 14 of the Safety

of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976 which states "14.     A local authority may

determine the fees to be charged in respect of applications for the issue or




                                   m
4   .
amendment of safety certificates but such fees shall not in a particular case

exceed an amount commensurate with the work actually and reasonably done.          The

South Yorkshire County Council did not fix any fees under the Regulation

apparently as a matter of policy and the Panel is therefore asked to decide

which of the following options-to adopt:- (a) state as a matter of policy that

no fees will be charged in respect of Safety of Sports Grounds legislation or

(b) decide in principle to fix fees and to ask for a report back on the costs

to the Council.

Conclusion

The Panel is asked to:-

(a)       Note the broad outlines of the administrative system organised by the

          County Council and authorise its continuation for the time being;

(b)       Note the position of the Health and Safety Executive and request the Head

          of Administration and Legal Department to keep the Executive informed of

          all matters relating to sports ground safety;

(c)       Request the Head of Administration and Legal Department to draft new

          safety certificate conditions in consultation with the appropriate

          authorities approval by the Council;

    (d)   Either resolve that no fees will be charged under the legislation or

          request the Head of Administration and Legal Department to report on the

          Council’s costs in this respect.

                                                          Roger Pensam,
                                                          Head of Administration
                                                          and Legal Department

    Town Hall,
    SHEFFIELD.
    May, 1986
