FORM 27 *
                                                                                 RC

                     GREATER MANCHESTER POLICE
                                                                                      7
                                        MEMORANDUM                                    fv? \
            Superintendent                                  Chief Superintendent
    From:
            G/N Sub Division                        To-    ’G ’ Division




                           TRAFFIC PROBLEMS - 15TH APRIL, 1989
                           _________ M67/A560 - MOTTRAM__________


                     On Saturday 15th April,- 1989, I was the Duty Officer
            covering the ’G ' Division.

                     At sometime shortly after 12 noon that day I attended
            at Stalybridge Police Station to discuss with the Duty Inspector
            contingency planning for the return of the Liverpool F.C. supporters
            from the F.A. Cup Semi-Final being played at Sheffield that day.
            This planning was based on problems encountered when these supporters
            had returned from previous matches in Sheffield.

                     Whilst at the Police Station I became aware of traffic
            hold-ups  at the eastern exit of the M67 which is situated close to
            Mottram village.    This is not uncommon, traffic often tailing back
            towards the motorway purely because of the geography of the roads.
            The motorway terminates into a single lane carriageway close to a
            cross-roads controlled by traffic lights in a small village centre.
            At the terminus of the motorway the A560 joins the roundabout at
            this point, and this in turn contributes to the traffic bottleneck.

                     I was not aware of any problems concerning either disorderly
            behaviour or the manner in which vehicles were being driven.

                      It was confirmed that Officers had been sent to both the
            traffic lights in Mottram village and those at Hollingworth to
            carry out manual control and give Sheffield bound traffic maximum
            priority.

                     With the information I then had I considered that the
            necessary steps had been taken to alleviate the problem.

                     Shortly afterwards I went to the M67 at Hyde and saw that
            traffic was moving fairly freely and that a proportion of it was
            made of Liverpool football supporters.  I heard singing from one
            coach but nothing else that would suggest rowdyism.   I then travelled
            part way along the A560 from Gee Cross, Hyde towards Mottram and
            again saw that traffic was heavy, in constant movement, and contained
            football supporters.  Some of these supporters shouted to passers
            by through the car windows, but it appeared good humoured rather than
            drunken.

                     Prior to going off duty at 1.45 p.m. traffic in the area
            of Mottram was still fairly heavy but had cleared considerably.   The
            problem had ceased.



                                                                     contd.
         This heavy volume of traffic was dealt with in the normal
accepted manner, and although anticipated, it cannot be re-routed,
and one can only give lengthy preference at the points already
mentioned.

         I was not aware of the behaviour problems until some time
later and no incidents were recorded relating to either people or
property in this area.

         Because of the afternoon's tragic events the return was
very staggered and no incidents of note came to our attention.
