                  Lic^Constable
Jillian Andrews Police Constable 3122 Andrews.                  1      (9 o    r s *>
B Grout) Woodseats Police Station*
 Duty : 08.45 x 16.45 Saturday 15th April 1989.

08.45 On duty V.’oodseats Police Station.
09.00 Transported by bus to Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground, Hillsborough.
09.30 T.O.A
10.00 Briefing in Ilorth Stand of football ground. I>uty allocated : Serial 8 with
      PS 1203 Karples in the Spion Cop, Hillsborough.
1 2.00 Resumed to turnstyle duties together with PC 14-5 Tew. Styles Ko.s 38 to kZ
      covered withii. the ground. These turnstjiies -..ere situated at the Penistone
      Tioad end of the ground, on the South otaiidci side. I.o other Officers were seen
      to be working turnstyle duties at this location, either inside or outside the
      ground, V.’e were visited on numerous occasions by Ps ^arples who stated that tae
      ground was filling up quite quickly and that we would soon be rcuired to return
      to our serial in order to reinforce the cordon between Liverpool and Notts.
      Forest fans in the Spion Cop. He therefore requested us to stand at the top of -;h
      the stairwell overlooking the turns£yles so that he could signal us to return
      when required. Only a few fans were entering the ground at this time via these
      tumstyles and they appeared in good spirits.
13.10 Signal received from PS Harpies to return to the serial in the Spion Cop.
      Returned to the serial which was situated in the Cop towards the North Stand side
      A       1 section of the Cop had been reserved for Liverpool fans, my serial was
       situated between these fans and the Hotts. Forest fans who were occupying the
      rest of the Cop. Prior to the kick off, it was noticed that the cop appeared
       overcrowded and many youths appeared to be cbmnk and wese generally acting in
      an abusive manner. This abuse was not only directed at the Liverpool fans, but
      also at the Police. A number of coins were thrown from within the Cop. V.e were
       joined by a second serial in order to reinforce the cordon and it was notiead
^     that a number of Family units near to the cordon were expressing their fear at
       thesituation but also a fear of trying to make their way out of the ground due
      to the vast number of people and their behaviour within*
15*05 Saw   a large number of people spill onto the pitch from the Leppings Lane end of
      the ground. Initial impression was that a 'pitch invasion* was talcing place.
      As the players left the field the fans in the cop appeared more aggresive and
      we were directed to continue our duties re separation/public order between tne tw
      sete of fans. As an ambulance and stretchers were brought onto the pitch it was
      realised hoi-: serious the incident was. I took no part in the events at the
      Leppings Lane end of the pitch, remaining in the Cop until all the supporters
      had left at approximately ':.50pm.


                                                  Continued.
Continued,


16,50 Together with serial, directed by Insp/Ch. Insp to resume a mobile transit
      patrol. On standby in Kiddlewood Hoad - Parkhead Koad re public order,
18,00 Returned to Kortb. Stand re debrief - much confusion. Stood down.
18.15 Penistone Hoad awaiting transport back to   oodseats.
18.4-5 Transported back to l«oodseats Police Station via minibus.
19.15 Off duty.




Poliee Constable 3122 Andrews.
