TELEPHONE:                                                    SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

SHEFFIELD (0742) 768522                                        POLICE HEADQUARTERS

TELEX: 547996                                                    SNIG HILL
FAX: (0742)   523416                                              SHEFFIELD S3 8LY


R B WELLS QPM MA
CHIEF CONSTABLE




                               Facsimile Transmission



   Date:
                       Isr October

   To-



   For the attention of: . .




   Comments:




  From:



  Tel No:     ...



  No. of Pages (including this page)
                                                I^
                                       ............ . V v ,




  In the event of a poor copy, please contact:-

  South Yorkshire Police
  Tel No: (0742) 768522, extension 8409
PCA
p o u c e c o m p l a in t s a u t h o r it y
                                                             London SW1P

                                                          Telephone



BRIGADIER J. L. POWNALL, OBE
Deputy Chairman


        G Moore, Esq                                   3 o . September, 1991
        Assistant Chief Constable
        South Yorkshire Police
        Snig Hill
        SHEFFIELD
        S3 8LY




                                                ✓

        Following our telephone conversation of last week, I discussed with
        the Chairman your suggestion of a further meeting between presenting
        counsel and the Authority.   We gave careful consideration to your
        proposal but felt that it would, perhaps, be imposing too great an
        influence from the Authority on matters which are strictly the
        responsibility of the South Yorkshire Police.

        As an alternative way of guiding counsel on the case,as we see it, I
        enclose a note which the Chairman has drafted.   It is very much in
        note form but we hope it will provide some helpful guidance to
        counsel.

        I very much hope that you will soon be in a position to notify us of
        the dates of the tribunal so that we can nominate the Authority
        members.   I would be grateful if you would continue to keep me
        informed if any other difficulties arise.




        J L POWNALL
                           NOTES ON DISCIPLINARY CHARGES

                                         HILLSBOROOGH

The    charges which       the     Police    Complaints    Authority    have   directed

against Chief Superintendent Dukenfield are very simple and easy to

understand.       This Authority appreciate that the overall enquiry gave

rise    to   a    vast    amount    of    paper-work.      The   case   against    Chief

Superintendent Duckenfield is concerned with a limited area namely his

failure to prevent over-crowding in Pens 3 and 4 and thereby to avert

the ghastly tragedy which resulted.              The charges which this Authority

have specified are deliberately framed so as to point to this failure

at three distinct stages, namely Charge 1. - to the time before the

crowds started to arrive;            Charge 2. - to the time between the first

arrival of the fans and the opening of Gate C;                   and Charge 3. - the

time after Gate C was opened.              The charges are specified so as to keep

the issues within manageable limits.               They are in no way intended to

suggest that no-one else was responsible for the tragedy.



Charges      1,   2 and    3 are    framed under        Regulation   4 of the     Police

(Discipline) Regulations 1985.              In order to prove any one of the three

charges (and, indeed the separate charge against Superintendent Murray

which mirrors charge 3 against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield) the

presenter of the charges must prove, beyond reasonable doubt, that the

officer charged:-



       (i)    was a member of a police force;              and



       (ii) that he was under a duty as a police officer to attend to

       or carry out certain things, namely in this case those things
    necessary for the proper control and safety of those members of

    the public who attended the match;           and



   (iii)    that, he neglected or omitted to carry out such

            things with due promptitude or diligence.



Proof of good and sufficient cause,          however,    lies on the officer

charged on the balance of probabilities.         Of these essential elements

in each charge (i) and (ii) apply          to all threeequally.

(i) is unlikely to be the subject          of dispute.



(ii) May not be contested.



If it is, brief evidence may need to be called as to the fact that not

only had the police accepted responsibility for crowd control and

safety     on   behalf   of   the   Club   but   that    Chief   Superintendent

Duckenfield, who was in charge of the police, knew this full well -

and accepted this.



Evidence:-      Operational Order

                The pre-match briefings



Evidence from Club - and if necessary, senior officers,             if this is

disputed.



NB. Case of Harris v South Yorkshire         Police which is referred to in

Taylor's report at page 29.
Duckenfield's evidence before the Coroner with regard to safety at

page 41, 43, 71, 82 at which he said:-



     On page 41 re pre-match briefing to Inspectors:



          (E)   "We (the police) must ensure the safety o f

          the public inside and outside the                 ground."



          (F)   "I     cannot     stress     too     highly    the     word

                'safety'".



          (G)   "Our     (the     police)      job     is     to   ensure     the

                safety of spectators".



     On page 43 "Safety of supporters in this ground is paramount":



          (D -G) re briefing to officers - same format.



     On page 71:                (D)     See passage.



     On page 82:                (C)      "Certainly not       so much    in the

                                pens,    but the whole ground, monitoring of

                                safety and levels was crucial".



In view of these answers and of the fact that police 'controlled' the

crowd, which must imply a responsibility for safety, in common-sense,

there may not be any dispute but that he was in charge of a police

operation which was concerned with the safety of spectators.
Hereafter references to his evidence before the Coroner which was

given on oath,     under caution and        after warnings that he was not

obliged to answer will be by reference to the transcript with a page

number.



(iii)    In   respect   of   the   three   charges    which   the Authority   have

directed and specified - the particulars will differ because the

charges deal with different stages.           Particulars may be sought.       If

they are it is for Counsel to draft them.                The basic charge will

stand.    The charge must be proved but this does not necessitate the

proof of all particulars (cf Machent v Quinn 1970 AER 255) but it does

mean that each member of the Tribunal must be agreed as to the proof

of a particular before it can convict of the charge (cf R v Brown 1983

79 CR App R 115) .



If particulars are not sought Counsel will have to decide whether to

deliver them or provide the defence with a copy of his opening.



I have set out particulars which illustrate the case as the Authority

would wish it presented.           Where appropriate I have put page numbers

in brackets indicating references to the transcript.             Where the number

has a (2) after it this means it is in the second sequence of numbers

dealing with evidence on 13 March 1991.              It is for Counsel to decide

what particulars he relies on.



Charge No 1



Chief Superintendent Duckenfield neglected or omitted to carry out his

duty as a police officer as alleged in that he:-
(a)   took   over      as   operational       commander          (47C)     in

      overall        command        (67G)      without             adequate

      preparation;



(b)   signed     the      operational       order     without        first

      visiting the ground;



(c)   relied on      an     operational      order         drawn     up    by

      someone else without further enquiry and accepted

      it as 'tried and tested' on the basis that it has

      been     operated      satisfactorily          on    two     previous

      occasions;



(d)   failed to brief himself adequately or to prepare

      for emergencies;



(e)   failed to acquaint himself with the layout of and

      facilities at the ground so as to be able to deal

      with     emergencies        (68C,     89(2),        90(2))    and    in

      particular:-



               (i)   did not know of association between

             turnstiles A-G and Leppings Lane Terrace

               (74C);



               (ii) did     not   know    where      Gate     "C"    was        (53C)   and

                     (25(2)B) ;
             (iii) did not acquaint himself with the sign-posting

             (68D);



             (iv) did not acquaint himself with Club requirement or

                    know of print-out which the Club were able to

                    provide (50 B ) ;



             (v)    did not know of         the    'penning'     in LeppingsLane

                    Terrace (44B and        C) , (but cf 72 D or ignored it

                        79 };



(f)   failed to appreciate the lay out of Leppings Lane

      Terrace and in particular             of the effect of the

      radial fences between Pens            3 and 4 and Pens 1 and

      2 and 5, 6 and 7 and the absence of any proper

      exits in case of emergency, thereby making over­

      crowding      a    very   dangerous    circumstance        which

      required special consideration.             Many references.



(g)   accepted "find your own level"               on the Lepping

      Lane Terrace when even a cursory glance would

      have   made       it   clear   that   such    a   policy    was

      unworkable (44B).



(h)   failed to provide any contingency plan if these

      pens became overcrowded (90D-E).



(i)   failed to enquire and did not know whether the

      police or the Club were to act as stewards,                  in
      particular    in     relation   to    the   Leppings   Lane

      Terrace and made no such enquiries (68E and 77,

      78, 92C);



(j)   failed to provide any police stewarding at the

      entrance to the Tunnel to Pens 3 and 4;



(k)   failed to provide for crowd numbers in Pens 3 and

      4 to be monitored (77C and 77G,             78A) ;



(1)   failed to read, or, if he read, to take any steps

      to apply the recommendations on the Green Book as

      to crowd density (71);



(m)   failed   to   heed    the   ACPO     recommendation    with

      regard to the drawing up of a               schedule as to

      police and Club crowd management or to ensure

      that such a schedule was drawn up, or to enquire

      as to whether this was done (68, 69);



(n)   failed to make any or any adequate enquiries as

      to police intelligence about the football clubs

      concerned;



(o)   failed to make any plan to encourage the even

      distribution of spectators on the Leppings Lane

      Terrace (91);
       (p)   failed to meet Club officials prior to 15 April

             1989 or to rearrange a meeting with them (38).



Evidence to include:-



       Plan of the ground.



       Plan of Leppings Lane Terrace.



       Photographs of the ground and Terrace.



       Sewill and Mole (if required).



       Transcript of Duckenfield's evidence before the Coroner.



Charge No 2



This   charge   is concerned with      Chief   Superintendent     Duckenfield's

neglect or omission during the period between the first arrivals of

spectators and the opening of Gate C.



Suggested particulars:-



       (a)   failed to monitor crowd security in Pens 3 and 4

             and to observe the build up        of   spectators   in

             those pens (60, 31(2));



       (b)   failed to get print out of numbers of spectators

             who had entered the ground (49H);
     (c)   gave an order to a police constable to ask people

           to move    forward   and    spread   out   but    failed to

           ensure that this was carried out (52B);



     (d)   prior to the opening of Gate C failed to observe

           or to take action consequent upon the obvious

           over-filling of Pens 3 and 4 and the under use of

           Pens 1, 2,     6, and 7 or to draw the conclusion

           from this that the spectators on the Leppings

           Lane Terrace were not, and could not, find their

           own level (4(2));



     (e)   failed to      control   further entry by spectators

           into Pens 3 and 4 by placing police officers at

           the entry to the Tunnel.



Evidence. Plans, photos, videos, Duckenfield's evidence to Coroner.



Charge 3



This charge is concerned with the failure of Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray to provide for the control and

stewarding of spectators coming through Gate C when it was opened.



Suggested particulars



     (a)   failed    to   provide     any   control   over    spectators   coming

           through Gate C.
(b)   failed    to    appreciate       that       these    spectators      would    be

      likely to go to the Tunnel.



(c)   failed to       observe that      Pens      3 and 4 were already,            and

      obviously,         overcrowded         -      and     that,     if further

      spectators       were     to   enter       these    Pens,   there    would    be

      danger of injury and death (3(2) C and D ) ;



(d)   failed to take any steps to monitor or control

      entry in Pens 3 and 4 (5(2), 6 and 7);



(e)   failed     to    inform    Superintendent           Greenwood   in

      whose sector Gate C the concourse behind Leppings

      Lane     Terrace    and    the   terrace       were    situated.

      (1 2 (2 ));



(f)   failed to inform the Club, or anyone else, of the

      opening of Gate "C" (13 D, E) ;



(g)   failed to observe a surge of spectators in Pens

      3 and 4 (22(2)F - 23(2)C);



(h)   failed to observe overcrowding in Pens 3 and 4 or

      disparity between these pens and Pens l, 2, 6 and

      7 or that anything was wrong before spectators

      came from Pens 3 and 4 onto the pitch (31(2)); or

      to take any action whether by relaying a message

      or otherwise (21(2) and 22(2));
     (i)   failed to exercise those reasonable qualities of

           command expected of an 'overall commander1 in the

           emergency.        [This was, the PCA believe,     largely

           because      of    his   lack     of    preparation     and

           forethought, as particularised in Charge 1.]



The references to the transcript of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield's

evidence do not cover all relevant references but are intended to

assist Counsel.



Evidence. Plans,     photos,    videos,     evidence of surge,     evidence from

officer in charge of concourse area to prove no steps taken to close

the tunnel     (as was done      in 1988,    unknown to Chief Superintendent

Duckenfield)    and transcript of Chief           Superintendent   Duckenfield's

evidence to Coroner.
