                     Sheffield Archives Ref:            °[jijbz,i\                          M IR.15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                Date and time raised   >/si          fOc^          Number
                                                                                                                  b2tf
                                                                          ,r
Title
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions — urgent actionl^ Y eYes]fNo
                                              s jfN o    QOCX                    Q X S T J-     ^
                                                                                                                   Receiver
 &> T f t>F               ( C- ^ ^ h r
                                                                                                                   Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised
                                                                                                               Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions


                                                                                                                   Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) of actions raised

Examined - further action to be taken

                                                                  ... f e 7 i


                                                                                                                   Indexer
Further action No(s)

When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse oijjer Document Master Number
                                                    Liverpool 23.


                                                       O   ** April 1989


The Right Honourable
the Lord Justice Taylor,
SHEFFIELD.



My Lord,

I feel constrained to write to you in the hope that it might assist you
in your inquiry, notwithstanding that I was not in that part of the ground
where the tragedy occurred.

I should tell you that I am a Chairman of Industrial Tribunals at Liverpool
and last Saturday I and my wife drove over to Sheffield in order to see
the game, for which we held tickets for the North Stand.

We arrived at the ground at about 2.30 p.m. and our entrance was near
to the entrance to the area behind the 'Liverpool goal1.

There were some 8 turnstiles for the North Stand in a small enclosure.
Outside the enclosure were a group of mounted police and foot police.
Inside the enclosure and standing between the turnstiles was one policeman.

There were hundreds of supporters trying to get into the stands through
the turnstiles and I have never experienced anything like it before.
People were pressing from all sides, women were screaming to get out
and it was taking a long time to get through the turnstiles. The mounted
police and foot police outside the enclosure made no attempts to ease
the situation.

One expected that they would have been in the enclosure from the beginning
ensuring that there were orderly queues for each turnstile, as one sees
happening at other grounds.   The impression I received was that the police
didn't want to know what was going on behind them.

Our seats were in 'R' section of the North Stand and after the game had
been stopped and it was obvious that an accident had occurred because
we could see people being pulled out of the ground, a very large number
of policemen were marched into the ground and formed 2 lines in front
of the North Stand facing the Stand.

This incensed large numbers of people in the stand who were screaming
at the police to go to the assistance of the supporters behind the Liverpool
goal and it was quite some time before they were marched away.

Then a large number of police dog handlers and their        dogs    were lined
up in front of the Nottingham supporters in Spion Kop.




                            -   1   -




                                                                                 t
..   • *

           1




           During this time spectators were carrying the injured on improvised stretchers
           to that part of the ground immediately in front of where we were sitting
               j regret to say 1 saw no more than 6 policemen assisting them.

           The view I have formed is that the police did not know what had     happened
           because there was no one in overall control.

           I believe the police thought there had been a ground invasion hence the
           lining up of the policemen and the presence of the dogs.

           I am satisfied that the casualties would have been greater but for the
           marvellous assistance given by supporters in transporting the victims
           away from the Liverpool goal who, as I   h a v e said, received virtually
           no help from the police.




                                       -   2   -




                                                                                            3
