JOHN PETER DONNELLY




CHIEF INSPECTOR

WEST BAR POLICE STATION

SHEFFIELD




On Saturday 15 April 1989 I was part of the policing operation mounted

in Sheffield City Centre in respect "of the FA Cup Semi Final.




This operation was commanded by Superintendent Bates the deputy commander

of 'D' Division. A/Superintendent King, the then coinnander of 'Dl'

Sub-division was in charge of policing by South Yorkshire officers at

the Midland Railway Station.     I, as deputy commander of 'Dl' was in charge

of policing in the city centre.




At 9.00 am I attended a briefing in the Gym on the 5th Floor of West

Bar Police Station.   This was given by A/Superintendent King and after

he had spoken, Superintendent Bates added some short comments of a general

nature.




The part of the operation for which I was responsible consisted mainly

of several police personnel carriers containing teams of officers who

patrolled the city centre ready to respond to any reports of incidents

involving football supporters.    In addition officers were deployed on

foot at various prominent locations in the city centre.    All officers

were instructed to meal at West Bar Police Station after 3.00 pm, in

other words whilst the football match was in progress.    I patrolled in

an unmarked car driven by PC916 Bradley.
2



Initially the city centre was quiet.    After midday some reports of

football supporters causing trouble were received.    Most of these

concerned supporters who had entered city city centre public houses.

I was present in the Wicker and Nursery Street when officers cleared

groups of supporters out of public houses in that area and set them on

their way to Hillsborough Football Ground.    Most of the supporters I

spoke to were Nottingham Forest fans.     There was little real trouble

and I saw no arrests made.



After 3.00 pm I returned to West Bar Police Station and went to the Senior

Officers Mess where I mealed with A/Superintendent King and Inspector

Beeden.   A few   moments after this we learned that Operation Support

had been called at the Football Ground.




A/Superintendent King, Inspector Beeden and myself made a conscious

decision not to attend because we knew we may be needed in the city

centre.   We were aware that some of our mobiles had already attended

the Ground.   Others were in the Canteen at West Bar Police Station and

had not yet attended.     Again we decided to retain these in case they

were needed in the city centre.    After this we monitored the Hillsborough

radio channel on a personal radio and gradually realised the enormity

of the tragedy.     We also realised that Superintendent Bates was now

detained at the ground and no longer in a position to command the city

centre operation.




A/Superintendent King, Inspector Beeden and myself met in the

Superintendent's office at West Bar Police Station and discussed the

situation.    It was decided Mr King would take overall command and remain

in the Control Room at West Bar Police Station.     I would take command

of policing at the Midland Station and Mr Beeden would take command of
3
                                                                               3. G»

the city centre.    We also decided to contact the shift of officers due

to come on at 6.00 pm and ask them to come on immediately.    We also

contacted all city centre public houses via the 'Pubwatch' scheme and

ask them to close until further notice.    The Control Room were instructed

to perform both these tasks.    I then went to the Midland Station.   At

first   few officers were available to me and I asked for more to be

provided as soon as possible.    Gradually officers who had been on patrol

in the city centre but had responded to the 'Operation Support' were

released from the ground and were re-deployed to the Midland Station.

Gradually football fans arrived in varying numbers from the ground and

boarded trains.    They were subdued, even shocked and there was no trouble.




Finally when all supporters had departed I returned to West Bar Police

Station and spent my time talking to and counselling officers who were

distressed.____________________________
