                                                                             J7/
ACCOUNT OF STEPHEN ROBERT BRICKLEY, POLICE CONSTABLE 211

I am a Police Constable in the South Yorkshire Police at present

attached to ’C' Division, Rotherham, as Divisional Road Safety Officer.

On Saturday, 15 April 1989, I paraded for duty at Main Street Police

Station, Rotherham at 8.30 am for transport to the Sheffield Wednesday

Football Ground at Hillsborough to take up duties with Serial 37.

At 9-10 am we arrived at the Ground and a short while later paraded on

the North Stand for a briefing as to our appropriate duties.

At 11 am I commenced duties at Wadsley Bridge Railway Station awaiting

the arrival of a special train of Liverpool Supporters later that day.

We also policed an area of Halifax Road adjacent to the Railway Station.

From 12 noon I noticed a large number of obviously Liverpool fans on the

shopping area if Kilner Way seated on the grassed area drinking from

bottles and cans of beer and lager.     At about 1 pm half our Serial were

asked to go to Curry's Electrical Shop - officer required assistance -

on entering the shopping area we were asked by a Superintendent to wait

at the driveway whilst he visited Curry's.    They did not require our

assistance.

Whilst walking back to Halifax Road I saw some several hundred Liverpool

fans stood and seated on the grassed area drinking from bottles and cans

of beer and lager.    I saw some dozens of fans queiang at Gateway Supermarket

and dozens leaving with single, four packs and dozen packs of beer and

lager.   I then returned to the Railway Station.

At 1.55 pm the   Special Train arrived and some 350 well behaved fans got

off the train,   walked down the steps and awaited escort to the Ground by

Mounted Officers.    This took about five minutes, they    were then escorted

by the Mounted Officers and half our Serial down Halifax Road.      The Serial

Sergeant, PC Shipman, and myself, remained adjacent to the Railway Station

policing the pavement area.
At 2.20 pm we walked up to the grassed area outside the shops on Kilner

Way, the fans had been moved on by the Mounted Section.      The area was

littered with hundreds of beer and lager cans and also on the pavement

on that side of the road and about a dozen cans were in the road and

vehicles running over them.

At 2.30 pm I returned to the frontage of the Railway Station, there was

a steady stream of fans on both sides of the road going towards the

Ground, some had obviously been drinking and about six youths were warned

as to their conduct (shouting and chanting).      Numerous were drinking from

cans of beer and lager.

At 2.50 pm we commenced walking down Halifax Road towards Claywheels Lane,

at 2.55 pm whilst outside the Gate Inn we assisted other officers in a minor

fracas that had taken place, preventing a Liverpool fan to re-enter the pub

to aid a friend inside, he was on the fringes of drunkenness.     There were

over 100 cans and bottles (empty) of beer and lager on the boundary wall of

the pub, I would say that these were not from the public house.     I looked

up Halifax Road and would say there were about 500 fans still coming towards

the Ground.

At 3 pm we walked towards Claywheels Lane for a meal, at 3.05 pm we were

called out to Leppings Lane for an unknown reason.     The Serial Sergeant,

PC Shipman, and myself, were transported there by an unknown Crime and Vandal

Squad vehicle.    At 3-10 pm we arrived in Leppings Lane outside the entrance

to the Ground, there were no fans waiting to get in but about 50 people just

stood around.    I was instructed by Inspector Ellis to keep pedestrians on

the pavement.    At 3-25 pm I assisted with traffic duties in/.Leppings Lane

for the arrival of ambulances and fire engines.

At if. 15 pm I spoke to PC Lawrence of Rotherham Division who was stood inside

a small fenced area in the Ground at the junction of the Leppings Lane Stand

and the South Stand, there were about 12 dead bodies behind this area, he was

obviously shocked.   I then walked towards Leppings Lane and several fans
shouted ’I t ’s your fault’, obviously directed at the Police but they did

not say what the reason was.        As I was stood in Leppings Lane the fans

who had been evacuated from the Ground appeared very shocked and angry

and were also angry about the press taking photographs and together with

PC Shipman I had to escort one photographer well away from the Ground.

He was wearing an official Press vest.        Numerous fans had minor injuries,

cuts, limping and grazes and were asking about their friends who were in

the Stand with them.         I advised them to stand on the pavement opposite

the Ground and see if        they could see them as they came out.

At 4.40 pm our Serial     attended at Wadsley Bridge Railway Station to see     the

returning fans on to the Special       Train, they were obviously sad but there

was no anger or bad behaviour.

At 5-45 pm I returned to Claywheels Lane awaiting the arrival of the

remainder of Serial 37-

At 6.25 pm we were transported back to Main Street Police Station, going

off duty at 7 pm.

Whilst on duty in Halifax Road outside the Railway Station       I saw two young

men enquiring of Liverpool supporters if they had any spare tickets, this

happened on two occasions but      I cannot state whether they were the same two

men.



On Saturday 9th April 1988, I did work the football serai final between the

same two clubs.     My duties were on Serial 2? at Hillsborough shopping precinct.

I cannot recall anything of an unusual or outstanding nature regarding football

fans happening that day.




Police Constable         \
