                                                                                                    M I R . 15




OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                  Date and tim e raised                                           Num ber



T itle    Id           ! -yvtv,
(Inclu d e source an d an y docum ent num ber i f relevant I


Receiver's instructions — urgent action — Yes/JXo          f a t > U         9 '- j / f y -   t o          77 C /   ,/A z c m ty
                                                                                                                                        Receiver
                                       >m.
                                                                  O '                                                                   r
                                                                                                                                        Indexer
D ocum ent registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised                                                                                                              P /s
                                                                                                                                   S tatem ent Reader
Statement reader's instructions
                                                                                                                               crM-o
                                                                                                                                        Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised

Examined - fu rth er action to be taken                                                                                                        S IO




Further action No(s)                                                                                                                    Indexer



When satisfied all actions raised O ffice Manager to endorse other Docum ent Master Number Form
                                                            Lancashire




Dear Sir

My husband and I travelled to Hillsborough with 2 friends, arriving at the
ground about 2.35-2.40, having parked some 20 minutes away.

Our tickets were for the North Stand, Gangway S. As we reached Leppings Lane,
we were immediately aware of the huge crowds in the vicinity of the turnstiles.
Last year, before we even approached this area, I can recall police officers
asking to see tickets, checking which stands or terraces fans were heading for.
I did not see any such ticket examination this year.

We were immediately engulfed in the crowd.    There was a mounted policeman to my
right, but his presence seemed to have little effect in attempting to get the
crowd into any form of queue.  I could not see any   policemen on foot in the area
around us.  At this stage it was difficult   to keep standing, and I was afraid
that I may be injured by the police horse.

As we were pushed further forward the short metal barrier on my right was
threatening to give way under the weight of the crowd and I knew that if I fell
I would not be able to get up again.  A fan, was yelling for people to push back
to the left, as we were being pushed further to the right.  He was shouting that
there were women and childen in the crowd.

As we were carried with the crowd to the turnstile, there was one policeman, who
because of the vast crowd, was himself hemmed in.   I pleaded with him to get
assistance, as I said someone was going to be hurt.   He said he could not as he
did not have a radio.   When I asked why, he said they were not all issued with
them.

My husband, helped by someone in the crowd, managed to get my friend and I, 2
other women and 2 young boys through the turnstile. Through nothing  but good
fortune, my 2 friends, myself and my husband had no major physical injuries.
Once through the turnstiles, I immediately approached a police officer to
request him to radio for assistance for his colleague outside, I told him I
thought someone may be killed in the crowd outside.

Over some years, I have travelled to many of Liverpool’s away games and have
been caught up in crowds, not least of all, Wembley last year, but never have I
been so afraid of injury as I was on Saturday.

The game had just kicked   off when we got to our seats.  It was not clear at
first what was happening   when people began spilling out from the terraces.   The
teams were taken off and   more and more people began pouring on to the pitch.
The thought that someone   had been killed went through my mind.

Liverpool supporters, youths, men were racing back and forth carrying stretchers
bearing bodies of the injured.  They were tearing down the advertising hoardings
and using them as stretchers.  I could hear Nottingham Forest fans chanting,
something derogatory, directed at the Liverpool supporters.  They were silenced
■s




     as they realised something was wrong.  They even began applauding the youths
     efforts as more ’stretchers’ were carried across the field.  A message came over
     the public address system, which we could not hear or understand.

     Police officers were standing the full length of the half way line.   More
     police came onto the pitch and they positioned themselves facing the North
     Stand.  I could see police over at the terracing.  One supporter was carrying
     another man on his back, the weight nearly bringing him to his knees.  He was
     watched unaided by police officers.

     I saw a ’stretcher’ being carried with an arm and leg hanging limply from it.
     My husband was trying to reassure me that no-one had been killed, but I could
     see that there were jackets covering some of the heads of those on the
     stretchers.  One man was screaming that someone was dead - I could not hear the
     name, his 2 friends repeated the word ’d e a d ’ and fell to the ground. The noise
     inside the stadium was deafening.  The whole thing was unreal.

     People in the upper seating area above the terracing were hauling people to
     safety out of the crowd.   An ambulance arrived and drove over to the terracing.
     There were still lads racing back and forth with stretchers.  A fire engine
     arrived and police in front of the North Stand ran towards the terracing.

     About 20 fans ran towards the policemen on the half way line pointing towards
     the Leppings Lane terracing. The police reacted as if the fans had gone to fight
     and linked arms riot-fashion.

     At this point, I d o n ’t know what time it was, we were very distressed and
     decided to leave.   The frustration at not knowing how many people had died, and
     not being able to help was unbearable.

     As we were leaving I heard a police officer remark to another that they were not
     responsible for ticket allocations.  We left the ground to scenes in the streets
     outside of youths, men and women crying.

     On our way home we learned just how many people    had died.

     I would like to comment that if every constable was not issued with radios,
     then a lack of communication with their Control Room could have been the reason
     why some of them were standing watching.      The Control Room must have Close-
     Circuit TV Cameras, and if so, why we r e n ’t they in contact with officers nearer
     to the terracing.  It could have lead even further to communication problems
     with those policing outside the ground.

     The FA were wrong in their allocation of the smaller part of the stadium to
     Liverpool supporters, two years in succession.  They must have now learnt, to
     our cost, their mistake.

     This letter which has taken me 2 weeks to attempt to record the nightmare I
     witnessed in writing is not meant to apportion blame to individual constables.
     I merely wish to record events as I saw them.

     My family are all Liverpool supporters.  My parents, now dead some years
     followed Liverpool religiously.  I am glad they were not alive  to have witnessed
     the events of Saturday 15 April.  It has broken our hearts, and I know it would
     have theirs too.

     Yours faithfully
                                                                  22 May 1989




Lancashire




Dear Madam

I read your letter concerning the Hillsborough tragedy with great
interest and found your comments of help.

I share your feelings of distress at the incident and I an very
grateful to you for writing.

Yours faithfully




J M Jones
Assistant Chief Constable
