Staternent Pages
 1521   -   T897
                                                                                   STATION

TAME:            STEPHEN KENNETH            Sheffield Archives Ref:
#                BQARDMAN

al)DRESS :
                             LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE,

AGE / DATE OF BIKIH: 15

OCCUPATION:      SCHOOLBOY


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 240589                                          S BQARDMAN                 (SIGNED)



         I live at the above address with my mother and father., I am 15 years

                             ________ School, Crosby.
         of age and attend _______

         I am a supporter of Liverpool Football Club, and attend mostly home

         matches at Anfield, as I hold a ground season ticket, but as the match

         against Nottingham Forest was the F.A. Cup Semi Fined I went to

         Hillsborough, Sheffield, on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489).               I ggt my

         ticket through my voucher at Anfield.              I paid #6:00 for the lappings

         Lane standing.       I went as a private individualr travelled by coach,

         which I booked a seat in a travel agents, Barnes Travel, County Road,

             Liverpool. The coach I went on I think the company were called Ralph

             BULLOCK, I don't know where they are based but Barnes Travel would

             know.   I travelled to the match with my brother,                        who

             lives at                             , and my friend                      of



             We all met at a park between Anfield and Goodison, I think the coach

             picked us up at Priory Road.      It was meant to leave at 11 o'clock

             (1100) but there was a lot of pushing and it didn't leave until 11.30

             am (1130) on Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489).            We didn't stop on route




                                                                                                1521
BQARDMAN                STEPHEN KENNETH                                   2

to the game, but we were in traffic jams virtually all the way to

Hillsborough.    The traffic delays started in Stockport on the

motorway.    Some of the traffic wanted to turn off to Stockport City

Centre, and all the coaches wanted to go the other way to Sheffield.

Traffic was nose to tail all the way,     We never went on the M62, but

the road over the Fennines, I'd say about Fifty percent of the traffic

was football traffic.

We arrived in Sheffield at 1440 hours.     The coach driver was worried

that we were going to be late so dropped us off at a roundabout at the

junction with Leppings Lane and Penistone Road North, he then went

and parked the coach up a hill in Halifax Rd where all the other

coaches were parked.

When we got off the coach, everyone just followed each other to the

ground.     I saw policemen standing on street comers, but no one really

needed any direction or escort to the ground.

On the way to the ground I saw supporters drinking out of cans,

sitting on walls, and standing on street comers, but everyone was

good natured and happy to be there, I saw no fighting or drunkeness.

We got to the entrance of the ground in Leppings Lane at about 1445

hours there were no queues just a mass of people, the crowd stretched

from the turnstiles past the blue gates, out into Leppings Lane

itself. I saw two police officers on horses outside the blue gates and

some foot officers down by the turnstiles, they were trying to

control the crowd but, they couldn't cope with it.     We just managed to

push our way into the ground just inside the blue gates just before

they closed them to ease the pressure on the turnstiles.     I didn't see

any stewards outside the ground.

My mate and I knew which turnstile to go through, although I had not

been to Hillsborough before but the crowd was so bad we could not
BQARDMAN               STEPHEN KENNETH                                     3


queue up as there was a lot of pushing. So we stood by the wall,

behind it is the river.    We were near a line of police by gate C, and

they were blocking a passage to the South Stand.

Whilst we were standing there I saw that occasionally the police were

opening this gate, either to let small children in who had been

crushed in the queues, or to eject people who had climbed over a wall

by the turnstiles.    It was whilst I was standing there that I heard a

group of about thirty supporters talking.     They were saying to each

other, that the next time the gate was opened they were going to rush

it, and get into the ground.     After only about a minute or so the

police opened the gate to eject someone and this group rushed the

gate, along with many others but these people may have thought the gate

was being opened legitimately.     I didn't rush in, I knew that the

crowd had forced the gate open and I think the police must have

radioed for help, because a couple of police horses came up the South

Stand drive, and they blocked the gate off so no more supporters got

in.     I think about two hundred people must have got in when they

rushed the gate.     I could see that the crush was getting worse and we

thought there was going to be trouble so we walked back towards the

blue gates which were still closed.      There were two police officers on

foot keeping the gates closed, but the crowd were pushing against

them.    There was a mounted Police Officer going backwards and forwards

in front of the gates but, he wasn't having much effect.      Eventually

the police couldn't hold the gates any longer and the gates opened,

and many supporters rushed in to the already crowded area outside the

turnstiles.

Ms and my mate jumped over the wall, and stood on the river bank to

get out of the crush,     I think about six other people did the same.

We walked along the bank towards the ground and I saw that the gate
BOARDMAN              STEPHEN KENNETH                                       4


was open again (Gate C) and people were going in that way again, only

this time a police horse was guiding people into the ground.     We

climbed over the wall again and walked through by the police horse.       I

asked a policeman on the gate if he wanted my ticket and he said "No,

there's not much time now, you might as well just get in."     I don't

still have my ticket, my brother took it back to Anfield to get

tickets for the replay at Old Trafford.    I never handed my ticket in,

and I had the complete ticket when I entered the ground.

When we got through the gate I just followed everyone else.     Everyone

was going down the tunnel.    I didn't notice any signs directing me to

the terraces, but I wasn't really looking for them as I say we

followed the people in front.    Some people were running, but we just

walked towards the tunnel, and down to the terraces.     I had free

passage along the tunnel, in fact I noticed that my shoelace was

undone so I bent down in the tunnel to do it up.    When we got within

about five metres of the end of the tunnel we met a solid wall of

people across the entrance to the terracing.     People were building up

behind us and we were being pushed forward with the crowd.     I had no

control over which direction to go in, and the crowd took me to the

left into pen Four.   It was obvious to me that the pen was very full,

I had lost my mate,                   \, by now and the crowd was swaying

forward and then backwards.     I didn't want to get stuck behind a crash

barrier so each time the crowd swayed forward I moved across the pen,

diagonally, in a zig zag fashion, eventually ending up about five

people behind the front fence.     I have marked my direction and final

position on a separate sheet of paper.

When I got to position one the match was just about to start.      I

didn't see the game start because I was working my way through the

crowd, to find a safe position.     In fact I didn't see any of the game,
BQARDMAN               STEPHEN KENNETH                                     5


I was too preoccupied keeping my balance and avoiding the barriers.

When I got to position 2 it was still just as crowded I was standing

on the floor, but I was being pushed round in a circle.     My arms were

tight into my chest, people from the back who were panicking were

coming over our heads, people standing next to me were criticising

these people as they felt they were in just as bad a crush as they had

been.    All I could see were people around me,   I saw that people were

standing around on the pitch.     I think the game was stopped by now.

People were shouting that children were getting crushed and telling

people to move back.     I remember somebody in front of me saying to the

people on the fence pulling people out, "Get me quick, I can't

breathe, I've got asthma." I don't know what happened to him or what

he looked like because I was trying to look after myself, but after

the disaster our coach was missing two people, one of them his

friends were saying suffered from asthma and they were trying to

describe him to me, I think this lad might have died in the pen in

front of me. I found myself being pushed towards the fence separating

pens four and five.     When I got to the fence someone standing behind

me held ray feet as I pushed up with ray arms to get over the fence.

There was a policeman on the otherside helping everyone up including

me.     As I climbed on top of the fence part of ray left arm went between

one of the spikes and another so I could push myself up and as I did

this someone else put his foot in the same gap between the spikes and

stood on ray left wrist,    this caused me a lot of pain and I managed

still to climb out and I was holding ray wrist and bringing it into ray

chest to support it.     I walked down pen five, through an open gate and

out onto the pitch. Once I was out I started worrying about ray

friend,     I saw him on the pitch after a short look for him, and I

started to make ray way towards him, but there were that many people on
BQARDMAN                 STEPHEN KENNETH                                       6

the pitch that I lost him again.

A policeman asked me to leave the pitch and I walked off towards the

North Stand because I had seen some friends of ray brothers sitting in

the first or second row.      I went and stood with them and eventually

________came and joined us.

I saw bodies lying on the pitch but I didn't know whether they were

dead or alive,      I couldn't help or assist anyone because I had injured

ray wrist.     I just stayed with ray friends at the North Stand.

After a while I heard a loud speaker announcement saying "Could you

please stay in the ground until all the bodies and injured people had

been removed by ambulance.      So at this          and I went to look for

ray brother.     I saw him in the West Stand.   We shouted to him, and he

heard us.      He gestured for us to wait there on the pitch and he came

and joined us.      Eventually we left the ground at 5 pn (1700) and made

our way back to the coach.      On the way to the coach some people living

in one of the streets let us use their phone, to phone home.

We got back to the coach and as I have already said two people were

missing, one was in his late teens and the other about 25 years,           I

don't know their names or what they looked like.         I only know one

suffered from asthma.      The coach waited for a bit.    Their friends went

off to phone the emergency line but couldn't get through.         Eventually

the coach left Sheffield at 6 pn (1800) and we got back to Liverpool

at about 8.30 pn (2030).




 I haven't really got any strong views about the way the disaster was
            BQARDMAN               STEPHEN KENNETH                                   7


            dealt, with apart from the fact that everyone was panicking and there

           was chaos.     There's nothing else I want to add to what I've said.



                                                                 S BQARDMAN SIGNED

    STATEMENT TAKEN
              PLACE:

              TIME:              DATE:

    WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

    OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




t
                                                                                         1527
                                                                              STATION

    NAME:
•                  1
                   =      ^
    ADDRESS:
                                    LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE

    AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 25

    OCCUPATION:


    Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
    by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
    it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
    prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
    to be false or do not believe to be true.


    DATED: 290589                                                            (SIGNED)



               I am presently employed by

               have held that position for approaching five years.

               On Saturday 15th April i989 (150489), I attended the semi final at

               Hillsborough while off duty.

               I am a Liverpool supporter and season ticket holder I had a    6

               Leppings Lane standing ticket for the match which I purchased from

               Anfield.

               I travelled to the match by coach, booked via Amberline, I travelled

               with three friends              .

                                                       l and                       1

                              We left at about 10.30 am (1030 hours), and travelled

               straight through the roads were busy we arrived in Sheffield

               at about 2pm (1400).     The coach parked in a industrial estate by a

               brewery headquarters.     There were lots of police about but no

               directions were given.

               It was a good atmosphere one or two fans were drinking in the streets

               but nothing more than normal.

               We made our way to the ground arriving at the leppings Lane entrance




                                                                                        1528
at about 2.40pm (1440).    There were no organised queues people were

just massing around the turnstiles there were four mounted police

there but the numbers of fans was such they hadn't got a chance of

organising or controlling them.     The crowds outside were back to just

beyond the perimeter gate.    It wasn't too crushed when I was there

just busy.    We joined the crowds and aimed towards the right hand

block of turnstiles for the standing.    As I got near to the turnstile

the crowd became more compact and I was jostled quite a lot.     I saw

the concertina gate to my left opened for a short time it was only a

few foot and then it was closed.    About this time a mounted policeman

said the game had been delayed, the crowd eased it did help.     But

then there was a roar and it got bad again, I eventually got through a

turnstile I was just with         and

who I had met outside the ground.

I handed my ticket in as I passed through the turnstile.

Once inside I saw no signs saying where to go but headed straight for

the obvious place to go the tunnel it was about 3.01pm (1501).

Inside the tunnel it was a bit crushed but nothing to worry about

there was no panic.    As we were in the tunnel I heard the roar I think

it was when Beardsley hit the bar; there was then a surge in the

tunnel and it got difficult to move people just wanted to see what was

happening.

I was caught up in the surge but I managed to get to the right into

pen 3 reference HI.    Just beyond the small brick wall people were

still coming onto the terracing behind me.     They were being followed

by more and were just filling behind one another with no choice in

the matter.    It became very bad where I was as people tried to move

back I was still with

At about 3.07pm (1507) six policemen came onto the terracing from the
___________________________                                             '        3


tunnel they could get into a certain point.            It became obvious to me

that something was wrong then I saw a body brought back by them.            He

was blue and looked obviously dead. He was a lad in his early twenties.

               went out to see if he could help but came back shortly and told

us how bad it was.            We all went out through the tunnel.   The tunnel

was empty.

As we went in the courtyard there were a lot of bodies in the

 courtyard lots walking about injured but about twenty lying

 unconscious.

 There were a line of about twenty policemen all lined up against the

 stand as though they were on parade there was no medical staff there

 just fans helping fans.           We iirmediately assisted with first aid trying

 to revive the unconscious.           I said to the Police 'Give us a hand', but

 they didn't and there was just no time to argue people were dying.

 There was only one policewoman who asked if we needed a hand.

 During the afternoon I lost count of the people I went to some were

  just unconscious and we were able to get them round others were

 unfortunately to far gone.

  It seemed like ten-fifteen minutes before the ambulance service came

  the fire brigade after that.          For the duration the police stood about.

  It got to the stage we were ordering them to do things some were doing

  what they were told to.

  When the first ambulances came we were working on one lad who was in

  spasms he was wretching blood. We tried to get a stretcher for him but

  was refused one by the ambulance men we just took one and put

  him in an ambulance.

  Another one we tried to put in who was in a bad way, as we got to the

   ambulance it drove off we had to find another.

   It didn't seem to get anything like organised until about 4.30pm
       (1630) when most casualties had gone.    The dead people had been laid

       out by the River Don just outside the ground a lot of the bodies had

       not been covered and people were leaving the ground.    I asked one

       police officer for his jacket to cover some he just refused it was

       upsetting peoples as they left.

       It was about 4.40pm (1640) before we left I hadn't seen the situation

       inside the ground.

       During the afternoon the policing of the match was a least very poor.

       The reluctancy to get involved in first aid was so obvious and

       unprofessional.

       Control outside had been so poor people were packed and funnelled into

       the ground they had no choice in where they went.

       I think had some announcements of the match being officially delayed

       would have helped considerably in avoiding the situation.

       I attended the semi final last year the tunnel then was blocked by

       police standing shoulder to shoulder.    It was about 2.55pm (1455) last

       year.   This year there was no police or stewards even by the entrance.

       It was very crushed last year and anticipated the ends would have been

       swopped this year.




                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                      |PCI
                                                                          STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                                          CHESHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:             LABOURER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 190589                                                            (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and I reside at the above address with my parents

           and two sisters.

           I am a Liverpool Football Club supporter and have been all my life.

           A few days before the 15th of April this year (150489) I managed to

           get a Semi Final ticket for the match between Liverpool PC and

           Nottingham Forest from my neice's boyfriend.    I paid #6.00 for the

           ticket to stand in the Leppings Lane End of the ground.

           On Saturday the 15th of April 1989 (150489) at about 11.00 am (1100) I

           left my home to travel to the game with my friends in a firm's van.

           There was about 11 of us altogether travelling in the van who I will

           mention later.     We did have a few cans of beer each in the van but

           none of us got drunk or had too much.

           It was about 11.30 (1130) before we actually made our way towards

           Sheffield.   We made one stop on the way, this was at a Motorway

           Service Station.     I don't know exactly where this was but it couldn't

           have been far from Sheffield because there were policemen there

           stopping us going into the shop.     The only other delay was a bit of

           slow moving traffic on the motorway.




                                                                                      1532
Just before we got into Sheffield the van stopped on the hard shoulder

for someone to go to the toilet and the police stopped us and gave the

driver a ticket.

We got into Sheffield at about 1.15 pm (1315) to 1.30 pm (1530).       We

saw a few people drinking on the way but only in pubs.    Eventually we

parked just around the c o m er from the pub that we went into.    I think

it was called the Owl or something.

Inside the pub we didn't buy any beer, we just drank what we had left

in our cans.   Also in the pub were Notts Forest and Liverpool fans.

There was no trouble and no one seemed to be too drunk.

On the way to the ground we didn't see or receive any police direction

nor did I witness any disturbances, fights or drunkeness.

It must have been about 2.40 (1440) or 2.45 (1445) when just three of

us reached the turnstiles.   The rest of them either had gone to find a

ticket or gone into the stand.   It was just me a n d __________ left in

the queue outside.

I would say it was bedlam outside, no organisation at all.     I saw four

mounted police officers who didn't seem to be doing anything.

All the people just seemed to be crushing towards one gate.       People

were climbing over the walls to get in because of the crush.      There

didn't seemed to be any police or steward direction.     Seme people

climbing over were not being crushed, they were just young kids

getting in for nothing and nobody seemed to be stopping them.

Although I had difficulty getting in to the ground I didn't see anyone

going through a gate nor did I see one open.

I actually entered through a turnstile.    I handed my ticket to the

turnstile collector nyself so to get through quickly.

As I got through the turnstile I did not see anything directing me as

to where I should go nor did I see any policeman or stewards. All I
saw was the tunnel and the pitch so I headed for these.     The tunnel

itself wasn't too busy and it was easy enough to get down.     At the

bottom I went slightly to the left entering Pen 4.     As I entered Pen 4

I was still with my mate,                 I was standing as marked on

the grid reference shown to me Exhib No Ref N o __

When we were standing there it was busy but only like the Kop on a

normal Saturday.

About 10 minutes later there was an almighty surge from behind and I

ended up right near to front, there was nothing I could do about it, I

also lost my friend.

Once I was stuck at the front I couldn't move my arms, even when I

breathed I couldn't breath again, you just had to pant.     Because there

were people taller than me I had to stick my head in the air to

breathe. You can see me doing this on the front page of

       dated

I started panicking to nyself, thinking I would be sick.     I remember

saying to somebody we going to die here.     We then started to shout at

a policeman to open the gates but all he did was put his hands through

the fencing and push a few people.    He obviously didn't know what was

going on although we were shouting at him.     It was then that I took a

step backwards and trod on someones leg, this caused me and some other

people to fall over.     I was on the floor for about five minutes unable

to move and people were standing on my legs.     I think I blacked out

for a bit.     Then a lad who you can also see on the front page of that

               wearing a hat picked me up.   I think he saved my life by

doing so.    The crush continued quite bad even when I stood up again

but a few minutes later there seemed to be a little more room.      I

managed then to move towards my left hand side.      I could see people

escaping over the fencing and as they did so people filled in on their
room.    Eventually I came to an open gate at the front of the pitch.        I

got half over it and then someone palled me right over onto the pitch.

I lay on the pitch for a while recovering then I met up with my two

friends,              [                    After a few seconds we

realised what was going on so we decided to do the same and take some

of the hoardings to help injured people.     We carried one bloke across

to the gymnasium, pushing past policemen as we did so.     When we got

him there           did mouth to mouth and I did cardiac massage.     Both

of us knew what to do as we are in the T.A.     However, it was obvious

that this man was dead after helping him for about 10 minutes.       (This

man I know died and have seen his name in the paper, Anthony KELLY,

and I recognised him.

We then went back to help somebody else.     This time we helped a

slimmer man who already had a coat over his head.     We picked him up

and took him over to the gymnasium.    As we took him across Nottingham

fans threw a can at us and it hit the man on the chest.     We got the

man to the gymnasium and again I gave cardiac massage and              gave

mouth to mouth.    I remember a policeman standing by who could do

nothing.    We kept this up for about five minutes until it was obvious

that this man was dead.

Again we went back, this time however we picked up a man but it was

obvious he was dead so we did not rush just took him to the gymnasium

area.

        then realised that his brother may have been crushed so we went

to look for him but         found him back on the pitch.

We then waited and eventually an announcement came over telling us to

keep our stubs for the next match as this one had been abandoned.        So

we then left through the terracing and up through the tunnel.        I can't

remember the time.     From there we all met up back at the van.     I was
          _______                                                                     5



•                                                                                 ]




           The whole time I was there from outside the ground to inside after the

           crush and the deaths it was handled badly by both police and ground

           staff.     I don't think I saw a steward all the match.

           I have nothing else to add.

           The peoples names I was with were;

                           address not known.



                                                  Liverpool.




           The others I don't know that well, only their first names.   Seme of

           the people above have been seen by you.



                                                                         1SIGNED

    STATEMENT TAKEN
              PLACE:

              TIME:              DATE:

    WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

    OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                  PC
                                                                         STATION

NAME:          ALAN PAUL
0              JONES

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 19

OCCUPATION:            ROYAL NAVY


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 050689                                             ALAN P. JONES (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and I live at the above address, where I am training

           to be a mechanic in the Royal Navy.

           I am a Liverpool football supporter and am a season ticket holder of

           the club.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I went to Hillsborough Football

           Ground for the semi-final football match between Liverpool and

           Nottingham Forest.   I travelled to the game on a coach that was

           organised by the Woodcutters Social Club, Garston, Liverpool.      I

           obtained my ticket from Liverpool F.C. and paid    6.00 for the Leppings

           Lane stand.   I travelled with my brother,        and friend,_____

                  The coach left Liverpool at 10.00 am (1000 hrs) on the morning

           and travelled directly to Sheffield.   Once we arrived in Sheffield,

           we were diverted along the outside of Sheffield which made us

           approximately 45 minutes late.   We arrived not far frcm the Ground at

           about 1.20 pm (1320 hrs), where we got off the coach and walked to the

           Fox Public House.    We got to the pub at 1.30 pm (1330 hrs) and drank

           some cans of beer outside the pub until 2.35 pm (1435 hrs).

           As we walked from the pub to the Ground, we were stopped by Police by




                                                                                      1 537
JONES                  ALAN   PAUL                                         2

a bridge and social club.     We were drinking from cans and the Police

told us to drink up and leave the cans there, which we did.     Everyone

going to the match were in good humour.

I arrived at the entrance to the Ground at 2.55 pm (1455 hrs) and I

saw a total mass of people outside waiting to go inside.     I went

towards turnstile B.     I saw a large crowd in front of a large blue

gate and I was towards the back.     I noticed a Policeman on a horse and

seme Police Officers inside the blue gate who were shouting at people

who were climbing up the gate and walls, trying to get in.

I tried to go around the outside of the crowd in front of the gate to

avoid the Policeman on horseback, but I went to my right, he pushed

us into the crowd.     The crowd was tightly packed and over the heads

of the fans in front of me I saw the blue gate open and the crowd of

fans surged forward through the gate.

Once through the gate there was a lot of space between the gate and

the tunnel entrance.     I waited for a few minutes for my friends and I

went to the toilet.     I then made my way to the tunnel entrance.    I had

been to Hillsborough the year before and it was my intention to

position myself to the left of the goal to view the match.

I walked down the tunnel towards the stand.     I kept to the left of the

tunnel so I could go left once in the terrace.     As I got midway into

the tunnel the people in front of me came to a standstill.     Then

people were coming into the tunnel behind me and it was getting

tighter and tighter.     The pressure of people around me frcm behind

lifted me off my feet as a surge of people came from behind.     I was

shallow breathing from that point on.     I was carried onto the terrace,

completely pinned by people about me, and it was only as I got onto

the terrace did I manage to put my feet on the steps.     As I came out

of the tunnel I was carried to the left and into Pen 4.     As people got
JONES                  ALAN   PAUL                                              3


onto the terrace, they began to lose their footing and topple down.         I

was trampling on people.      I became aware of a man on the ground who

was unconscious and people about me were shouting to get the man up.

The man was dressed in grey trousers, white shirt and orange belt.          I

managed to pick him up by his belt and got him to chest height and

others grabbed hold of him, but he was a big chap and people let go of

him and he dropped back down to the Ground.      As he fell I went down on

the ground with him and twisted onto ray side.     As I went down there

was a man behind me who stood on ray face. My friend           grabbed

hold of the back of ray jacket and pulled me up.     People were trying to

push themselves back in order to let this bloke that had fallen down

get up, but he wasn't making any effort to get up.      His eyes were open

and going round.   I would describe him as aged between 40-50 years,

black curly hair with sideburns, about 5'10 and very well built with a

beer belly.

I was pushed to the left of him.      I don't think he got back up.   I saw

people trample over him.

I then was involved in another crowd surge in Pen 4.      I was pushed to

the left and up against a barrier.      My leg and waist were pressed up

against the barrier.    People were kicking ray legs and I was pushing up

on the barrier to prevent the pressure going onto ray ribs.     I managed

to push myself around the barrier and I was crushed between people.             I

was oblivious as to what was happening elsewhere; however I saw people

tumbling about the pitch.

I was gradually moved forward and a man in front of me moved out of

the way of a next barrier.      As he moved I fell forward and felt the

full brunt of pressure against ray waist and leg.           had managed to

get around this barrier and he tried to get me from behind it.        The

pressure was so great that ray eyes were watering and I could hardly
JONES                  ALAN   PAUL                                           4


breathe.    I felt totally winded and thought that I was going to pass

out.    I thought ray eyes were going to pop out of ray head with the

pressure.

        persevered in trying to get me from behind the barrier and

finally he succeeded in pulling me around it.

By this stage I was about 10'0 (10') from the perimeter fence.      There

were gaps between the barrier and the fence and I bent down to get ray

breath, but         told me not to.   He then grabbed me under ray crutch

and lifted me up towards the top of the perimeter fence.      I threw ray

hands in the air and a man on the top of the fence grabbed hold of me

and pulled me up.     I sat straddled on top of the fence and I began

pulling people out of the crowd.           [was refusing to get out of the

terrace because he wanted to help people in the terrace.      There was a

Policeman without his helmet on the top of the fence who told him to

get himself out.     Eventually        got out and he helped pull people

out with me.    Shortly after that, two Policemen told us to come down

and they said that they'd help people get out.      So we got onto the

pitch after helping a man with cuts down his face.      He said someone

had trampled on his neck.     We took the man over to the touchline and

calmed him down; he was totally shaken up by what had happened.

        saw a man who was having difficulty breathing so we left the

other man and went over to him and he was shallow breathing.      We put

him into the recovery position and another man cleared his airway.          As

this man recovered himself I left him and walked over to a group of

people who I recognised from our coach party.      I then sat with them

for a while.

After ten minutes I went to look for ray brother.     He was wearing jeans

and a red top.     I went over to the goal area where the bodies were

laid out and I saw a body laid out that looked like him.       The body was


                                                                                 1540
       JONES                  ALAN    PAUL                                          5


       face down and had been covered with a leather jacket over the head and

       shoulders.     I stood leaning against the fence waiting for someone to

       turn this body over so that I could see if it was ray brother.      The

       stretcher bearers came over and moved the body, and as they did this,

       his arm moved and I saw that it had a mark on his arm and knew then it

       wasn't ray brother.   Very shortly after this ray brother found me.    We

       then stayed on the pitch and tried to locate our friends.       We all met

       up outside the Ground and we went back to the coach.       I was totally

       dazed by what had happened.

       As a result of this incident I received numerous bruises to ray legs,

       stomach and groin area.       My knee was also badly bruised.   I didn't

       attend hospital



       I feel that the Police and Medical Services did a marvellous job in

       getting people out and helping people.       I did notice that it took a

       long time to get an ambulance on the pitch.

       I feel that there should have been a filter systsn outside the Ground

       to control the fans by the Police.        (Signed) ALAN P. JONES.




                                                            ALAN P. JONES SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:     050689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:                  POL WPC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                        1541
                                                                        STATION

 NAME:        THOMAS JAMES
£             NICKSON

ADDRESS:
                       MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 17

OCCUPATION:    UNEMPLOYED


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 140789                                                 T NICKSON (SIGNED)



         I am a Liverpool supporter and hold a season ticket for the Kop at

         Anfield. On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489).     I travelled to

         Hillsborough football ground, Sheffield to watch the F.A. Cup semi

           final between Liverpool football club and Nottingham Forest football

         club.

           I purchased my ticket for #6.00 at Anfield for the lappings Lane

         terraces.

           I travelled to the game by train together with Gregory FAGAN, Kevin

         WILLIAMS and Andrew DUNCAN.     We all live in Formby and caught the 7 am

           (0700) train from Formby to Liverpool where we caught the 9 am (0900)

           train from Liverpool Lime Street Station to Manchester where we

           changed for Sheffield.

           We then travelled from Manchester to Sheffield arriving at the main

           station in Sheffield at about 11am (1100) though I am not certain of

           the time.

           When we arrived at the station we were directed by the Police to

           special buses which took us directly to the lappings Lane entrance to

           Hillsborough.    The bus took us about fifteen minutes from the station




                                                                                     1542
NICKSON                THOMAS   JAMES                                          2

to Hillsborough.

From leaving Formby until arriving at Hillsborough I had seen no

trouble and no one consuming alcohol.

When we arrived at the ground we had left Gregory FAGAN at the train

station as he was waiting to meet some of his mates.      Kevin, Andrew

and I then walked around the ground for about half an hour, they then

said they were going to go to an off licence.

I saw seme other friends of mine from Crosby.       I don't know their

proper names just one of them who I know as '        |   . We know each

other from playing football.

I then walked around the ground for about an hour with '|            \ and

his mate who had not got a ticket.      We were asking people for spares

and eventually got one in Leppings Lane about one hundred yards

from the entrance to the ground, towards Penistone Road.       He paid face

value     6.for a terrace ticket.

After we got the ticket we then went to a pub about half a mile from

the ground.    We got there at about 1 pm (1300).    Whilst in the pub I

swopped my ticket for the Leppings Lane terrace with '               who had

one for the North Stand.     I gave him my ticket plus    #5.00.    Whilst in

the pub we got another ticket for one of '            s' friends who had

not got a ticket.     Again we paid face value for a Leppings Lane

terrace ticket.

In the pub I had a pint of lager and two bottles of Pils.          The pub was

full of Liverpool supporters.

We were all having a drink and a laugh but I saw no one drunk.          We

stayed in the pub for about an hour and a half during which time I met

up with Gregory FAGAN and the mates he had waited for at the station.

We left the pub at about 2.30 pm (1430) and walked to the ground

getting there between 2.40 (1440) and 2.45 pm (1445).
NICKSON              THOMAS     JAMES                                     3


I do not remember seeing any Police outside the ground all day except

for the Police at the station who put us onto the buses.

When I arrived at the turnstiles to the North Stand there were only

about fifteen people in front of the each of individual turnstile,

though there were crowds of people in Leppings Lane itself who I had

to make ray way through to get to the North Stand entrances.

It took only about two or three minutes to get through the turnstiles

where I handed ray ticket in.

I do not recall any Police or Stewards around the turnstile area, the

first Stewards I remember were in the North Stand itself and directed

me to my seat.   I saw no fighting, disturbances or drunkeness between

leaving the pub and getting my seat in the North Stand.

I took up my seat at about 2.55 pm (1455) just before the two teams

came out onto the pitch.

I was not involved in any crushing at any time and did not realise any

crushing or anything wrong was taking place on the pitch until about

3.10 (1510) - 3.15 pm (1515).     I was concentrating on the game and

when people first started to come over the fencing from the terraces I

just thought it was an overspill which you often see at games.

I did not realise anything was wrong until a fan ran up to Bruce

GROBELLAR and shortly afterwards the game was stopped.

I was at the Spion Kop end of the North Stand and could not see

clearly what was happening at the far end of the ground but then I saw

fans start to carry dead and injured fans from the Leppings Lane

terrace to the c o m e r of the pitch formed by the North Stand and the

Spion Kop.

I then saw people with their faces covered by clothes and blankets and

realised people had died.     I then saw Martin THOMPSON running around

on the pitch looking at the bodies.     By this time I had met up with
NICKSON                 THOMAS   JAMES                                  4


Gregory FAGAN and his friends. I could see that Martin was panicking

and together with Gregory and one of his friends we went out of the

stand and onto the pitch.    We saw Martin who told us that Stuart

THOMPSON was missing.     Stuart THOMPSON was a friend of mine from

school but I had not seen him at all that day.

I started to help Martin to look but then lost Martin and then met up

with Andrew DUNCAN and about six to ten other friends from Formby.

We stayed within the ground for a good while and eventually left at

about 5 pm (1700) of our own accord.     We never did find Stuart

THOMPSON.

When we left the ground we were told to get onto buses by the Police

at about 5.30 pm (1730) and were then taken to the train station and

made our way home.

I did not help any of the dead or injured.

I think one of the main factors to cause the deaths and injuries to

the fans was not delaying the game for about 15 minutes and making

announcements to this effect over the loud speakers.

I believe the number of Police particularly outside the ground was far

too few.    I cannot remember seeing any at all outside the ground.

I did not see anything through the day which I believe to be a

criminal offence.

I believe that there should be more seating within football grounds

and perimeter fences could be replaced by moats to prevent crushing.

Once the game had stopped seme of the Police got stuck in and helped,

in fact a lot of the Police were good, but I thought that the Police

used to form a line across the pitch could have been better used to

help the injured.

I think that the medical facilities and staff were inadequate for the

size of crowd.
          NICKSON              THOMAS   JAMES                                     5


          Liverpool should have been allocated the Spion Kop end of Hillsborough

          as Liverpool has a far larger following.

          I never saw Kevin WILLIAMS again after I left him at the entrance to

          the ground, but I have been told by other friends that he met up with

          Stuart THOMPSON



                                                                        SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

            TIME:            DATE:

^ T N E S S TO SIGNATURE:

 OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                    PC[




                                                                                      1546
                                                                             STATION

NAME:
C              □
ADDRESS:
                            LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 21

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 140889                                                               (SIGNED)



           I am a single man residing at the above address.

           On the afternoon of Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I attended the FA

           Cup Semi-Final football match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest

           at the Hillsborough Football ground in Sheffield.

           I attended the match as a Liverpool supporter.     I have supported

           Liverpool all my life and am a season ticket holder at Anfield.         I

           regularly attend home matches and certain away matches.     I obtained my

           match ticket from Anfield.    The ticket was for the Leppings Lane

           Standing and cost me six pounds.

           I travelled to the match with Ian MCDERMOTT who has been seen by the

           Police.   We travelled to the match in Ian's company van.

           We made one stop on the way to Sheffield at a mobile caravan about

           thirty miles outside Sheffield.     I can't remember the road.    The

           mobile caravan does snacks and drinks.    We had something to eat and

           carried on to Sheffield.     We had one bad hold up on the way.    That was

           caning out of Stockport heading towards Sheffield.     We were held up

           for a while due to the volume of traffic.

           We arrived in Sheffield at about twenty past two (1420).     Ian parked
                                                                            2


the van in a side street at the bottom of a dual carriageway leading

towards the ground.     It was a fifteen minute walk to the ground.    We

made our own way to the ground, as we were both familiar with

Hillsborough.     I have been to Hillsborough before, including the

corresponding semi-final last year.    We did not receive any Police

directions or an escort, but we didn't need them.     There were quite a

few Police on the streets on the way to the ground.     On the way to the

ground I did not see any disorder or fighting and there was no obvious

drunkeness.     I did see supporters drinking on the way to the ground.

They were drinking from cans of beer.     I do not remember there being

any supporters looking for spare tickets for the match.     There were a

lot of supporters heading for the ground at that time.

We arrived at the Leppings Lane turnstiles at about quarter to three

(1445).   When we got there there was a crowd of people outside the two

large iron perimeter gates which were closed.     There were a lot of

supporters outside these iron gates and we were about thirty feet away

from the gates.     There were still a lot of supporters actually in

front of the turnstiles trying to get in, but there was a fair bit of

space between the rear of the crowd at the turnstiles and the iron

gates.    We had only been there a couple of minutes when the iron gates

opened.    I don't know who opened the gates or how they were opened.

As soon as the gates opened, all the crowd walked through and Ian and

myself walked through with them.     As we got behind the gates, all the

crowd that had gone through them went towards the right-hand side of

the turnstiles.     I did not know where they were going, we just

followed them.     All of the crowd entered a space behind the

turnstiles, to the right of the turnstiles.     I am now aware that we

did in fact enter the ground via What I now know as Gate 'C'.       Once

inside the ground, all of the crowd headed for a tunnel which led to
the terraces.    The tunnel ran under the West Stand in the centre.       I

did not hand in my ticket as I went through Gate 'C' as there was no

one there to hand it to.     I did not receive any Police or Steward's

directions from the time that I arrived outside the Leppings Lane

turnstiles.     Ian and myself followed the crowd towards the tunnel. We

walked along the tunnel quite freely, it wasn't congested.       I do not

remember seeing any Police or Stewards either at the entrance to the

tunnel or inside it.      As we got towards the end of thetunnel it was

packed with people.      The time by    now was about five tothree (1455),

as I remember seeing     the players    on the      pitch having akick around.

At the end of the tunnel    we went     to the      right-hand side and into what

I now know to be pen number three.       I went to the right-hand side,

mainly because I like watching matches from the right-hand side of the

goal.   We pushed our way through the crowd towards the front of the

pen without too much difficulty.       It was packed in there, but we

managed to get through the crowd.      We took up a position in pen three

which was pretty well central in the pen, towards the front perimeter

fence, about fifteen yard behind it.       I have marked this position on

the separate grid plan of pens three and four using the figure one.

We took up this position at about two minutes to three (1458).

Shortly after taking up the position, I could feel things becoming

tighter.   After a couple of minutes there was a large roar and cheer

from the crowd.     This was obviously a response to the game kicking

off, although I could not actually see the pitch.       I have no further

recollections of anything that happened on the pitch after that.

Things got tighter and tighter in the pen and all I could see was

the person in front.     I could hear people screaming and I was aware of

people walking over our heads towards the front of the pen.       By new

Ian was standing slightly in front of me.        I could feel the pressure
                                                                           4


from the crowd begin to lift roe slowly.    I went from normal standing

position to standing on my toes.    Within a short space of time I had

been lifted about six or seven inches off the ground.     Although I had

been lifted up, I still couldn't see the pitch as my face was up

against the rear of somebody's head.     Ian was still near to roe at this

time, although he was a good few inches lower than roe now.    He was

still standing and conscious.    Whilst I was raised off the ground, I

became aware of a lad below roe about two feet to my left-hand side and

slightly forwards of roe, perhaps on the terrace in front of mine.      The

lad's head was slumped forward, his eyes were open and his mouth was

closed.     I could see the right side of his face which was a yellowy/

green colour. I heard someone near say, "He's dead."     I cannot recall

time very well, but I would say that I saw this lad at between five

past and ten past three (1505) (1510).     All I can remember of the lad

was that he was a white male, and he had ginger coloured hair which

was straight and cut short.     He was a young lad, perhaps eighteen or

nineteen.     He did not wear glasses or have a moustache.   I think he

may have had freckles. All I can remember of his clothing was that he

was wearing a navy blue nylon kagool top.     It was plain and had a

hood.     Shortly after seeing this lad, the pressure seemed to ease a

bit and I was slowly lowered back to the ground.     I think the

pressure eased because the people behind roe seemed to move back and a

lot of people had got out from the pen by climbing over the dividing

fences and the front perimeter fences.     Having got back down to the

ground there seemed to be more space in the pen.

I could see a lot of people lying on the terraces, obviously injured.

I looked round for Ian, but couldn't see him.      I saw a large pile of

people, piled up on top of each other, but still couldn't see Ian.

Some supporters started to pull people away frcm the pile and as
_______                                                                     5


they did so I saw Ian.     Ian was lying on the terrace about five or ten

feet away from the front perimeter fence.     I went straight over and

pulled Ian away from the other people.     Ian was unconscious and didn't

appear to be breathing.     Ian was on his front so I turned him over and

placed him on his back.    As I did this another supporter came over and

looked at Ian.    He said he was going to try and revive Ian.   He told

me briefly about applying pressure to Ian's heart and he started

giving Ian mouth to mouth.     I don't know anything about first aid so I

just kept pressing Ian's chest.     Shortly after a policeman came over

and took over from me.     After about four minutes, Ian responded and

started breathing again.     Two more policemen came over and carried Ian

towards the front left-hand c o m e r of pen three.   Ian was then carried

through a hole in the fence where the mesh had been pulled away, and

placed on the pitch.     I can't really remember anything about the lad

or the policemen that revived Ian.     Ian was placed on the playing area

near to the six-yard box to the left of the goal as you look frcm the

terraces.    By now Ian was barely conscious, but was still breathing.

I wasn't allowed to leave the pen with Ian.     After he was taken out,

the Police outside the pen told me to stop inside.      I eventually got

out a couple of minutes later through the hole in the fence and joined

Ian on the pitch.    Seme lads came over to us with an advertising

hoarding that was being used as a makeshift stretcher.      We placed Ian

on the hoarding and carried him to the far left-hand c o m e r of the

ground, in between the Kop and North Stand.     We took Ian off the

hoarding and we laid him out in the eighteen-yard area in front of the

Kop.     A few minutes later, two ambulancemen placed Ian on a proper

 stretcher and took him into the gymnasium at the rear of the North

Stand.     I remained with Ian in the gymnasium.   Ian was given oxygen by

 a fireman to help with his breathing.    Ian was eventually removed by
                                                                                  6


       ambulance to the Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield.   I was told

       that Ian was to be detained, so I got a taxi back to where Ian had

       parked the van and I drove the van home after phoning my mother and

       Ian's mother to say we were alright.

       I do not recall the barrier breaking inside pen three.

       During the course of the afternoon I did not see anything that I would

       consider to be a criminal offence.

       On the afternoon of Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I was wearing the

       following clothes.   A waist-length black leather jacket, the button-up

       type.   A dark green open-necked shirt. Blue denim jeans and black

       coloured 'Reebok' training shoes.

       I am a white male, five feet nine (5'9) in height.   I have light brown

       hair which is cut above the ears and parted from the right side.     I am

       clean shaven.

       I produce the separate grid plan of pens three and four (Ex No         )

        (Ex Ref___

        I do not wish to make any corrments or observations, as I feel that

       everything has been said in the interim report made publicly recently.




                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:        140889

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE!

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                 PC




                                                                                      1 552
                                                                           STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                       LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 21

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by roe, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 220989                                                              (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and I live at the above address with my parents.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I attended the FA Cup Semi

           Final game at the Hillsborough Football ground in Sheffield.      I

           attended as a supporter of Liverpool Football Club.    I have

           supported the club for thirteen years attending most home games and a

           large number of away games.   I had been to the ground at Hillsborough

           on four previous occasions prior to Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489).

           I got my ticket for the serai final from Liverpool FC using my season

           ticket voucher it was a six pounds ticket for the Leppings Lane

           Terraces.

           I travelled to Sheffield with eleven other people in a hire van.      I

           didn't know all of the poeple in the van the details of the people

           that I knew amongst the passengers are as follows:

           1.                                Liverpool I I

           2.                                Liverpool

           3.

           4.                                                Liverpool

           5.                              Liverpool




                                                                                      1553
6.

7.

         8.                   he is the borther of           girlfriend.

We departed from Liverpool finally after picking everyone up at 10 am

(1000) on Saturday morning 15th April 1989 (150489).        We weren't

subjected to any travel delays.

We stopped at about 12.05 pm (1205) at a pub on the outskirts of

Sheffield.      I can't remember the name of the pub.    We had about two

pints and left the pub at about 12.30 pm (1230).

We then made our way towards the ground on route we got stopped by the

police about three times, they searched the van for alcohol and

checked our tickets.

We parked the van about one mile away from the ground at about 1.15

pm.   (1315).    We parked in a side street I can't remember the name of

the street.

We went into a pub called something like the Bridge Inn, at about 1.17

pm (1317).      The pub was full of Liverpool supporters.    We all had

about 3 or 4 pints and left the pub at about 2.30 pm (1430).        About

eight of us walked down towards the ground together.         I stopped at a

chip shop on the way with         and                   all the others

carried onto the ground.

We got a bag of chips and the three of us walked down to the ground

together at about 2.50 pm (1450).             and        both had tickets for

the North Stand so they went off towards the stand turnstiles.

On arriving outside the Leppings Ln entrance at about 2.50 pm (1450),

all I could see was a mass of people stretching back frcm the terrace

turnstiles to the outer perimeter gates.      There were two police men on

horses blocking off the area across the perimeter gates, they appeared

to be trying to organise people into seme order of semblance but
there was another huge mass of people stretching back from the police

horse standing across the outer gates stretching back into the road in

Leppings Lane.    At that time the situation outside the outer gates

appeared worse than it was inside.

At this time I \/as on my own and I managed to squeeze around the back

of the police horse and I walked down along side the wall by the river

bank.    It was clear in that area.   I could see that the area in front

of the turnstiles was packed with people shoving and pushing to get

in.     I could also see people climbing over the tops of the turnstile

rooves to get into the ground.     I carried on walking down by this wall

and I saw that a large blue gate that was situated around the right

hand c o m e r of the terrace turnstiles was wide open.   I had my full

ticket in my hand I walked through this large open gate no one was

about to check my ticket.     I never saw anyone standing near to the

gate, I had not seen who had opened the gate.

Once inside the ground because I knew where to go from previous visits

I walked to my right around the West Stand and entered the lappings Ln

terracing via what I now know to be pen number one.

I wanted to get behind the goal to watch the match so I walked across

the back of the terraces underneath the cannopy of the West Stand

above.     I walked across the back of pen number two easily as there was

plenty of room.     I went through an open gate at the back of the

dividing fence and into pen number three.     Once in pen number three I

found the terraces to be more congested and had to weave my way

through the people, not experiencing too much difficulty doing this to

a position I have marked with a figure one 1 on the separate grid plan

which I produce (Ex No          ) (Ex Ref     |. I arrived at position 1

at about 2.54 pm (1454) and I saw that the players were already on the

pitch having a kick about.     In this position at this time it was very
______                                                                     4


tight but I was not being crushed.    I was still in position one 1 when

the game kicked off, by kick off the terracing was being to get fuller

but I still wasn't getting crushed.   There was a lot of movement in

the crowd.    I never saw anything that I would describe as a surge, the

only thing that made me aware that there was a problem on the terraces

is about two or three minutes after kick off I could hear

people screaming out things like 'stop the game' and 'open the gate

we're getting crushed.'

I saw Peter BEARDSLEY'S shot which hit the cross bar, but again I was

not aware of anything unusual occurring in the terraces, until just

before I saw the policeman run onto the pitch and the game being

stopped, just before this happened a few people climbed up and over

the front perimeter fence at the front of the pen I was in.

By the time the game had stopped, I was in a position I have marked

with the figure two 2 on the separate grid plan.    Although I had moved

a considerable distance across the back of pen number three I cannot

recall being aware at any time of any noticeable sideways movement, I

just seemed to be in motion with the movement of the crowd.

At about 3.10 pm (1510) I climbed up onto the dividing fence dividing

pen three from pen number four and seme people pulled me up into the

West Stand.    I did not climb up into the stand because I was in any

stress just to make more room.    Once I got up into the stand I also

helped pull other people up from the terraces below (pen 3).

At about 3.30 pm (1530) I started to look down into the terraces into

the front of pen number three.    I saw that people had started to move

away from the front of the pen and I could see a mass of people lying

motionless piled on top of each other in a kind of semi circle

stretching beyond either side of the gate in the front perimeter fence

of pen three.    It is difficult to say how many people were stacked
                                                                 5


into this pile, the bodies were just all lying on top of each other.

The only one of these bodies that I could really describe was a white

male aged in his mid twenties, I would say he was about 5'10 tall and

of medium build.   I could see his face was very pale, he had long

black hair shoulder length, he appeared to be of a general scruffy

appearance like he had not shaved for a few weeks with a straggly

growth of black facial hair forming a scruffy beard.

This man was wearing a red and white rugby type shirt it had broad

hoops running around the body and sleeves in a horizontal position,

the stripes were quite wide about 3 or 4 inches.   He was wearing blue

denim jeans.   This man was motionless lying up against this pile of

bodies almost in an upright position.   He was on the edge of the pile

of bodies only about two or three feet away frcm the dividing fence of

pens three and four.   He was about 10 feet (10') away from the front

perimeter fence.   I have marked the position where I saw this man as

best as I can judge with a letter X on the separate grid plan.   After

seeing this man for a short time I turned my attention away fran him

and I never saw him again after that first time which would have been

at about 3.35 pm (1535).

Although I saw a lot of people that were obviously dead the above

person is the only one I could describe in any detail.   To the best of

my knowledge I did not personally witness any deaths, I remained in

the West Stand and I did not therefore assist any of the injured

persons.

Once the area around the dead people at the front of pen number three

had started to clear I saw that a crush barrier had broken.   I was not

aware before this time that the barrier had broken.

I did not see anything during that day which I thought was a criminal

offence.
       Having stayed in the West Stand until leaving the ground at about 4.45
ft
       pm (1645).     I saw a lot of what was going on, on the pitch, the only

       thing I wish to say about how the incident was handled after the game

       was stopped is that given the circumstances and once the emergency

        services realised what was going on I think they did the best they

       could everyone helped out except for the press photographers who were

       making matters worse.            ~

                                                                        SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                         PC




%




4                                                                                1 558
                                                                          STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                                  HEREFORDSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 24

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 020589                                                             (SIGNED)



           I am                      and I live at the above address with my

           fatter, my stepmother and my two brothers          and        I am

           currently employed

           Hereford.   I have worked there for about four years.

           I am a Liverpool Supporter and I have been to two or three Liverpool

           matches this season.

           When Liverpool won the quarter final tie, myself and

           _______ my cousin, decided to go to the semi final at Hillsborough.

           I have tried on numerous previous occasions to obtain tickets for

           matches through Liverpool but to no avail consequently everytime I go

           to see Liverpool I have to buy tickets frcm ticket touts unless I

           could pay on the door.    I never usually have any trouble getting a

           ticket as long as I'm willing to pay, because there are usually lots

           of touts.

            I have only ever been to Hillsborough once before and that was to see

           Liverpool against Sheffield Wednesday in a league match.      I paid on

            the gate on that day, that was February 2nd 1985 (020285).     I was in

            the Leppings Lane Terrace on that day as well, there were a lot of
people there but there was not the same problems with crushing that

there were when we played Nottingham Forest.

At about 7.30 a.m.(0730) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), the day

of the semi final, my brother           iecided to come with          and I

to the match.    We all set off at about 08.45 a.m. (0845) and travelled

through Ross on Wye, we then joined the M50, travelled along that and

joined the M6 and headed north.    We left the M6 and joined another

motorway.    There were a lot of Police direction signs that we

followed, we eventually came off the motorway and at every traffic

island there were Police directing us towards the ground.      The route

I was travelling was the route taken by most of the Nottingham Forest

fans.

I eventually parked in a side street about 2 miles away frcm the

ground.     I asked a Police Officer for directions to the ground which

he gave me.     For the whole journey frcm the car to the ground we were

surrounded by Nottingham Forest fans who were all well mannered even

when we passed a pub full of Forest fans we got no abuse.      The only

time I got any abuse was when we walked past a group of about fifteen

Forest fans outside the ground who shouted, "YOU SCOUSE BASTARDS,"

but even that was not too malicious.

I started asking if anybody had "GOT ANY SPARES" because that is what

I usually say to the touts.     While I was outside the Forest end I

spoke to one tout who told me that he could only sell me a Forest

ticket for #20 and that the Liverpool tickets were going for #30.         I

told him that I would pay #30 somewhere else and walked on.       I

carried on asking people if they had got any spares, one said, "WHAT

DO YOU WANT". I said Liverpool so he said, "O.K. FOLLCW ME."      We ran

around the ground to the Leppings Lane end once we got there he

said, "wait HERE, I'LL GO AND GET SOME FOR YOU."     He then ran off
___________________                                                                  3


 and came back within 2 or 3 minutes, he took us into a nearby shop

because he said, "THERE ARE TOO MANY BIZZIES ABOUT."              He said, "IT

WILL COST YOU #100 plus a few coins FOR THE THREE TICKETS."                 I told

 him that we would only pay #90 so he took it and I said, "CHEERS MATE

 SEE YOU AT WEMBLEY." He then ran off quite quickly, I then looked at

 the tickets and realised we had been conned because he had sold us

 Forest tickets.            We looked for him but couldn't find him.    I would

 describe him as a white male, early 20's, about 5'8 tall, short dark

 hair about collar length, he was overweight, no facial hair and

 wearing black tracksuit bottoms and a dark top, possibly a cardigan.

 I then resigned myself to the fact that we would have to swap our

 tickets.             I started to shout Swops again, a bloke came up to me and

 said, "What do you want."             I said   I want to swap FORREST for

 Liverpool, he originally said, "NO CHANCE."              I said, "COME ON MATE",

 and he said, "IT WILL COST YOU #10 PAID FOR EACH TICKET."              I

 replied, "I'LL GIVE YOU #20 FOR ALL THREE."             He said "ALRIGHT", and

 then we swapped the tickets.             I gave him #15 pounds and said, "THAT'S

 ALL I'VE GOT TAKE IT OR LEAVE IT."             He took the money and walked off.

 We had now got our tickets and the time was about 12.15 (1215) so we

  decided to find a chip shop.           We found a chip shop about half a mile

  away from the ground and queued up for the chips.             After we'd eaten

  our chips we walked back towards the ground.             I saw a supermarket

  with Liverpool fans outside.            So we went in to get a bottle of lager

  each, whilst in the supermarket the shopkeeper told us that we were

  only allowed one each, at this point a Police Officer came into the

  supermarket and strongly advised us to have only one bottle.               We

  bought one bottle each and walked back towards the ground.                All of

  the time I noticed that there was no hatred towards the Police and in

   fact there was a friendly 'banter' between the fans and the Police.
We stopped over the road from the Leppings Lane end turnstiles at a

telephone kiosk so          could telephone his parents to tell them

where he was.   While        was on the phone a Police Officer

approached us and said that if he could smell alcohol on our breath

when we went in that our tickets would be taken off us and we

wouldn't be let in.     We crossed the road and I noticed about 15-20

Police officers and a few stewards standing next to seme big blue gates

at the entrance to the ground.     When we got to the turnstiles there

was nobody there except the Police Officers outside each turnstile.

The time at this point was about 1.15p.m (1315).

When I got to the turnstile I was searched by a Police Officer.        I

then went through the turnstile and as I did so the steward tore off

the counterfoil of ray ticket and ticked something off on a list.       I

then went through and queued up to be searched by a Police Woman.

She made me turn out my pockets.     At this point the officers and the

fans were still joking among each otter, it was all good humoured.

As soon as I had got through the turnstiles, I could see no signs

indicating where the terraces were, but I could see a tunnel.

Through the tunnel I could see the goals and a bit of the pitch so I

assumed that that was the only way onto the terraces.     We all went to

the toilet and then made our way through the tunnel, when I was about

half way through the tunnel I found myself running because the tunnel

was so steep.     When I came to the end of the tunnel I saw a fairly

thick metal post about 7 feet (7') tall directly in the middle of the

end of the tunnel, this was the end post of the fence between pens

three and four.

We stopped at the end of the tunnel and     we decided to go to the left

into Pen no. 4 just to the left of the goal.     When I got into the Pen

at about 1.20 p.m. (1320) I noticed that there were quite a few people
______                                                                    5


in this area but there was still room for us to sit in a group.     We

sat down about 10-15 yards (yds) to the left of the fence between

pens 3 and 4 and 10-15 yards from the back wall.

At about 2 p.m. (1420) the players came onto the pitch in their suits

and just walked around.    At this point we all stood up and due to the

fact that it was getting quite packed I never sat down again.       The

players stayed on the pitch for about 5 minutes and then left.      At

this point the terrace was tightly packed but it was still quite

comfortable and I was still able to move around.

At about 2.20 p.m. (1420) I noticed a group of about five lads just to

my right and slightly in front of me, they were all obviously drunk

and one, who I remember was wearing a green tracksuit stood out as

being the most drunk because he had to be held up by his friends.

At this point the crowd began to sway together, this didn't

particularly worry me because it is a normal occurrence in Liverpool

crowds.

The swaying continued until about 2.50 p.m. (1450) during which the

crowd became increasingly packed.    At about this time I saw a teenage

girl standing on my left.    She was crying and said, "I CAN'T COPE

WITH THIS MUCH LONGER." She was trying to push her way to the back,

unsuccessfully, as though she was looking for somebody.     I said to her

 "IT'LL BE ALRIGHT IN A FEW MINUTES WHEN THE GAME STARTS. "

At this point the players came onto the pitch, it was now about 2.55

p.m (1455).     There was a great big cheer, at this point it was

extremely cramped and all I could do was move my head to see.       I could

hear the crowd shouting Alan HANSEN's name and I realised he must have

been playing.     I was struggling to see anything and I could just about

 see the pitch.

At this point I felt a tremendous surge from behind, from the
direction of the tunnel, it pushed me so hard that I was forced off

ray feet and forced into the backs of the people in front of me.

At this point I lost sight of ray brother and        |, ray cousin, and

the girl who I had been reassuring.     I would describe her as a white

female, between 16-20 years old.     I noticed that she was quite

attractive.    She had a pale complexion and I think she had a few

freckles.     She had long blonde hair that was sort of 'frizzy'

although she didn't have a definite perm, she was about 5'8 tall and

was reasonably slim, the only other thing I could remember about her

was that she was wearing a beige long sleeved top.

During the initial surge I was lifted off ray feet, turned in mid air

to face the stand behind us and flung into the people in front of

me.   At this point I noticed Police Officers in the front row of the

stand.   Everybody was screaming at the Police to stop people coming

in.   The Police Officers there were about three or four of them,

looked horrified at what was happening but at this point it was too

late, there was nothing they could do, if they had tried to stop the

people coming in they would have probably got caught in it themselves.

At this time I was turned around to face the pitch, and there was

still a tremendous pressure on ray back, I've never felt anything like

it in ray life, I kept expecting for the crowd to sway back, although

I was still being slowly forced forward.     At about 3.10   (1510) I had

been forced so far foward that I could not move any further, and I was

so trapped that I could not move a limb in ray body.    At about this

about time 50-60 of us decided to try to push backwards to relieve the

pressure but I could still not move a muscle.     People were walking

across our heads and shoulders.     We were packed so tight that they

couldn't have fallen through.At this point I thought thatl was going

to die. At about 3.20 p.m. (1520) the pressure from behind me reduce
slightly at which point somebody behind me collapsed giving me rocxn

to force my way backwards. I made my way back up the terrace to the

tunnel, at this point I looked round for my brother.   I quickly saw

that he had made his way onto the pitch and he was walking about,

obviously O.K.   At this point a scouser put his arm around me, he was

crying and he said, "THIS IS TERRIBLE, I CAN'T BELIEVE IT'S

HAPPENING." I then made my way up through the tunnel in search of

         I saw people dragging limp bodies along the tunnel towards the

turnstiles. As I came out of the tunnel I saw about 20-30 people lying

flat, each with ambulance, policemen and fans around them trying to

revive them. I was looking through all of the bodies for my cousin but

couldn't find him and after about quarter of an hour I managed to get

back onto the terraces.   There were people standing around dazed with

tears in their eyes.   I got to the front fence and I was told by a

Police Officer I was not supposed to come onto the pitch.     I told him

that I was looking for my brother and my cousin and he let me go onto

the pitch through a piece of fencing that had been ripped away.     At

this point       and       ran up to me.   We hugged each other and

just walked around in a daze for a few minutes until we decided to

help.   We ripped some of the advertising boards down to be used as a

stretcher, while we were doing this, we were being applauded by the

Forest fans in the stands who were helping push the boards away.      We

ripped two boards away from the stands and carried them to some

people who were lying in the Liverpool penalty area, there were two

people carried off on our boards who were just about alive.

We wandered around for ages and a Police Officer asked us to move to

one side to allow the injured to be treated, and after a while we

made our way to the area between the Spion Kop and the North Stand.

We went under the North Stand and the area looked like a mortuary
                                                                                   8


       there were at least 20-30 bodies lying with there faces covered.      I

       had also seen five dead bodies in the Forrest Goal.

       We eventually got out of the ground at about 4.10 p.m. (1610) and we

       came out in Vere Road.       Somebody asked if anybody wanted to use the

       phone in their house, so we phoned heme.

       We went back into the ground to see what was going on, we sat in the

       west stand and after a while a loudspeaker announcement said that the

       match had been abandoned and to keep the tickets as they would have

        to be exchanged.   At this point we decided to go home.

       We arrived at my car at about 5 p.m. (1700) and got home at about 8.30

        p.m (2030). I am willing to give evidence at Court if I am required.



                                                                          SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE                       PC
                                                                             STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                           HULL, N HUMBERSIDE,

AGE / DATE OF BIKIH: OVER 21

OCCUPATION:                          )RIVER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 012 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 180589                                                            (SIGNED)



           I am a                      driver employed by

                    and I work out of their depot situated at

           I reside at the above address with my parents.

           I have been a supporter of Liverpool football team since 1978(000078)

           and I attend as many games as possible, both at their heme    ground -

           Anfield, and at most of their away fixtures.

           I decided to go and seetheir FA Cup semi final tie against

           Nottingham Forest which was to be held at the Hillsborough football

           ground in Sheffield on Saturday 15th April 1989(150489). I usually

           have a season pass but I let it lapse this season so when I learnt

           that this match was ticket only I decided to travel there without a

           ticket and to buy one from outside the ground. There is usually quite

           a number of ticket touts about at this calibre of match. On the

           morning of Saturday 15th April 1989(150489). I met with three mates in

           Hull city centre,                  who lives at

           H u l l , o f                             Hull and a lad called        ., I

           don't know anything else about him other than he's Asian and he

           resides in Hull also. The four of us boarded a normal service train at
                                                                        2


Hull railway station at about 10.30am. (1030) We travelled to Sheffield

with only one stop enroute this being at Doncaster. Prior to this stop

we had been the only supporters on the train but maybe 5 or 6

Liverpool fans boarded at Doncaster, they didn't sit in our

compartment and I didn't see anything of them. There were no incidents

to speak of on the train journey and we arrived at Sheffield Central

Train station at about 12. 30pn. (1230).



Upon our arrival there were quite a number of uniformed Police

Officers, on the station platform and outside, possibly fifteen or

twenty. These officers were engaged in parting the opposing fans who

were arriving mainly on Special trains we intended to visit a friends

house in Sheffield before going to the ground so we told the officers

this and they allowed us to walk out of the main entrance and into the

general bus station. The Police were questioning all fans and

then moving them to respective buses depending on which team they

supported. There were a number of special buses parked outside to

convey fans to the ground.

The four of us boarded a normal service bus to Hillsborough, we didn't

bother about calling on our friend. The bus took us eventually to the

ground and we got off in Leppings Lane. There hadn't been any other

supporters on this bus, we arrived at about 1.45pm.(1345).

When we got off the bus there were large numbers of people gathered

outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles. Although there were a lot of

people there at this time, I wouldn't say it was "packed", people

just seemed to be standing around. There were quite a few Police

officers in attendance at this time, standing at intervals within the

crowd. I can't say that I recall any untoward incidents at this time.

We then walked together from the bus stop away frcm the ground and
towards a traffic roundabout at the junction of Leppings Lane and

Penistone Road. There were substantial numbers of people walking to

the ground and we were generally asking if anyone had any spare

tickets to sell. My three mates hadn't got tickets either. We couldn't

find anyone with spare tickets so we walked from the traffic

roundabout along the Penistone Road and to the Spion Kop Stand. There

were good crowds of supporters standing about outside the Spion Kop

end but not anywhere near as many as there were at Leppings Lane.

We stood with the crowd at the rear of the Kop and then a man came to

us and asked us if we wanted to buy any tickets. We all said that we

were interested and agreed to buy tickets from him. He only had two

tickets which were for the Spion Kop end. The face value of the

tickets was #6.00 The man asked us to make him an offer for them

so we said #10.00 each, me and       were going to buy than. The

man agreed and we gave him a twenty pound note for the two. He handed

over the tickets pulling them from his jacket pocket and he walked

away. He openly handed us the tickets in the street and didn't conceal

them in any way. There were Police officers about at that time but I

don't think they saw what was going on.

I would describe the man who sold us the tickets as being a white male

in his early fifties. He was about 5ft 6"(5'06) tall and of fairly

stocky build. I can't recall any of his facial detail otter than he

was wearing black framed glasses. I think he had brown hair but I

can't be sure. He was wearing a grey 3/4 length rain coat.

We waited around outside the Kop stand to see if the other two in our

party could get tickets but there were none being offered. After a

short time the four of us returned to the Leppings Lane end of

the ground via Penistone Road, although myself and       had tickets

for the Kop it's been my experience in the past that you can
gain access into any stand using a match ticket. It was our intention

to use our Spion Kop Tickets to get into the West Stand with the

remainder of the Liverpool support.

When we returned to the Leppings Lane turnstiles the crowds outside

had grown considerably. It was at this time that we parted company

with     and       as they were unable to get tickets, they had been

asking other people constantly if they had tickets for sale but to no

avail. It was about 2.20pm(1420) on our return to Leppings Lane

turnstiles. Myself and       joined the mass of people outside the

turnstiles, we were stood infront of the smaller block positioned

right of the stand as you look at the ground. The crowds were really

dense and it was a case of having to push your way through the people

in order to make any headway. Whilst being part of this crowd. I

remember seeing a couple of mounted police officers stood within the

crowd itself, the officers were issuing instructions to people but it

appeared to have very little effect due to the steer volume of fans in

the area. I can't recall seeing any uniform officers on foot or ground

stewards outside the turnstiles. With regard to many previous matches

both at home and abroad which I have attended I had a feeling that

something wasn't quite right whilst I was stuck in this crowd in

Leppings Lane. I don't think I've been to many good class games where

there has been such inadequate supervision. I'm sure that if there had

been more officers on duty it wouldn't have been such an intense crush

outside the turnstiles in Leppings Lane.

The nearer we got to the actual turnstile the tighter the crowd was,

we were just pushing through, you weren't free to move and your arms

were pinned either side. We must have been in the crowd outside the

enclosure for about 20 minutes in all before actually getting in.

Just before moving into the turnstile I noticed two lads infront of
myself and        they were both from Liverpool. I heard the one lad

say to the other that he hadn't got a ticket. The second lad said that

he did have a ticket and he went on to say that when he gets to the

turnstiles he will hand his ticket over and then as he pushes through

the one without the ticket should dive beneath the turnstile to get in.

We moved to a turnstile second from the right in the small block.

These two youths were in front of us, but in the crush they were

forced behind us so I don't know whether or not they actually

practised what they had planned.

Myself and       reached the turnstile together, I went in first and

handed in my Spion Kop ticket, the ticket was accepted without

question, I was allowed in and         followed soon after. Once into

the enclosure at the rear of the turnstiles it was much easier, there

were still quite a number of people present but it wasn't as dense as

it had been outside.

We both walked around the enclosure looking for somewhere to get a

drink, we walked to the right handside of the stand where there is a

small Kiosk and we purchased drinks.   We both then walked with

our drinks around the West Stand and into Pen 1. We hadn't decided

upon staying in this pen but we wanted to see what the crowds were

like in the other pens as we didn't want a repeat of the crush outside

the turnstiles. It was purely by chance that we wandered around the

stand, there were no directions in the enclosure infact if we hadn't

specifically gone for a drink we may well have walked down the tunnel

to the centre pens in front of the stand.    From pen 1 we saw that the

centre pens were very crowded so we decided to remain where we were.

Our own pen was about half full and we moved to the bottom of the

terrace in front of the fencing and beside a gate. It was about 2.45pm

 (1445) by the time we took up our viewing position.   As the two teams
                                                                         6


came onto the pitch just before 3pm(1500) I climbed up onto the

fencing in front of me and began to cheer. I then looked across into

the centre pens and saw that there was something wrong. I didn't have

an excellent view but I could see that it was very crowded indeed and

the people at the front seemed to be crushed against the fencing. This

was what I had feared and why I had gone into the side pen, I had

foreseen what could have happened with the numbers of people present

and the crush outside the turnstiles.

I climbed back down off the fencing and shortly afterwards I saw

people climbing over the fencing in the centre pens, they dropped down

off the fencing and onto the track, these fans were then directed

along the track and to our pen. On duty at the gate we were standing

next to where two police officers, a man and a woman. As the people

arrived at the gate it was opened by one of the officers and the fans

were pushed into our pen from the track. I felt at the time that this

wasn't right as these people wandering down the track were dazed and

shocked and they hadn't done anything wrong and didn't deserve being

pushed into our pen as they were. It was my impression that the Police

officers involved weren't aware of the impending events in the centre

pens and feared a pitch invasion. I can't stress how strongly I feel

about this particular point as some of the people who came walking

along the track were blue faced and were obviously dazed and they were

pushed into our pen, as though they had done something wrong.

About this time someone in plain clothes walked a supporter down the

track from the direction of the centre pens, the supporter was again

dazed and in some distress. The man who was leading him was pulling

onto the youths hair, the youth was struggling to walk and was being

pulled along. This youth was then kicked through the gate and into Pen

1 by the man who had led him from the centre pens. The youth sat near
                                                                        7


to our position and was obviously distressed.

This particular incident brought a great deal of anger from people in

the crowd and there were shouts of abuse towards this man who ignored

the abuse and walked away along the track and back towards the centre

pens.

The supporter who he had brought along the track was in his late

teens, about 5'9(5'09) tall of slight build and had short fair hair.

He was bare chested and had a sweater tied around his waist.

The man, who I thought to have been a ground steward, was a white

male, in his late forties, about 5' 7(5'07) tall, of average build. He

had short light hair, clean shaven and was wearing a blue blazer

jacket, collar and tie and I recall he was carrying a personal radio

set. After this man had kicked the youth into our pen it took him

some minutes to recover from his ordeal, he was red faced and

obviously distressed, he found it very difficult to breath. I heard

the youth say, "There's people dying in there". I felt extremely angry

over the way this youth had been treated and particularly so when he

had been dragged along the track by his hair.

As more and more people came over the fencing in the centre pens, the

pitch in front of our position became strewn with people, the match

was abandoned and I saw the players retiring to the dressing rooms.

I remained inside the pen but I do recall several instances of

particular note after the match had been called off.

The man who I described wearing the blazer returned along the track

helping a police officer to carry a young girl. The girl appeared

unconscious and was laid on the pitch in front of us. The officer

tended to her and held her head for a time until she came around. She

got to her feet and was assisted through the gate and into our pen,

she was then left and the officer returned to the track. After a few
minutes the girl collapsed besides us,       went to give her

assistance.       was joined by another supporter in the pen and they

together carried her back through the gate and onto the pitch,

left her there and returned to where I was standing, the girl lay

unconcscious on the pitch, she was attended to by the St Johns

ambulance service, I didn't see what happened to her after that.

I would describe this girl as about 17 years of age, about 5' 6"(5'06)

tall, she was slightly built and had collar length dark brown hair.

She was wearing blue denim jeans and a red anorak type jacket.

Whilst I was standing at the fence I can remember passing bill boards

out on the pitch which had been pulled off the hoardings, at the rear

of the stand, people on the pitch were using the boards as temporary

stretchers.

I can also remember a man being brought along the pitch from the

centre pens and placed in front of our position. The man was

unconscious and was tended to by two police officers. The man was blue

faced and the officers gave him the "kiss of life", in an effort to

revive him. After sane time the man didn't seem to respond and the

officers gave up. I assumed the man was dead. He was left on the pitch

for some time lying face up until a fan went to the man and draped a

coat over his head. I would describe the dead man as mid thirties,

well built, he had short mousey hair and a moustache. I can't recall

what he was wearing. I have subsequently seen pictures of this dead

man in the national press. I would be able to identify him again and

indeed other people I have coimented upon.

I cannot recall other specific instances, there were numerous people

brought onto the pitch in front of us both dead and injured. We were

in our position in pen 1 for about 40 minutes after the game had been

abandoned and we left via a main gate at the rear of the West stand.
           I have marked on a sketch plan of Hillsborough football ground my

           turnstile entry point, the position of the drinks kiosk I mentioned

           and also my final match viewing position in pen 1.

           If I am required then I would be willing to give evidence at any

           hearing.




                                                                         SIGNED

^ A T E M E N T TAKEN
                PLACE:

              TIME:           DATE:        180589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE                    DC
                                                                            STATION

NAME:


.ADDRESS:
                                ]RUNCORN, CHESHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 21

OCCUPATION:      UNEMPLOYED


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 100589                                                              (SIGNED)



            I am a single man living with my parents at the above address.

            On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I went to the Hillsborough Football

            Ground, Sheffield, to watch Liverpool play Nottingham Forest.

            I went to the ground with nine friends including my brother ___

        ______ and                      I do not want to give the names of the

            other lads.   Five of us had tickets, but the other five, including me,

            didn't have tickets.

            I am a Liverpool supporter and did not attend the Semi-Final last Year.

            On the way to the ground the only time we stopped was on the

            motorway hard shoulder.   But we were stuck in slow moving traffic,

            just as we come into Sheffield.

            We arrived in Sheffield at about 12.00 pm (1200) and parked near

            Penistone Rd North near a Pub.

            Outside this pub I saw supporters drinking alcohol.

            When we parked the van we didn't see any Police direction to the

            ground.   I didn't see any disorder or drunkenness between arriving in

            Sheffield and going to the ground.

            We walked around the ground and got to Leppings Lane end at about 1.40
                                                                             2

pm (1340).     The queues at this time were chocka.

There were a few Police at this time but they seemed to disappear.       I

didn't see any Stewards, I had no difficulty finding the turnstiles to

get in as seme of us had been there the year before.    As I didn't have

a ticket I had to feel and wind my way through the crowd and then wait

by a wall for an opportunity to slide through a turnstile.    While I

was doing this I was up against a wall.     I felt so much pressure on my

back.   I was being crushed, so I put my feet up against the wall and

pushed back.

Eventually I got near to a turnstile and I did what they call a

'double click' ie I stood closely behind someone with a ticket and as

he went through the turnstile I went as well.

I didn't see any gates open other than turnstiles and I would say I

saw about 30 lads climb over the top of turnstiles.    They had

tickets because I saw them show them to a Police Officer on the ground

inside the ground.

Once inside the ground I tried to go up some steps into the West Stand

but the Stewards wouldn't let us so I then went through the tunnel.

In the tunnel it was empty until we got to the end then we had to push

to the right and make our way into Pen 3 to the bottom right comer.

I didn't see any Police Officers or Match Stewards near the tunnel

entrance.    I didn't see anybody drinking alcohol inside the ground.

We got into the match viewing point about 2.45 pm (1445).     The

crowd around us was normal, full but not unusually full.     We were to'g

and fro'g which is normal at Liverpool games.     Then we were pushed

forward from behind, we didn't seem to go back again.     I felt crushed

I couldn't feel my feet or any part of my body, it was hot.       My left

arm was down against my body whilst my right arm was leaning against

the fence in front of me keeping me up.     I started to feel pins and
______________________________                                               '
                                                                             3


needles in my arm. I felt a burning pain all over my chest.

              was standing beside me.     He kept giving up, his head

flopped below my arm.   I had to nudge him to keep him going.     The only

think I kept thinking was that if I died no one would identify me

because I wasn't carrying identification.    We were stuck at the

bottom of this pen crushed for about 20 minutes.     Eventually I was

pulled out of pen 3 when a lad pulled me upwards so far that my

hips were trapped between people's bodies.     Straight away a Police

Officer leaned over and pulled me out and sat me on top of the fence.

I was then lowered down onto the pitch.

I didn't witness any deaths but I saw several bodies lying on the

pitch seme were covered up others were being attended to.

I would say the main factor in the deaths and injuries was the crush

and surging of the crowd just before 3 pm (1500).




I don't know what time I left Hillsborough but I remember it was

after a loud speaker announcement.

After the match was stopped everyone tried their hardest to help the

dead and injured.   I don't think you can blame any individual.

The only thing I consider to be a criminal offence is when I saw a

lad's ticket snatched from him in Leppings Lane before the game.
                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   100589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC




                                                  1579
                                                                         STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 26

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 080589                                                            SIGNED)



           I am a single man and I live at the above address alone.

           I am a supporter of Liverpool Football Club and I attend as many of

           the heme and away matches as I can.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I caught a train at Wolverhampton

           Railway Station to Sheffield at about 7.50 am (0750) intending to

           go the Liverpool versus Notts Forest Football match being held at

           Hillsborough.   I was alone but I knew I would meet up with my friends

           at Sheffield as like me they attend most of the matches.

           I did not have a ticket to the match and I was aware that it was an

           all ticket game but as usual I knew that I would be able to purchase a

           ticket somewhere outside the ground.

           I arrived in Sheffield at about 10.30 am (1030) and was not aware

           of any other supporters on the train but there was about 200 or so in

           the station at Sheffield.

           I saw in the station at Sheffield about 3 police officers who were

           advising us to start walking in the direction of the football ground

           and I saw about 2 police vans outside with dogs in.    I met two of my

           friends at the station,                firm Liverpool and
from Salford in Manchester and together with those and all the other

fans from the station we walked towards the football ground.

We were closely followed by the two police vans who had their blue

lights on for about a mile until we got out of the city.      On route to

the ground we had to walk by the Dog and Gun Public House, together

with              and others who I didn't know we went in for a drink.

I left the pubat about 12 midday (1200) after having about 2

drinks which I think was a pint of lager and one brandy and pep.        I

walked on towards the ground and called in at a nearby supermarket

where I purchased two cans of lager to take with me.      I then carried

on to the ground approaching it via Leppings Lane where I intended to

purchase a ticket outside the stands.

On arrival at the ground I saw about two to two and a half thousand

supporters who were outside the Leppings Lane entrance, there were

sane sitting up against the wall of the ground sane standing around

talking and a large number, the majority were around the turnstile

entrance, sane trying to form a queue but without success.      This was

before 1 pm (1300) and the turnstiles were not open.      It appeared

to me the majority of people there were like me without tickets and

were looking round to purchase one.     I carried on walking around

checking the place and the ground out to see how I was going to get in.

Whilst I was walking around by the gates to the entrance to the ground

in Leppings Ln I saw three ticket touts, two were by these gates and

the other was by the turnstiles.     I approached than to find out how

much and to check the ticket, they wouldn't let me have a look at the

ticket and wanted between them     200 and   250 for a   #14.00 stand

ticket.   I was not prepared to pay that much so I walked down to the

turnstiles, on my way I could see it was crowded but there was no

crush or problem to get through.    The tout at the turnstiles had one
ticket left which was for the seats and wanted    500 for it.    I saw one

scouser take   500 out of his pocket and purchased the ticket.     I saw

nearby a policeman standing outside the turnstiles.    I noticed however

that there was a policeman outside each of the three turnstiles.      I

walked up to him and told him what I had just seen take place, his

reply was "He didn't have to buy it."

Whilst I was waiting outside the crowds were building up, at about 2

pm (1400) you couldn't move near the turnstiles due to the amount of

people there, there were no queues, just a mass of people all gathered

round. I was about 5 foot (5') away from turnstile 'B' in the crowd,

it appeared that most of the people around me had no ticket either as

they were not going in, only the ones with tickets were filtering

through and going through the turnstiles.    It was so bad that for

every one that went through the turnstile with a ticket I saw one

without jump the turnstile with him to get in.

It was then that the police on horses, I believe there was 3 of

them began to force their way through the crowd in attempt to form

three separate queues for the turnstiles as there were people jumping

from one turnstile to another.   But due to the horses coining through

and people trying to get out of the way the crush started to become

unbearable.    I could not move my arms or legs and found I was being

moved around with crowd involuntarily.    Eventually I managed to

get to turnstile B where I was faced by the policeman.     I told him I

had not got a ticket for which he started giving me a lot of lip

saying what was I doing there then.     I told him I had no choice.   I

ended up here because thats where I had been pushed by the crowd.         I

told the bloke on the turnstile the same and asked if I could pay in,

he just waived his arms indicating 'no' and the policeman told me to

get on my way.


                                                                              1582
_______                                                                       4


Due to the crowd behind me I couldn't go back and could only move

along the side of the wall along the turnstiles, again I was being

crushed up against the wall then a policeman on horseback with a loud

haler began working his way through the crowd, he was saying "Tickets

only" but again the crowd were trying to get away from his horse and

were pushing, this was causing people to fall over and getting trod on

but they were being helped back up by others.    Again I was being

crushed up against the wall unable to move my arms or legs and again

having to go with the crowd.     I could see that tempers were rising as

the people with tickets were being told they could not get in and then

the crowd started chanting "Merseyside, Merseyside, Merseyside" and

were jumping up and down and there was a surge for the turnstiles.        I

saw the policeman outside the turnstile fall down and some lads helped

him back up on his feet.     I saw people punching and kicking the police

horses which caused the horses to bolt and run through the crowd.     It

appeared then after the horses had gone to be better as the crowds

moved back and I found I had room to move my arms about.     It was then

that a rumour was spread that the chap in the turnstile to the far

right of the 'B' turnstile     was paying in, in other words letting us

pay to get in, then I saw the crowd split and it appeared half ran to

the flood gates and halfincluding myself ran to this turnstile.

Those that ran to the flood gates were banging and screaming at than

and police who appeared puzzled by what was happening went down to the

flood gates.   The chap at this turnstile then realised that the

police had gone and said"hurry up,     hurry up, gis your money and jump

over."    I saw loads givehim money,   I saw people falling over in and

around the turnstile in the rush to get through, they handing

over at least ten pounds to get in.     I just put my hand in my pocket

and gave him what I had which was thirty pounds and I jumped over the
______                                                                     5


turnstile into the ground.     Once inside the ground I saw that it was

just as packed, you were unable to move freely and had to push your

way around.     I was aware of about two hundred people who like me paid

the bloke on the turnstile and jumped the turnstile to get in.

I had previous knowledge of the ground and wanted to get into terraces

via the tunnel.     It was about 2.45 pm (1445) and I knew the match

would be starting soon, so I began to push my way through the crowd

towards the tunnel.     I managed to get to about halfway through the

tunnel and could go no further due to the amount of people in front of

me.     I saw that there were two or three policeman in the tunnel

against the side walls and like ourselves they were getting crushed as

well.     I conxnented with others to than that here we were having

purchased a ticket and couldn't see the match, but they were unable to

help us because they were stuck there like us.

I could not go back either as other fans had ccme up behind me and

were now trying to push their way through too but it was impossible.

Suddenly I was aware of a surge from behind as the crowd in front had

to move because of the pressure, again I was trapped with my arms by

my side and being moved forward without any control. As we reached

the end of the tunnel it appeared that everyone in front just fell

down the steps of the terraces.     I saw people falling to the ground

everywhere and I fell over myself, a man nearby began to help me to my

feet, he was leaning over a crash barrier with his hands out screaming

at me to give him my hands to help me, but somehow I couldn't move.        I

saw a kid lying on the floor by me, he was about 15 yrs old', he had a

Liverpool tracksuit on with a Liverpool football shirt with "Candy"

written on it on top, he was blue in the face with his tongue sticking

out of his mouth, scinehow I managed to lean on two lads either side of

me and began to pull myself up,     I reached out to the chap who was
                                                                            6


shouting me and I had to stand on the head of this kid on the floor to

get up, I think he was dead.     I got up and again the crowd just closed

in again.    You were like a sardine unable to move anywhere.   I

had managed to get behind this crash barrier to where this bloke was

who helped me, I looked down to in front of the barrier and I could

still see this kid on the floor with everyone standing on top of him.

They had no choice.    The match kicked off then, all the while I

still in a crush unable to move or do anything when I turned my head.

I could see people being pulled up into the seats above, then John

Barnes hit the cross bar with a shot and the crowd just pushed forward

and again everyone in front went over, the barrier I was up against

just appeared to fold over, and I fell forwards rolling over and over

and ended up right at the front at the fence, my nose was

bleeding and as I looked around I saw a girl also getting up, and

I saw a kid with his hand out over the barrier, this was another

barrier.    I thought his hand was out to help us up but when I

looked at him I saw he was bent double over the barrier and

was being crushed against it by the crowd.     I took hold of his hand

not knowing this and it was lifeless.     I looked at his face, his face

was blue, again his tongue was out, he appeared dead, he appeared

about 25 yrs, black hair, with jeans on.     I think it was a blue top he

had on.     I managed to get to my feet and I don't know if it was out of

fear or what but I found I had urinated in my trousers and looking

around me I could see other people had done the same, then when the

crowd began to push backwards I saw the kid on the barrier just slump

over onto the floor motionless.

I then remember a gate at the front was opened and I saw a girl and

sane blokes near to it.     In fear I went over to the girl and I punched

her in the face and knocked her over so that I could get out in front
       of her.    I then climbed out and ran onto the pitch.   A policeman and

       and policewoman came up to me and asked me if I was alright.         I told

       them I was and I just sat there watching them seeing all their faces

       up against the fence, people being passed over the heads of supporters

       to the police at the front.

       I then got up and started ripping bill boards down with other

       supporters, putting the injured on them and carrying than to the other

       end to the ambulancemen.      I was doing this for ages, backwards

       and forwards.     Later I wanted to leave the ground but the police

       wouldn't let me as then they weren't sure whether the match was off

       or not.    I left the ground at about 4.10 pm (1610) and just walked

       around.    I went into a pub in Sheffield and got legless and walked

       around all night.     The next day I caught a train hone.




       On the day I was wearing a pair of blue jeans, a red shirt and

       training shoes.



                                                                            SIGNED

^kTEMENT TAKEN
^        PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:    080589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                     PC
                                                                           STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                           TYNE AND WEAR

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 27

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 240589                                                              (SIGNED)



           I am a Liverpool supporter and have been since 1971.

           On Saturday 15 April 1989,(150489) I went to the Hillsborough

           football stadium to watch the FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool and

           Nottingham Forrest.

           We travelled to Sheffield in a hire car there were five of us all

           together, there w a s a n d                                     and



           We left hone at about 8am (0800) and we arrived in Sheffield at about

           10am (1000).

           There were two of us who did not have tickets for the match, myself

           and                   so on our arrival at Sheffield we went to the

           ground, but the ticket touts wanted too much money for the tickets and

           we did not buy any, we still thought that there may have been a chance

           of getting some spare tickets off sane Liverpool fans who             had

           arranged to meet in a pub.   This pub was at somewhere called

           Staysbridge or Stallybridge, I cannot remember what it was called, but

           it had a full sized snooker table in it.   So at 11am (1100) we went to

           this put, we got there just as it was opening, not long after
Liverpool supporters started arriving at the pub.               waslucky

as he managed to buy a spare ticket, but that was the only one

available.    We stayed at the pub until about 2pm (1400) and when we

left there were still a lot of supporters at the pub, the supporters

in the pub were well behaved and the atmosphere was good.     It took us

about 20 minutes to return to the ground and we parked up the hill,

past the ground and walked back to the Leppings Lane turnstiles.        I

was still hoping to be able to buy a ticket to get into the ground,

but although I asked a lot of people if they had any spare tickets,

there were non available.    I stood by the barrier at the side of the

turnstiles, the time was now about 2.30pm (1430) to 2.45pm (1445).

The crowds now were very large and there was a lot of pushing going on

as people tried to get to the turnstiles, people were shouting and

becoming angry because they could not get into the ground.     I was now

in the middle of the crowd having been pushed there.

The only Police I remember seeing was one in avan      and one on a horse

and these two were telling people not to push, but     because of the

amount of people in and around the Leppings Lane turnstiles they were

having no success.

In my experience this is one of the worst crushes I have been in.

At about 2.50pm (1450) the large blue gates atthe      side of the

turnstiles were opened by somebody, I do not know who, but everyone

rushed for these gates and I was carried along with them, it was

impossible not to go with them, the only alternative was to get pushed

over.   Once inside the ground, I went to the far side of the terraces

             by the North Stand, where I met up with         and     and

__________     I do not know where                  went and I did not

see him again that day.

We took up our viewing position just before kick off, although it was
_________                                                                  3


crowded where we were, we were not uncomfortable.   When I walked

across the yard area at the rear of the West Stand I did not see any

Police or stewards.

I have been to Hillsborough before and I know the layout of the ground

and know where I was going once inside.

The first thing I noticed was a fan go up to GRQBBELAAR, the Liverpool

goalkeeper, then a Police Officer ran onto the pitch and went to the

referee and he took the players off.

I did not know that any person had died in the tragedy until after we

left the ground at about 4.30pm (1630).

I personally did not assist anyone who was injured, I stayed on the

terrace until the official message was broadcast that the game had

been abandoned.

Whilst outside the ground I saw a fan climbing the wall to get in.     I

saw this fan being ejected again.

I only saw the one gate opened on one occasion.

I had no intention to enter the ground as I did not have a ticket and

I was prepared to stay outside and rejoin the others after the game,

it was only because I was pushed through the open gate that I went in

and once inside I didn't see any point in trying to turn round and

leave.

I have no observations on how the tragedy occurred, but there were far

too many fans trying to get through the turnstiles between 2.30pm

(1430) and the time the gate was opened and the atmosphere outside the

ground was turning nasty because fans were getting annoyed because

they could not get in and I believe that if the gates had not have

been opened there may have been people injured or killed outside the

ground.
                                           SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:   240589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     POL PC
                                                                             STATION

NAME:          ALISON JANE
               BENNETT

ADDRESS:
                          , NOTTINGHAMSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 24

OCCUPATION:    VDU OPERATOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by roe, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 270489                                               A J BENNETT (SIGNED)



           I am a single woman living with ray parents.   I am a V.D.U Operator

           employed by                   [

           I am a Liverpool F.C. Supporter and on Saturday 15.4.89 (150489) I

           travelled to Sheffield with ray boyfriend, David LOWE,

                                   and his girlfriend           We travelled by

           car and parked in a side street.

           We did not have tickets for the football match and we went to the

           Penistone Road North end of the Hillsborough Stadium where we

           purchased 5 consecutively numbered tickets from a ticket tout.        I

           have the stubs from 3 of the tickets (Ex No         ) (REF NO             )•

           The ticket tout was a white male, late 20's early 30's, 5'7 - 5'8,

           stocky build, brown hair, straight with perhaps a side parting.       He

           was casually dressed in a ski jacket type anorak.    We paid him #20

           for each ticket.

           We arrived in Sheffield at about 11.00 am (1100) and after parking the

           car went to a pub, I think it is called the WHITE HORSE.        The pub got

           busy about 12.30 (1230) onwards and became packed with Liverpool

           supporters.   Dave had about 3 pints and a bottle of beer because
BENNETT                ALISON JANE                                           2

the pub ran exit of glasses.           had half a lager and then

orange juice,         was driving and only had shandy.   I wasn't

drinking.

At about 1.30 pm (1330) we went to the ground.     The tickets we had

purchased were for the Spion Kop end and so we went to a Police

kiosk, something like a Portacabin, outside the ground, in the area

to the South Stand.    We explained to an officer that we were

Liverpool Supporters and he advised us to see a steward at the West

Stand entrance.

We went to the entrance to the West Stand and spoke to a steward.

This was man in his early 30's and I think he had a beard.      We spoke

to him about the tickets and he directed us to the far left

turnstile.    When we got to the turnstile the man there refused to let

us in.    We then went back to the Steward and he directed us to the

far right turnstile.    When the Steward sent us there he cortmented "HE'S

BEEN LETTING PEOPLE IN." At this turnstile we were allowed into the

ground, the turnstile operator looked at our tickets and retained the

one half.

Once inside the ground it was not crowded at that stage and we

entered through the tunnel to enclosure 4 (as marked on the map). We

went towards the left hand side of this enclosure and sat slightly

more than half way back from the front.

It was not crowded but there were quite a few people there.         There

was room to move about and to sit on the steps.     We sat for about ten

minutes.

At about 2.30 - 2.40 (1430 - 1440) we started to move forward.         Not

necessarily because we wanted to, but because of the numbers of people

behind us.    We reached a barrier and because of the pressure from

behind we ducked underneath it.      At this stage I wasn't apprehensive,
BENNETT                ALISON JANE                                                 3


it was just typical of a normal football match filling up.

At about 2.50 - 2.55 (1450 - 1455)                   David and I got

separated from        and        |.   I think        had got frightened and

they had gone towards a gate at the front to try and get out.

David and I finished up against the fencing at the front.          When we

first got pushed up to the fence                finished up in front of roe

and facing roe I think his back was against the fencing.         This was the

point when the pressure started to hurt and I got frightened.          The

game had I think started but I couldn't see the pitch.                 shouted

for people to move back but it was obvious that they weren't going

to. People then started climbing over the fence, onto the pitch.

There were people climbing both sides of roe and I think someone close

to          managed to climb out.     People were shouting to be let out,

and children were being passed over the fence.

I think people close to roe could have died but I didn't realize that

at the time.    The pressure was so great that you couldn't turn

around and couldn't even look around. I was telling David that it was

hurting and to hold roe and not let roe go down.        He was shouting, and

swearing, to try and get roe lifted out.

To the left of us was about 3 lads and then the side fencing.          People

were trying to get the females and the children out, and these lads

helped roe up onto the top of the fencing by the c o m e r of the pen.         I

was then helped down onto the pitch area.          I could talk to David and

          through the railings and I could touch them but you just

couldn't do anything.       After about 5 minutes           was helped out

over the railings.     David was still in there for what seemed like ages

and I could see his face going a funny colour.          This was because he

couldn't breathe.     He then saw a gap behind him and fought his way to

the side fencing and got out, over the fencing.
        BENNETT                 ALISON JANE                                        4


       When this all started I saw girls and children getting to the front

        and trying to climb out, or being passed or pulled out, and the

        Police were tryng to push them back into the pens.        When the Police did

        realize what was happening there seemed to be no organisation and

        they didn't seem to know what to do.     The Police even seemed to be

        pulling the people off the fences that were trying to help other

       people get out.

        It also seemed to take a long time before the ambulances came onto

        the pitch.    We got out of the ground as soon as we could.

       As a result of the incident I suffered bruising to my ribs, arms and

        legs

        I am 24 years of age, 5'3 tall, slim, long blond hair ufriich was

        tied up with a red scarf in a bow.      I was wearing a white sweat

        shirt and navy blue tight trousers with a thin red stripe.

       Whilst in the pub and in the area of the ground, we were asked on

        several occasions, a dozen or so times, if we had any spare tickets

        to sell.     This was mainly from Liverpool supporters.

        I am a keen Liverpool supporter and go as regular as I can.




                                                             A J BENNETT SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

         TIME:                DATE:    270489

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE                    DC




                                                                                        1 594
                                                                              STATION

NAME:            DAVID   PETER
                 LOWE

ADDRESS:
                                         NOTTINGHAMSH

AGE / DATE OF BIR3H: 22

OCCUPATION:      MOULDER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by roe, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 290489                                                     DAVID LOWE (SIGNED)



           On Saturday 15-4-89 (150489) I travelled to Hillsborough to support

           Liverpool F.C.    We travelled by car and with roe were Alison

           BENNETT,                             and ray brother

           We travelled in           car and parked in a side street near to the

           ground.    We arrived at about 11.0 am (1100) and went straight to the

           ground. None of us had tickets and we bought tickets from a tout.         We

           paid #20 each for the tickets and they were for the Spion Kop.        I

           have been to the ground a number of times and we knew that we wanted

           to go to the West Stand.     Although we had the wrong tickets we knew

           we would be able to get in, or at least we intended to try to get in,

           with the Liverpool supporters.

           The ticket tout that we bought the tickets off was in the Penistone

           Road North area.      He was asking #30 for tickets for the Liverpool end

           and   #20 for tickets for the Spion Kop end.

           This man was a white male, about       late 20's early     30's about 5'8 -

           5'9, stocky build, dark hair.     I don't think I would recognise him

           again.

           Prior to the match we went to a pub, the White Horse, we had tried to
LOWE                 DAVID     PETER


get in another pub but had not been alloowed in without being a

member, or so we were told.     In the White Horse it was mainly

Liverpool supporters and a few Forest supporters.      There wasn't any

trouble between the fans.

At about half past twelve the pub became packed but I didn't notice

anyone drinking heavily or deliberately getting drunk.       Myself, I had

three pints and then the pub ran out of glasses and I had a bottle of

Lager.

We left the pub at about 1.0 pm (1300) or just after.       We walked to

the entrance to West Stand in Leppings Lane, this was after we had

taken our coats back to our car.       On the way to the West Stand we had

called in at a Police kiosk by the South Stand and asked if we could

get in the Liverpool end.     We were told to ask a Steward.       The person

we spoke to commented that he wasn't on duty and I don't think he was

wearing any part of his uniform.       He was in casual clothes.     I might

be able to recognise him again, but I can't describe him except to

say he was white, late 20's with dark hair.

At the West Stand we spoke to a Steward who was standing with a

Police Oficer in uniform.     The Steward was a white male about 45-50,

straight greying hair, slim build.       We explained that we were

Liverpool Supporters and that we had tickets for the Nottingham

Forest end.

Last year when I attended the same match I again had tickets for the

Nottingham Forest end and the Police put us in a standing terrace

between Spion Kop and the North Stand. They told us that the pen was

for Liverpool Supporters but they also put Nottingham Forest

supporters in the same pen and the Police came and formed a line

between us to avoid problems.

The Steward sent us to the far left turnstile, marked on the map as
LOWE                   DAVID   PETER                                       3


the turnstiles by the letters A/G.     We were refused entry at that

turnstile and we went back to the same Steward and he sent us to the

far right turnstile. He commented that the operator there had been

letting people in.

We gained entry at the turnstile. The operator took our tickets and

then we went through the tunnel into Pen 4 (Four).

Over the past 5 years or so I have been to the Hillsborough Stadium 6

or 7 times and the only route I know for getting on the terrace is

through the tunnel.     I was not aware of any other access routes.

When we got into the Pen 4 there was quite a few people in them

but it was not packed.    The Spion Kop end seemed to be fairly full

but there were very few people in the North and South Stands.     This

was at about 1.45 pm (1345)

We chose a position to the rear and left of centre of the pen.        At

about 2.30 pm (1430) the Pen started to become full, and the

supporters started swaying, and we had to go with them.

At the same time we were being pushed forward and we came up against

a barrier. The pressure from behind continued to increase and

and         left us because       was frightened and I sent than to

the front to try and get out onto the pitch, through the gate there.

Alison,            and I ducked under the barrier and that took the

pressure off us for about five minutes.     We were then only 2 or 3

steps from the front and we again began to get crushed and couldn't

move.     By this time I realized that we had to get out for our own

safety.    Other fans had started to climb the fence to get out and at

first the Police tried to prevent them, by shouting at them. Whilst

the people at the front were concerned for their safety there were

people at the back still chanting and obviously they didn't realize

how bad it was.



                                                                               1597
LOWE                   DAVID   PETER                                          4


On top of the fence were seme supporters who were lifting out the

young lad and the girls. Alison was frightened and saying that she

had to get out.     I shouted to the people on top of the fence and she

was lifted out over the side fence into Pen 5.       I had got separated

from          and although he was only a yard (1 yd) away from me I

couldn't see him because of the way we were packed in.       I kept

shouting to him if he was alright and he said he wasn't. After what

seemed like a long time I saw             being lifted out. He got stuck on

the fence but then got safely onto the pitch area.

Although I was close enough to touch the fence, I was not crushed

against it. There were other people round me, but I couldn't move and

when someone tried to pull me out the crowd was packed so tightly

around me that I couldn't be lifted.       Due to people trying to lift me

and also because of trying to push back against the fence, my hands

turned yellow.

After seme time, about 3.15 - 3.20 pm (1515 - 1520) I realized that

behind me the crowd had thinned slightly and I forced my way up the

terrace and was helped over the fence into Pen 5, which was virtually

empty. As a result of the incident I suffered a bruised spine and

shock.



Alison,           and I joined up on the pitch and we left as soon as we

could.

I did not see any person in Pen 4 that I can definitely say

suffered an injury or died within my view.

I am a white male,              slim, fair curly collar length hair,

with an earring in my left ear.        I was wearing a black sweatshirt and

blue Jeans.

When I attended the Match last year we were in the Spion Kop end, the
        LOWE                   DAVID   PETER


       Liverpool Supporters that is, and the whole event seemed to be a lot

       better organised. I feel that this is an important factor that

        contributed to the disaster.

        I think the Liverpool fans should again have been put into the Spion

       Kop end.   David Lowe




                                                          DAVID LOWE SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

         TIME              DATE

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE                 DCI
                                                                            STATION

NAME:          ANTHONY   JOHN
A              MURRAY

ADDRESS:
                      STOKE ON TRENT

AGE / DATE OF BIR3H: 42

OCCUPATION:    TELEPHONE ENGINEER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 040589                                                   A J MURRAY (SIGNED)



           I am a married man and I live at the above address with my wife Edna

           Catherine MURRAY and

           It was my intention to go to the football match at the Hillsborough

           football stadium in Sheffield on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489)

           with my son Paul MURRAY.     To this end, I   purchased two tickets for

           the match and transport was arranged by the Stoke branch of the

           liverpool football club supporters.

           The arrangements were to pick up a coach in Hanley, Stoke on Trent so

           Paul and myself set out at about 1015 and made our way to Hanley in my

           works van which is a Ford Escort              and travelled from Meir into

           Hanley. Once we arrived in Hanley, I parked the van in a car park in

           the City Centre.     Paul and myself made our way to the pick-up point

           which was the bus station.     There were quite a few people waiting to

           be picked up for the match and the coach arrived about 10 minutes late

           and all the waiting people boarded the coach.       The coach was a medium

           sized coach run by "Ladyline" coaches at Congelton.       The coach then

           made its way via Leek and Buxton until we reached the village of

           Bakewell where the coach stopped at about 1.00 pm (1300) for
MURRAY                 ANTHONY    JOHN                                         2

refreshments.   Whilst the coach was stopped Paul and myself had a

portion of chips to eat and then rejoined the coach to continue the

journey.   Once everyone was on board the coach, it continued its

journey to Sheffield. As we got into Sheffield, the coach pulled up

about two miles short of the ground because of the congestion.        I

don't know the name of where we stopped or even the area.        Once the

coach was parked, we hurried along to the ground at a fast pace.          As

we were going to the ground, we saw several large crowds of people

making their way to Hillsborough but they appeared to be Nottingham

Forest supporters.     As we approached Leppings Lane, the crowd had

spilled out onto the main road past the perimeter fence and it was

packed solid.   At this point, I could see no Police or stewards

guiding fans it seoned to be a free for all. Paul and myself joined

the large crowd and from the information on our tickets which said the

Leppings Lane entrance, turnstiles A & B we could not see where we

were supposed to be.     At this point I could see no queues or orderly

lines to the turnstiles so we tried to make our way to the gates any

way we could.   It was at this point I noticed about three or four

police on horseback who were trying to control the crowd but as the

crowd was so large, they appeared to be ineffective, the crowd was

swaying from side to side and my thoughts were for Pauls safety so I

concentrated on making sure Paul didn't fall over.         I thought at this

stage that it was very badly organised in respect of the queueing

system or lack of it.     I feel more crowd control was required by

either stewards or Police.       I can't say how long I was in the crowd

but the crush was building up and at some point we were jostled around

towards a large blue concertina door.         I then all of a sudden felt a

great deal of the pressure lifted from the crowd and I looked and saw

that the big blue door was open.         I believe that this was a good move,
MURRAY                  ANTHONY   JOHN                                      3


as the pressure was so intense and this relieved this to make it

easier for the crowd.     I thought they had opened the gate to let fans

into another set of turnstiles. As the crowd started to move towards

the gate, the whole weight of the crowd pushed through. I can't say if

people were running or walking but I think the solid mass of people

just fell through the open door.     Paul went through with me and I had

hold of him and went with the crowd at a quick walk.    As we had gone

through the gate and we were into the large enclosed area, I saw a

Liverpool fan run past me and say to someone else "I told you we

wouldn't need tickets," and run on.

At this point I saw a tunnel where everyone was making for. I saw no

signs for any side entry to the ground or enclosure.     I looked around

for a prograirme seller but couldn't see one.    I saw about five

stewards scattered around this area.     The stewards were standing back

as if unable to give directions or control the crowd.

The crowd pressure at this point, was slightly better due to the larger

area to fan out into.     Paul and myself then made our way towards

the tunnel.   There were still crowds of people going through the

tunnel but I found no obstruction in the tunnel and as we reached

the exit of the tunnel, we made our way to the right and into the

right hand pen, pen three.    As we emerged onto the terrace, I could

see the Liverpool players kicking the ball around on the pitch.        It

was at this point that Paul was spun round by someone banging into

him causing him to face me and Paul then fell to the floor.     I

stooped down to try to pick Paul up and was knocked severely from

behind as part of the surge or crush causing me to be pushed forward

into the crowd.   I then found myself at the front of the pen by an

exit gate with a few steps leading up to the exit.     I thought I saw

Pauls black jacket at this stage but I can't be sure.     I remember
MURRAY               ANTHONY    JOHN                                        4


then lying on my side with a crowd of people on top of me and I

could only see a bit of daylight.      The pressure of the crowd made it

inpossible for me to move and I was screaming for help.      I don't remember

how long I was in the crowd for but I then remember someone pulling me

out of the pen and on to the pitch.      I was left on the football pitch

to see if I was alright by some of the Liverpool fans.

My right leg was completely numb from my hip to my knee.     My main

concern was for Paul at this stage.     A doctor approached me to see if

I was alright or if I had any chest pains.      I told the doctor I didn't

and he then looked at my leg.   The doctor thought it might be broken

so he took my jeans off. It was then that I was put into an ambulance

and taken to the Northern General Hospital.      Upon arrival at the hospital

I was given x-rays and then taken up to a hospital ward and detained

overnight.

That is, as best I can remember it, my total recollection of the

incidents on the day of Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489).




I give the Police access to my medical records



This was my first visit to the Hillsborough football ground in

Sheffield. When my jeans were taken from me, my right leg was put into

a plastic splint.
        MURRAY           ANTHONY     JOHN


                                            A J MURRAY SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:    040589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC
                                                                             STATION

NAME:             DAVID   GEORGE   LAWRENCE
                  WATTS

ADDRESS:
                                   NOTTS

AGE / DATE OF BIR3H: 52

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 100589                                                      D WATTS (SIGNED)



           I am David George Lawrence WATTS, and I reside at the above address

           with my wife and family.

           I am a follower of Association Football and have been a supporter of

           Nottingham Forest for the best part of my life.

           I obtained a fourteen pound seat Ticket for the Nottingham versus

           Liverpool, F.A. Cup Semi-final at Hillsborough, from my friend

                    who has close connections with the Club.

           On Saturday, 15 April 1989 (150489), I travelled to Sheffield by car,

           with three friends of mine as follows:-

           (1 )

           (2)


           (3)

           All of the above addresses are in                   Nottingham.

           We commenced our journey from               at about 11.30 am (1130) on

           the morning of the 15th April (150489).   We had an unhindered journey

           into Sheffield where we arrived at 1.00 pm (1300).            garaged his

           motor vehicle at Hatfield Garage in Sheffield where we spent some

           time chatting to the staff.




                                                                                       1605
WATTS                  DAVID   GEORGE   LAWRENCE                           2

Following this, we hired a taxi cab to a Public House by the river in

Sheffield which was located some 3/4 (three-quarters) of a mile from

the Hillsborough Stadium.

We entered the Public House at 1.45 pm (1345), I believe the name of

this establishment was the Free Masons Arms.

We only stayed on those premises for 20 minutes or so and consumed one

pint of beer each.

It was whilst we were in the Public House that I noted a large number

of Liverpool Supporters who were all drinking.

There was about twenty in one particular group, who took up a position

close to my party of friends.     Two of the group who were in their late

teens to early twenties, sat by me and we had a conversation.

They stated that they were Liverpool Supporters and from their

accents I could tell that they were from the Liverpool area.

The group were very rowdy and many of them were quite drunk.    However,

they were not of a violent nature and so I continued my conversation

with the two youths who were sat next to me.

I mainly spoke to the youth right by me and the conversation went

along the following lines.

He first asked me if I was a local of Sheffield, I told him that I was

in fact from Nottingham and was a Forest Supporter. He did not react

to this in an unkindly manner and we continued on with our

conversation.     He next enquired if I had a ticket for the game and I

told him I had.     He seemed surprised and asked where I had obtained it

from, I told him simply, that it was from Nottingham Football Club.

It was then that he surprised me by openly stating that he did not

have a ticket for the game.     I was curious and asked him how he was

intending to enter the ground.     He said, "Oh, they won't stop us."

And then added in a matter of fact way, "They never have yet." We
WATTS                   DAVID   GEORGE   LAWRENCE                        3


continued to talk about football in general until we left the

Public House at 2.05 pm (1405), the group of Liverpool Supporters were

still there drinking as we departed.

We made our way toward the Hillsborough Stadium via a park adjacent to

the ground, we saw several supporters along the way who looked as

though they had been drinking, I believe that these were in fact

Nottingham fans.

We arrived at our entrance to the South Stand seats at 2.25 pm (1425),

there were Police officers in evidence, but I did not witness any

Police or Stewards giving directions.      We had found our entrance quite

easily and had no problems entering as queues were light.

I entered via a turnstile and handed my ticket in, I did not see a

gate open nor did I witness the opening of one I did not witness any

unauthorised entry to the ground.

Having entered, I did not see any direction signs but experienced no

difficulty in finding my seat.

At no time did I enter any part of the Leppings Lane end.

I did not witness any incident of disorder or the consumption of

alcohol within the ground.

I took up my viewing position at 2.30 pm (1430), seated next to my

travelling companions.

When the game was stopped at 3.06 pm (1506) due to the problems at the

Leppings Lane end, my attention was obviously drawn towards this

Stand. I could see that the end was packed to capacity but did not

witness any crowd surge and could not see any of the barriers due to

the amount of people.

I did see supporters coming over the perimeter fence and saw people

lying on the playing surface who were obviously very ill, but I could

not tell how bad they were from where I was seated, I was in no
        WATTS                  DAVID   GEORGE   LAWRENCE                         4


        position to assist.

        I do not believe that I witnessed anything that was a factor in the

        deaths or injuries, nor did I witness what I consider to be a criminal

        offence.

        I believe that daring this tragic event, there was a lack of

        communication and organisation all round.

        I believe the main cause to have been drunken Liverpool supporters

        forcing their way into the Leppings Lane end, not unlike those I had

        spoken to earlier that afternoon in the Public House.

        I would describe the two youths I spoke to in the Public House as

        follows:-

         (1)   White youth, 18 yrs, approx 5 ft 8 inches (5'8), nine and a

         1/2 stone with light quite smartly cut hair, no facial hair and a

        fresh complexion. He was dressed in smart casual clothes.

         (2)   White youth, 20 yrs, 6 foot (6') tall and fat, he was dark haired

        with a medium fairly smart cut, he was also wearing casual dress, I

        cannot describe them further.



                                                                D WATTS SIGNED

^fcVTEMENT TAKEN
^          PLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:    100589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                      PC
                                                                          STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                         READING, BERKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 26

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 090589                                                             (SIGNED)



           I reside at the above address, having moved to the area from my native

           Merseyside in 1984 (000084).

           I have been a supporter of Liverpool Football Club for many years and

           have travelled to see them play in numerous forms and sizes of

           stadium, both seated and standing in this country and indeed

           throughout Europe.

           When Liverpool reached the semi-final of the F.A. Cup this year,

           together with a friend of mine, I travelled to Hillsborough,

           Sheffield, in order to see the match.   My friend is                      of

                                          Cheshire, telephone number

           In order to go to the match I travelled to my parents house in

                   Cheshire on the matchday (Saturday 15/4/89).

                        It was our intention to leave
                                                at about 11.30am (1130), however,

           we had a problem with my car, a Ford Capri, black in colour,

           registered number         jin which we subsequently travelled to

           Sheffield. We left eventually at 12.40pm (1240) and elected to travel

           using the A57 snake pass route, therefore avoiding traffic on the

           troubled M62, Ml route.   N e i t h e r n o r myself had a ticket for the




                                                                                          1609
                                                                          2

match, however, it is common for tickets for such matches to be

available outside the ground prior to kick off.

En route to the ground we did get held up in both Stockport and

Glossop thus adding about an hour and a quarter to our journey.

In Sheffield and some two miles from Hillsborough two roadside Police

Officers stopped us and having questioned us as to which team we were

supporting, directed us to park approximately half a mile away from

the ground.   We were not asked if we had tickets for the match.    I

don't recall the name of the road we parked in but it was a side road

near to a park on the Leppings Lane end of Hillsborough.    When we had

parked the car I did in fact check my watch and can say that the time

was 2.55pm (1455).

Already we could hear the cheers form inside the ground and made our

way down a steep road past an old school building and the crowd was

gathering into fairly large numbers.   We walked briskly to the

leppings Lane end of the ground and I, along with others, was

confronted by a line of five or six police officers on horseback,

these were positioned nose to tail as a barrier adjacent to the open

iron gates that allow access to the turnstiles and subsequent entry to

the ground. On my way to the ground I saw no evidence of any alcohol

being consumed or any fans acting in a disorderly manner.

On my arrival I could identify each turnstile with having its own

queue, although it was very busy and the match had obviously kicked

off.   I would estimate the time as being 3.02pm (1502), as I checked

my watch around this time.

The horses did not appear to be stopping people going to the

turnstiles but more to be slowing the flow of people down.     I saw at

this time fans were scaling the wall adjacent to the turnstiles and

were left alone by the Police and ground officials, although I did not
see any ground officials in the area outside the turnstiles.

I did not receive and directions from the police officers on horseback

or from the two foot patrol officers I saw by a wall behind the

horses, and was not asked if I had a        ticket.

When I did pass behind the line of horses it was with the intention of

looking for a ticket to purchase butwithin about ten seconds of my

arrival and to my utter amazement a large blue concertina door to the

left of the turnstiles in front of me slid open.      I was amazed because

it was obvious to me that this was an exit gate and therefore gave

access to the interior of the ground.    When this gate was opened it

caused a large portion of the crowd to go towards it and in fact

through it.     I didn't go towards it as I hadn't got a ticket and in

fact          said to me, "Shall we try and pay on the turnstile?"

I said, "Why not". We could after all only be turned away and if

people were entering by the gate there seemed no reason that we

couldn't be let in by the turnstile.

I could not see any reason for opening the gates as the crowd did not

seem to be crushed.

After the gates had opened I passed through the line of horses which

was a menacing task in itself and I made my way to the third turnstile

from the left with            The Police Officers remained silent and no

indication was given as to the condition of the crowd inside the

ground and I saw no sign of any stewards.

       reached the turnstile first, the queues having depleted somewhat

at this time.     I heard       bay, "And him as well".   The reply from

the attendant was "Yes, come on".     I gave him ten pounds, just as if

it was a ticket and was let in.     I cannot describe the attendant at

all.

Once through the turnstile not a single Police Officer, Steward or any



                                                                             161
other ground official offered advice at to the situation.    I did see

two Police Officers stood to the left of the tunnel to pens 3 & 4, I

would estimate about 2 to 3 metres (2 to 3m) to the left.    They did

not direct anyone that I saw.    I made my way towards the tunnel with

numerous others, it was busy but not a crush and my entry towards and

through the tunnel was comfortable.

The passage from the turnstiles to the tunnel is a natural one and I

saw no indication sign wise to indicate differently.    I was a

stranger to Hillsborough and it was my first visit, although           had

been previously.

I had suggested to         we go to the left of the tunnel into pen 4,

in fact for no other reason that a personal preference to watch the

game from that position.    I had reached open air before I experienced

any difficulty in getting into the viewing area.    Both the right hand

and left hand entrances to the viewing areas were tight.    The game was

still in play and crowd surges forced by friend and I apart.      I had no

option in taking up the position I wanted, as it was selected for me

by pushing and surging.    I having entered the left hand side into pen

4 experienced 3 large surges.    Unlike at normal football matches after

a surge you generally make your way back to your original position,

this was all sideways and forward movement with very little backward

movement as if the space created by the surge was filled by other

people.   I managed to stay in an upright position and eventually ended

up about 12 to 15 people in front of the wall to the West Stand and

under an advertising board on the West Stand.    It was a yellow and

black board and I was about a 1/3 of the way to the left of it as

you face it with the playing area behind you.

My memory of the actual game is vague and virtually nil as I was more

concerned for my safety.    I was aware of 3 police officers on the
front fencing facing the crowd and gesturing to people to get back.

They appeared to be shouting but I couldn't hear them as the crowd

noise was still high.    The people around me were shouting for help.

I, at this time, saw one of the Police Officers pushing a young lad, in

his teens, back into the pen but his jeans were caught on the fence.

I didn't see what happened after that as I was looking after my own

safety and the whereabouts of           as we had be separated.

It appeared because of the Police actions that they had not grasped

how serious the situation was.

I did not see anyone with a loud-hailer or other equipment and did not

hear and announcements on the Public Address system.

The second surge I felt forced me up against a barrier which concerned

me because my hips were tightly pressed against the barrier.      I

believe the game was stopped just prior to that surge.     I was getting

distressed at this time.     I could feel intense heat and the smell of

heat and sweat.    The main heat was from my chest down almost to a

'sauna' type level, although not the same type of heat.

The Officers at the front were still offering silent gestures of "get

back" and I along with countless others, replied "We can't move".

Another surge to my relief moved me away from the barrier and further

left, leaving me in the position I previous described.

Following this surge, I had some freedom of movement from the

shoulders up and I could see a solitary Police Officer, positioned

directly above me in the West Stand.,

I shouted desperately at him "Hey! Hey! sort this out now, come on

sort it out".     I was ignored.   I did not see him use his radio, I saw

that he had one.     I would describe this Officer as being tall, thin,

he had a 'baby face' although he didn't see that young, I would say

about 24 years of age.     He had dark eyes, high cheek bones and a drawn
type of face.   He did not have glasses on or a moustache.    He was a

Police Constable wearing a helmet and a blue police shirt, no jacket.

The Police Officer disappeared and I didn't see him again but the fans

in the West Stand began to pull people from the terraces into the

seated area.    I was too far down to get into that stand.

I saw that about three rows of people in front of me, people trying to

get someone to their feet and a girl eventually emerged.     She looked

shocked and faint.    I didn't see what became of her but she was

assisted to my right and backwards.

I also saw a man in his early twenties standing on a wall about 1.8

metres (1.8m) high adjacent to the entrance to pen 4.   He shouted, "

Come on get out there is a girl dead down there".   At this time the

crush was easing because of the fans pulling people out to the stand

and people were by now spilling onto the pitch.

It was about now that I heard for the first time that I recall the

P.A. system and the instructions were to get back and this showed to

me that the authorities had not realised how serious the situation was.

As some people had been released from the crush the intense pressure

on myself was relieved sufficiently to enable me to move of my own

free will, back towards the entrance from which I came and to find my

friend.

I found         just in front of a barrier in front of the tunnel and he

was safe although confused.

We made our way into the tunnel with some ease and we stopped to have

a cigarette half-way along as we had no idea as to what was going to

happen with regards to the continuation of the match or whatever.

Whilst having a cigarette I heard shouts, "Move, get out of the way".

I then saw two police officers with some other people carrying a man

who was face down and unconscious, out of the tunnel towards the rear
of the West Stand.

Prior to this I had seen a tall blonde woman police constable in the

tunnel at the entrance to the terrace and she was shouting "Come on

lads, get out, get out".    This was the first sound advice I had heard

from a Police Officer.     She was about 25-30 years of age, slim build,

blue eyes and she had a four inch pony tail hair cut.      She

wore a fluorescent jacket, yellow in colour.

I, with         , went out the back of the stand, the time was about

3.15pn (1515) and I could see people being laid out in the recovery

position, this was at the rear of the West Stand.

I was half way between the West Stand and the turnstiles, leaning

against a barrier I then saw a Police Officer n u m b e r s t a n d i n g in

front of me and offering no assistance, assurance, comfort or any

type of help to anyone.     I took his number because I couldn't believe

he was taking no action.    The Officer was wearing a cap and I believe

was a Police Constable, he was about 40, average build and height.       I

saw nothing striking about him other that he did have thick eyebrows.

Whilst was in that position I saw urine cascading onto a number of

people, seme of which were Police Officers.     The urine was coming from

behind some of the steel cladding, high above at the back of the stand

and to the left of the tunnel from the turnstile side.       I person

responsible who I couldn't see would not be aware of the fact that he

was urinating onto people as they would be out of his or hers sight.

Whilst behind the stand I heard a request on the P.A. for Doctors to

come forward.    Although I could hear the P.A. system, I would say that

the system was clear enough when the noise level was low but not good

enough when the normal noise associated with a football match could be

heard.

The Police Officers seemed controlled but were silent and subdued and
                                                                                   8

       expressionless, when the Ambulancemen arrived, together with firemen

       and took hold of the situation more positively.

       Whilst in ray position by the barrier, I recall seeing a man about a

       metre (lm) in front of me and he was in the recovery position.      The

       man appeared lifeless.    He was tall, about 6 foot (6'), he was in his

       early 30's, heavy build, dark brown hair.       He was wearing a light

       coloured 'T' shirt, jeans and I could see he had Liverpool boxer

       shorts on under his jeans.    He was not being attended to at this

       time. I, together with          left the ground unable to take anymore.

       I then went and telephoned ray wife.    I left the ground at about 3.

       40pm (1540).     I subsequently drove back to           following the route

       I had taken to the ground.

       I was not injured so as to require attention but deeply shocked as a

       result of the experience.

       On the 20th of April 1989 (200489) I wrote a letter to the Chief

       Constable of the West Midlands relating to the incident.       I have

       retained the handwritten copy leaving forwarded a typed copy of

       the letter.



                                                                          SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:   090589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                      DC
                                                                          STATION



•
NAME:

              a
ADDRESS:
                          | LONDON,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 24

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 050589                                                         (SIGNED)



        I am a single man and I live at the above address with ray parents.

        On Saturday 15th April, 1989 (150489), I went to the FA cup semi-final

        between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough Sheffield.          I

        am a Liverpool supporter and have been since I was young as ray parents

        are from Liverpool.   I went to the game with ray two brothers,

        _____ who is 25 yrs old and                who was 15 yrs old.     We

        had not got tickets for the game and we left Saint Pancras Station,

        London, for Sheffield at 9 am (0900 hrs) Saturday 15th.(150489)       We

        all brought British rail tickets but, by coincidence, happened to

        travel on the same train as the Liverpool supporters club from London.

        The atmosphere on the train was good humoured.

        We arrived at Sheffield station at approximately 12.05 pm (1205 hrs).

        On the way I did not witness any supporters consuming alcohol and we

        were not subjected to any delays.   The only stops that the trian made

        were at scheduled stations.

        Upon our arrival there were quite a few Police officers at the

        station.   About four or five were at the ticket barriers, directing

        fans to supporters buses outside.   Liverpool supporters were directed




                                                                                        1617
to the right.    There was a lot of confusion about getting onto the

waiting buses.    Bus Inspectors were putting people off the buses if

they didn't have enough change and it took about half an hour before

we actually got onto the bus.

All this time, the police were keeping the two sets of supporters

apart with a line of men and seme horses, basically confining the

supporters to the station.     Everyone's bag was searched by the police

for alcohol, before they got onto the buses.

On the way to the ground I did not see any disorder or consumption of

alcohol.    We arrived at the ground at approximately 12.40 pm (1240 hrs)

still without tickets.    We then hung about around the ground area,

asking for tickets from lots of people.     There were lots of people

outside the ground at this stage and I could see the turnstiles, but

no one was going into the ground.

At about 2 pm (1400 hrs) my elder brother,             approached a lad

aged about 20 yrs near to the turnstiles.       He had a spare ticket and

we paid     #20 for it. This was a standing ticket for the Liverpool

end and we gave it to              We arranged to meet after the game and

then            headed towards the entrances.    I don't know how he got

into the ground but he still has a full ticket and stub at home.

          managed to get a ticket at about 2.30 pn (1430 hrs) from a

supporter in Leppings Lane near to a row of shops.       That was also a

terrace ticket and I think he paid     #20 or #25 for it.    It was for the

Leppings Lane end also and once he had bought it he went towards the

ground.

I must say that I thought then that I would not get a ticket to get in

as so many people were asking for them.     I heard that it was possible

to buy tickets at the Nottingham end from the touts so I went to look

but I didn't approach any.


                                                                              1618
                                                                           3


I eventually managed to get a ticket from a supporter at the far end

of Leppings Lane, at a roundabout.     I approached him and ask if he had

a spare ticket.    He charged me #25.00 for a standing ticket for

Leppings Lane and I bought it.     This was at around 2.55 pn (1455 hrs),

and there were still thousands of supporters caning from the direction

of the coach park.

They were, in the majority running in the direction of the ground and

I joined in and ran down Leppings Lane.     There were Police officers on

each junction, preventing fans from going down side roads and I saw a

Police van parked in Leppings Lane.

When I arrived at the turnstiles it was just a mass of people.      People

were aware that the players were on the pitch and began to push.        They

were anxious to get in and not miss the game.

There was one mass of people at the turnstiles then there was a line

of Police horses near to the wrought iron gates.     These horses

managed to keep the supporters in Leppings Lane from getting to the

turnstiles and the crowd there.     I was one of those in Leppings Lane

stopped by the horses.     However, supporters coming from our right,

over a bridge, were not stopped and were joining what had now become a

crush at the gates.

The crowd that I was in was well behaved, and we stood and waited.

The Police on horses were not forcing us anywhere or any other fans.

I was on the front row right next to the horses.

When the people at the turnstiles had cleared, the horse officers said

that we could go on.     There were other police officers near to the

turnstiles also.     We walked in between the horses, but, because of the

urgency and the amount of people behind, we ran as fast as we could

towards the turnstiles, a distance of about 20 yards.     The time was

approximately 3pn (1500 hrs) by this stage, and , as I reached the
turnstiles, there were only about 2 people in front of me.       I handed

in my ticket and went into an empty area.    There was a steward

standing at a gate for some steps and I showed him my ticket, asking

him where to go.    He pointed to a tunnel with a large letter 'B' on

top and told me to go down there.     I also saw a large letter 'C' on

the right hand side of the ground, but I decided to go down the tunnel.

I began to walk along the tunnel and as I was one of the first, I had

free passage.    There were approximately 3 or 4 Police officers

standing against the walls of the tunnel and other people drinking teas

and coffees.    As I reached the end, it was packed.     I could get onto

the terrace and I did so.    People at this stage were leaving the

crowd back down the tunnel as there was no roam.       There was also a

steward standing there at the end but he was giving no instructions.

There was space for me to step into the terraces and I did so.      The

game had started at this stage.     I stood behind some people

approximately 5 feet(5'0) from the back in pen 3 about 7(7'0) feet

from the dividing fence on my left.

I was aware of people continuing to come behind me and in a matter of

seconds I was constricted.    I was being pushed gradually forward and I

began to feel scared.    I then saw a crash barrier in front of me and I

was aware of people climbing out of the pen in all directions. It was

then that I saw the pitch and noticed the football hit the crossbar at

the end Liverpool were attacking.     A roar went up and it was then that

the crowd surged forward.    The pressure from behind was a lot more

than before and I became pinned against the crash barrier.       Together

with some others on the barrier we managed to get our hands and feet

onto the barrier.    I had my right foot against the barrier bar and

then we all pushed backwards, at the same time.     This gave us some

space and I then managed to turn to face the tunnel.       I began to force



                                                                              1620
my way back through the other people, towards the tunnel entrance.         I

think I reached, as far as I could, the position from where I had

started in the crowd, 5 yards from the back of pen 3 when I saw a man

in his 30's or 40's, on all fours, on the floor.     I reached down and

managed to pick him up. I put his right arm around my shoulder.       He

was a white man, with short, black hair and a black moustache.     He

was wearing a white shirt, blue jeans and a black leather jacket.          I

tried to get to the tunnel with him and people made some roam, but

still had to push some.    The man was not walking and I was dragging

him at this stage.

I shouted for someone to help me and another supporter grabbed his

arm.   We made our way through the tunnel, which at this time, had

more people inside than when I used it first, and out the other end.

I saw a concertina gate, directly in front of the tunnel entrance,

which was open by about one foot.(l'O)     I could see an ambulance

across the entrance outside the ground.     I also saw two ambulance men

talking to a police woman and I shouted to than to bring the ambulance

into the ground.     They did nothing so, with the help of 2 other fans,

we carried the injured supporter to the gate.

The ambulance men opened the gate and we then saw a crash barrier.

The police woman moved the barrier and we put the man inside the

ambulance.   I then turned around and went back into the ground.      No

one else came back through that gate with me and I don't know whether

it was closed or not.

I made my way back down the tunnel to see the game and there was now

two way traffic with people still going in and others coming out.          I

reached the end of the tunnel and I could see that by now, the players

were off the pitch.     I got into roughly the same area as I had been in

before and by now people were turning around to leave.     People were



                                                                               1 621
being helped towards the tunnel.     I saw two men caning towards me with

an injured supporter.    One had his arms the other had his legs.     They

were caning straight up the terraces towards me I grabbed the right

leg and helped to carry the man through the tunnel.     He was a white

man in his late twenties.     He was about 5 foot 11(5'11) inches tall

with medium length, fair hair.     He had no facial hair.   He was

wearing light grey canvas trousers, a white Tee shirt with a print on

it and white training shoes.     He was not speaking but was making

panting and gasping noises.

When we reached the end of the tunnel we walked out approximately 2 or

3 yards and laid him down.     One of the other supporters called for a

first aider and I went to stand against the wall to the right of the

tunnel entrance.   I then became aware of 4 or 5 Police officers,

across the entrance of the tunnel preventing anyone else from entering.

I went around to Pen 1 but it was packed so I just hung about the area

near to the tunnel entrance.     About half an hour after I had helped

carry out the second man I saw him again.     He was lying a little

further over to the left and had his face covered with a light

coloured beige jumper.    I think he was dead.   I waited until about 4.

20 pm (1620 hrs) to 4.30 pm (1630 hrs) when I found my brothers and we

then just headed for the station to return home.

I will add that the steward at the end of the tunnel was not directing

people where to go and it was obvious that the terrace was already

packed with people when I arrived.     I think that one of the causes of

the tragedy was that we were directed down the tunnel by a steward

instead of being told to go to the empty pens I think people should

have been told what was happening.     I did not see anything that I

consider to be a criminal offence.




                                                                             1622 .
                          _______________            7


                                            SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   050589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                PCI




                                                         1623
                                                                          STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                          CHESHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRIH: 17

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 060589                                                             (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and live at the above address together with my

           parents and two sisters.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989, (150489), I travelled to Sheffield to see

           the FA Cup Semi Final match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.

           I travelled with                                     and



           We had been trying for a couple of weeks to get tickets for the match

           but we knew by the Thursday prior to the game that we would not be

           able to get tickets.     It was decided amongst us that we would travel

           to the game and try to buy tickets from a ticket tout.

           We left Chester by train at about 9 am (0900) and arrived in Sheffield

           at about 12 pn (1200).     From the train station we caught a special bus

           which took us to Hillsborough.

           Once we were in the area of the ground we walked around for a while

           looking for tickets to buy.    We realised that tickets were scarse and

           we returned to the bridge by the football ground.     There we found some

           ticket touts who we approached with the intention of buying tickets.

           The touts told us that they had no tickets to sell, so we decided to
                                                                           2

watch than for a while to make sure they were telling us the truth.

At about 2 .40pn (1440), the touts moved off the bridge towards

the ground.    We followed than because we thought that they were about

to sell their tickets.    We followed than to the main bar gates which

allow people into the ground from Leppings Lane.    As we did so a large

number of fans followed us down from private coaches which had

arrived.    This resulted in a mass of people outside the bar gates

which were now closed.

As the crush increased, I saw that the bar gates were opened, so

myself and my three companions were able to go in towards the

turnstiles.

Together with several thousand other people we walked towards the

turnstiles in a mass crush.    As I walked towards the turnstiles I saw

that a large gate was open and that people were walking through it in

their thousands to get into the ground.

Us four were caught in the crush and just moved with the crowd through

the gate.

As I walked through the gate I could see a tunnel iirmediately in front

of me.     The whole crowd moved towards the tunnel and us four

were forced into and through it.    At the end of the tunnel we

went into the right hand Pen.     It was at this time that myself and

         got separated from       and

As we entered the pen we were able to walk down it until we were about

half way down.     When we got this far we couldn't go any further as the

space in front of us was packed solid with people.

Once we were standing still more people came in behind us and the

crush began to get worse.     It got to a point where I found it

difficult to breath.     People in the crowd were shouting to the Police

to open the gate and people were climbing over the perimeter fence
       onto the pitch.

       The little gate at the front of the pitch was then opened and people

        started to get onto the pitch.   As more and more people left the pen

       we had more space to breath and the crush eased.

       We stayed in the Pen for a while watching what was going on and by

       about 3.20 pm (1520) the ]?en behind us was empty enough for us to walk

       back along the tunnel.

       As we walked along it I did not notice any injured people lying in the

        tunnel.

       Myself and         walked back up to the bridge where stayed for about

       one hour, watching the crowd empty.    While we were there I saw seme

        Liverpool fans shouting at the Police in Leppings Lane.   I saw one

        Police Officer punched by a supporter, but the supporter was

        restrained by his friends and the Police let it go.

        By about 9 pm (2100), myself and       decided to cone home, so we made

       our way to the train station and caught a train to Chester.     I arrived

        home at about 10.30 pm (2230).




                                                                       SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:   060589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                             STATION

NAME:           LOUISE     JAYNE
                HINT®
ADDRESS:
                            LINCOLNSHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 18

OCCUPATION:     STUDENT


Who states:- This statement consisting of 014 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 170589                                                 LOUISE HINTON (SIGNED)



           My name is Louise HINTON I am a student studying at North Lincoln

           College.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989(150489), I attended a football match at

           Hillsborough Stadium with my boyfriend,                  of

                      Loughborough although I am not a football fan my boyfriend

           supports Liverpool football club, it is because of this that I

           attended the football match on this date.

           At approximately 1000am(1000) on Saturday morning I set off with my

           boyfriend to catch the train from Lincoln station. At this time I was

           wearing a white round neck T Shirt a pair of blue denim jeans with

           rips in the left knee a green cord jacket which buttons up at the

           front. I was also wearing a pair of mahogany brown ankle length riding

           boots. I would describe myself as being a white female. I am 5'3" tall

           (5' 03), I have long dark brown hair cut into a perm style. I have

           brown eyes a small face and have a fresh complexion. I am of a small

           build. My boyfriend              was wearing a pair of denim

           jeans, a sky blue round neck tee shirt and a tweed style breasted

           jacket. He was wearing, a brown suede ankle length boots. He is a




                                                                                       1627
HINTON               LOUISE   JAYNE                                       2

white man aged 20 yrs. He is 5'10" tall(5'10) and is quite

well built. He has dark brown hair cut around his ears and it is

brushed back.

We left my house together and walked to Lincoln Station. I paid    4.30

for a cheap day return to Sheffield. We boarded the train almost

immediately. I cannot remember what time the train departed. We didn't

have to change trains although it did have to stop at a number of

stations en-route to Sheffield. The journey lasted for about 1 1/2

hours. When we eventually arrived in Sheffield. I noticed that a few

football supporters got off our train. We stepped onto the platform

and I could see that the station was fairly full I could hear singing

and chanting from mainly Liverpool supporters. I could see about ten

Police officers standing at the platform and they were directing fans

through   different points. I witnessed fans being searched by the

officers and on one occasion saw a Policeman take a knife from one

football supporter. We then walked out of the station, outside to a

bus pick up point. I stood with        at the point for about twenty

minutes. There was about twenty to thirty other supporters, waiting

for the bus too. Just prior to this I saw several supporters drinking

from tins by a cafe. They were not drunk at this time. When the bus

arrived, we got on and paid the driver #1 each for a return journey

to the ground. We sat downstairs and I saw one policeman get on and

sit downstairs. The bus was not full. The bus did not make any stops

but took us straight to the Lepping Lane Section of the ground.

The journey took seme time and I think we travelled about four miles.

As we neared the stadium, the roads became crowded with other vehicles

many of than displaying scarfs from the windows. I do not know if they

were Nottingham or Liverpool supporters. We subsequently arrived in

Leppings Lane, between one and one thirty.(1300)&( 1330)we got off the
HINTON               LOUISE     JAYNE                                       3


bus and a Police officer stopped oncoming traffic, to allow us to

cross the road. We were unable to enter the stadium because we did not

have any tickets.

We stood in the Leppings Lane area for about 3/4 of an hour.

approached several people and asked if they had any tickets for sale.

I saw a number of people selling tickets to others. At this time there

was also people sitting on walls, drinking beer from cans. I could

also see three or four Police officers on horseback as well as other

foot patrol officers. They were walking into the crowd that was

gathered and telling people hanging around to move on and those with

tickets to enter the stadium.           was unable to buy tickets at this

time and so we walked towards the Spion Kop Section of the ground to

see if we could purchase tickets at the Nottingham end. We walked to

the left of the Leppings Lane entrance and alongside the length of the

stadium. We walked past a petrol garage situated on the right hand

side of the road. I saw a group of about six lads standing near to the

garage and I understood they were buying tickets from a tout. We

continued to walk to the Spion Kop end of the ground. It was now about

2 .00pn( 1400) although it was crowded it was not as packed as the

Leppings Lane end.        asked a couple of people if they had tickets

to sell but we were still unable to buy any. We decided to sit down

for a while and after about ten minutes we could hear singing from

inside the stadium. We got up and continued to walk around the stadium

asking people enroute if they had tickets to sell. We were still

unable to purchase any and so we decided to purchase a transistor

radio from a nearby shop. We had by now lost all hope of buying

tickets but as we got to within two or three minutes of the Leppings

Lane end I saw a group of about ten people standing in a group. We

walked over to the group and            asked if they had any tickets for
HINTON               LOUISE   JAYNE                                      4


sale. One out of the group said he had two tickets which gave access

to the leppings Lane End which he was prepared to sell for #20 each.

I cannot remember what the lad looked like apart from that he is a

white teenager aged about 18 - 19, he was about 5'9" tall(5'09) with

short fair hair. His hair was cut short on the sides and slightly

longer on top. He was slimly built. He was wearing a light coloured

tee shirt, and blue denim jeans. I cannot remember if he was wearing a

jacket or not. He was also standing with a friend because he

cortplained that he had not asked enough money for the tickets.

I gave the lad #17 a n d g a v e      him the outstanding #23. We then

walked to the Leppings Lane section of the stadium. We walked over the

brow of a small bridge and as we did so I could see hundreds of people

standing outside a blue main gate to the side of the turnstiles. I

remarked to        about the number of people in the area. I could

also see perhaps two officers on horseback. We walked down into the

crowd and as we did so another crowd joined us from behind and pushed

us forward. I could still see the Police on horseback m a r to the

front of the crowd. One of the horses started to kick out and we were

being pushed slowly towards the horse.          and I tried to turn

around to get out of the crush but it was too difficult. There

was too many people and we came close to losing our footing.

By now we were standing about twelve feet(12'0) away from the main

blue gate. The gate was positioned slightly to my left. I was really

scared at this time because I am small, I was being crushed and I had

no control of where I was going. The next thing I knew was that the

blue gate had been opened. I was pushed along through the gate and

over to the right where I managed to pull myself out of the crowd and

stand to the right hand side of the gate. I could see a good few

hundred, possibly a thousand fans flood through the gate and head
HINTON               LOUISE    JAYNE                                     5


towards a tunnel over to the left. The area where we were standing was

quite clear and we were able to approach two police officers standing

nearby. I think one was a Policewoman I showed them my ticket and

asked where I should go. The Policeman told us to go into the ground

and to worry about it once inside. We then approached a steward who

was standing near to some stairs to the right hand side of the

stadium. We showed him our tickets and asked him where we should go.

The steward was a white man in his late twenties. He had dark hair cut

short, possibly with a side parting. He had a medium build and was

about 5' 10" tall. He told us to move over to the left and to go down

the tunnel. I think he said 'Stand B'. We proceeded to walk to the

tunnel and as we entered it we managed to walk freely until we got

about 10'(10'0) into it more and more people entered and I began to

feel squashed. The tunnel was pitch black and people began to quicken

their step to get into the stand. When we got to the end of this

tunnel I was confronted by a wall of people across the length of our

pen. As we left the tunnel we were pushed to our left into pen 4.

I was very scared and I think I screamed.        was pushed to the

right and the force of the crowd propelled me to my left. I tried to

push my way back but I couldn't do it. It was very packed at this

point I couldn't even move my arms. I was still being pushed to my

left and forward as well. The teams were now on the pitch but I

couldn't see the game at all, I could hear people around me shouting

for everyone to 'Move Back'.

My feet were not touching the floor I was being carried along by the

crowd. I then felt myself being crushed even more.

I couldn't breath very well and because I'm so small my mouth was

being smothered by the people in front. I remember that at this stage

I had an old man on my immediate left. He was a white man aged about
HINTON               LOUISE   JAYNE                                     6


thirty five, he had dark brown hair cut short. He appeared to be well

built and I think he had a moustache. He was wearing either a tee

shirt or a sweat shirt which was light in colour. There was a youth

next to me aged about eighteen. He had short light brown hair flicked

back at the front. He was quite slim and was wearing a light coloured

tee shirt. I was panicking at this stage and I still couldn't breath.

The man I have described attempted to take hold of me by my legs and

jacket and pull me up higher so that I could take a breath of air.

Everytime they did this I slipped back down. They kept telling me to

keep breathing and to take deep breaths and at one stage the man to

the left of me tried to pull my head up. The lad to my left then

managed to make some space and luckily I managed to get some air.

My hands were above my head all this time.

By now I was about six feet(6'0) from the perimeter fencing at the

front of the pen and about twelve feet(12'0) from a gate in the

fencing. I could see perhaps six uniformed police officers standing on

the fence in front. They were waving their hands in front of them and

shouting at people to get back. I could see people climbing from the

pen onto the fence and over onto the pitch. I could hear spectators

shouting at the officers that we were being crushed and to help us get

out. We were still moving forward and as we did we were more and

more crushed. I then felt something at my feet. At first I didn't

know what it was. I then felt a clawing sensation on my legs and it

felt cis if there was somebody on the floor trying to get up. There was

nothing I could do to help. My head was locked to the left my arms

were still in the air and I couldn't move. After a while the clawing

feeling ceased. Arms were being pushed into my face. I still found it

very difficult to breath and at one stage had to bite somebodys arm

because I was being suffocated. I thought I was dying by now and I
HINTON               LOUISE   JAYNE                                      7


lost all hope. My arms flopped forward. The lad to my right kept

saying, "Keep going, Keep going" I was really hot, my jacket had been

forced over the top of my head and I had to keep fighting for breath.

We were getting nearer to the front. I had stopped shouting by now I

then saw a row of Policemen run to the fencing infront of me and begin

to pull at the fencing. They eventually managed to pull the fence down

and everyone then clambered onto the pitch. I stayed where I was and

began shaking I found it very difficult to stand. I had to hold onto a

bar behind me. Seme men asked me how I was. Looking around I could see

it was total chaos. There were people giving mouth to mouth

resuscitation to one person to my left and others were being helped on

the pitch. I helped pull two people to their feet at the front of

the stand. They were badly shaken and couldn't stand properly. One had

been sick. I can only remember what one looked like. He was a white

man aged in his early twenties. He had curly dark hair which was long

at the back. He was slim and was wearing jeans and a light coloured

shirt with a collar. I helped to prop them against a barrier in the

pen and loosened his shirt collar.

After this I was comforted by some people and approached by a

policeman who asked me if I was alright. I then walked across the

stand and by chance bumped into         who appeared to be quite shaken

cis well. We stayed in the terracing for a while.

I could see scarfs littered around the stand as well as childrens

shoes and trainers after a while I heard Kenny Dalglish say something

over the tannoy asking people to remain in the ground and to let the

emergency services onto the pitch.

We remained in the stand for a while longer and I saw a small fight

develop on the pitch to the right hand side of the pitch. I think it

was broken up though. I also heard a lot of people, shout abuse at the
HINTON               LOUISE   JAYNE                                      8

police saying that it was their fault that the tragedy had occurred.

We eventually left the ground at about 4.30pm(1630) via the tunnel we

had entered. There were hundreds of people leaving at the same time.

On leaving, we turned right at the entrance gates and alongside the

stadium. We were given directions by a policeman to the bus stop and

walked for the bus. Eventually we boarded a bus but because of the

crowds it took an hour to get to the railway station. We were very

stunned, as was everyone else.

We had a drink of hot chocolate in the cafeteria at the station and

went to catch our train home at 8.30pm.(2030)




For future football matches of this size and importance I would

recommend that the cages and fencing be removed. I believe the area

outside the ground should be made larger for a mass of people if

needed. There should be more signs within the ground telling you where

to go. There should be better communication between the

statutory bodies both inside and outside the ground. First aid

facilities and staff should be inproved and a better tarrnoy system

should be introduced. I believe matches should be delayed should any

problem arise giving more time for officials to sort matters out. L.H.
        HINTON            LOUISE      JAYNE                          9


                                              LOUISE HINTON SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:        170589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             DC




                                                                         1635
                                                                         STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                                          CHESHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 20

OCCUPATION:     APPRENTICE


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 100589                                                            (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and live with my parents at the above address.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I went to Hillsborough football

           ground to watch the FA Cup semi final between Liverpool and

           Nottingham Forest.I went with nine friends in a transit van belonging

           to             s works.   These friends were

                                                                                and

           two others I know only as

           I know that five of us had tickets I didn't have a ticket for the

           game.   On the way to Sheffield we stopped at a motorway service

           station near to Sheffield, we weren't subjected to any traffic delays.

           On the way all the lads in the van had a couple of cans of beer each.

           When the van stopped on the side of the motorway so we could go to the

           toilet a police patrol stopped and checked us out, all the cans of

           beer had been drunk by then.

           We got to Sheffield at about 2.10pm (1410) and I'm not sure where we

           parked it was off the main Pennistone Road North.   When we parked up

           some of the lads with us had been there before and knew the way to the

           ground, there were quite a few police around but none of them gave us




                                                                                      1636
                                                                                2


an escort to the ground.

When we got to the ground it was about 2.20pm (1420) and the queuing

area was really congested it was just a mass of p>eople with no

organisation and I just got into the queues with

                                                           and whilst

queuing became squashed up against a bin near to a turnstile.        I had

been refused entry to two turnstiles.

At this time when I was being squashed I could see that there were

some police officers on horseback but they seemed to move out, I then

wriggled into a third turnstile where I put a     10 note onto the

counter and said to the gateman, 'There you are mate.' He said, 'In

you go.'     I then got into the ground I didn't see any other gates open

other than the turnstiles I then met up with the other lads who had

got in before me.    A couple of mates went into the North Stand.     We

tried to get into the North Stand but a couple of officers were stood

there checking tickets, then we went down the tunnel leading to the

terracing.     I walked the tunnel with

                              at the end of the tunnel we went to the

right into Pen 3 and made our way through the crowd to the front.          We

got to the match viewing position at about 2.40pm (1440).     The crowd

around us at this time was full but not packed, it was comfortable.             I

could see the pitch without any problem, the atmosphere was great.

Then at about 2.55pm (1455) there was a bad crush it happened in a

split second, the crush came from the back and suddenly I was packed

into the crowd, it became unbearable, I feared for my life, I just

couldn't breath property, I thought at first it was just a sway but

the crowd never went back, this crush took my breath away.     I was

still having great difficulty breathing I was crushed against a blonde

girl at the front, she was screaming at first then seemed to go
                                                                           3


unconscious, I thought she had died.   This crush went on for about 20

minutes, there were police officers in front of the fence shouting at

us to move back, my hands went numb, I just couldn't move in any

direction.   Eventually the crush began to subside and I got a bit of

arm space then               who I saw had a young lad aged about 10

wearing red tracksuit bottoms, red Liverpool top and blonde hair,

between his legs, he had been protecting him.                  then

lifted this boy who was still alive up onto the fence in front of us,

a police officer then lifted him over the fence.    As

went to get out I grabbed hold of his shoulder and said to him, 'Lets

get this young girl out.' At this time I thought she was dead,

myself and police officers managed to pull this girl up and over the

fence.   Eventually I pulled myself up the fence and another police

officer and supporter pulled me over and I fell to the ground.    At

first I couldn't walk and a police officer helped me up and asked me

if I wanted any oxygen.   I said 'No' I wanted to look for

As I stood up I saw him coming over the fence.     I went onto the pitch

and could see people lying on the floor everywhere. A steward then

told me to get off the pitch and I went and sat on the advertising

boards in front of the South Stand.    Then other supporters came up to

us and asked us for the boards which used as stretchers.

We walked around for a bit in shock and disbelief and left the ground

at about 4.20(1620) on direction of a loudspeaker announcement.

I think a factor in the deaths and injuries to these supporters was

that the police were slow to realise that people in the pens were

being crushed right in front of them, they should of reacted quicker

by opening gates onto the pitch to ease the pressure, also a lot of

police officers were put across the pitch at the half way line, this

annoyed me as they would have been better used helping the injured and



                                                                               1638
         giving first aid.

         The grounds medical facilities were not adequate at all, there just

        wasn't enough St. John Ambulance and seme police officers didn't seem

         to be helping, they were just walking about doing nothing.

        There was also bad lack of communication between police inside and

        outside the ground.

         From beginning to the end it was totally disorganised.



                                                                      SIGNED

 STATEMENT TAKEN
£          PLACE:

           TIME:              DATE:   100589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                          STATION

NAME:           SHANE ANDREW
                TRACEY

ADDRESS:
                          BEDFORDSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 17

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 300589                                              SHANE TRACEY (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and I live at the above address with my mother. I am

           a supporter of Liverpool FC.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), in company with my friend

                   I attended the FA Cup Semi Final which was staged at

           Hillsborough between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest. Neither of us

           had tickets for the match but we intended to purchase seme from touts

           outside the ground.

           We travelled by train to Sheffield where we arrived at about 12.

           45pm (1245 hrs). We had changed trains at Leicester and the train

           from there to Sheffield contained lots of supporters from both teams,

           but mainly Nottingham.   There was a good friendly atmosphere on the

           train and I don't recall seeing any drunkeness or rowdy behaviour.

           At Sheffield railway station all the supporters on the train were met

           by a few Policeman who directed everybody to some buses which had been

           laid on specially for the game.

           The bus took us to the ground and we arrived at about 1.15 pm (1315

           hrs).   The behaviour of the fans on the bus was quite orderly and

           friendly.    It had on it only Liverpool supporters as the buses at the




                                                                                     1640
TRACEY                 SHANE   ANDREW                                        2

railway station had each been designated for one club's supporters

only.    On the journey I saw a number of football supporters standing

outside pubs drinking from glasses.      I saw a couple of supporters who,

though not aggressive or disorderly, were well on the way to being

drunk.   They appeared very happy and were dancing in the street.

When we got off the bus it was quite obvious where the Liverpool

supporters had got to go to get in.     The queue at the turnstiles to

the standing area of the West Stand were at this time quite crowded

but there didn't appear to be any problem.     There was a Policeman on

the gate leading to the turnstiles and he was regulating the flow of

people going into the area immediately in front of the turnstiles.

There were also several Policemen in Leppings Lane area asking people

whether they had tickets.      They were instructing all people without

tickets to keep away from the ground.             myself and about twelve

other ticketless supporters were approached by a Policeman who

questioned us about tickets and then told us to keep away from

the ground.    I didn't notice at this time whether there were any

stewards at the turnstiles.

         and myself walked around the Leppings Lane area for about an

hour, trying to buy tickets.      There seemed to be thousands of other

Liverpool fans trying to buy spare tickets. During this time the area

became congested with Liverpool supporters.      We decided to have a

drink of tea and we went to a cafe in the Leppings Lane about two

hundred yards (200 yds) from the ground.      We stayed there for about

twenty minutes and went back to the Leppings Lane area.      By this time

the area was really tightly packed with Police but I didn't notice

anything unusual.    Supporters were still arriving by the thousand.

We continued looking around for people selling spare tickets but

there were no sellers about.      The word spread amongst the fans that a
TRACEY                  SHANE   ANDREW                                     3


couple of touts had been arrested.

We kept trying and as it approached 3.00 pm (1500 hrs) I saw fans

begin to climb over walls at different parts of the Leppings Lane end.

The area immediately before the gate to the turnstiles was now jammed

tight with people, many of whcm did not have tickets.     At 3.00 pm

(1500 hrs) we could hear that the game had started and everyone was

pushing forward.     I lifted my head up and I saw some gates being

opened at the right hand side of the turnstiles.      I didn't see who

opened than.

There was a release in the pressure and everyone seemed to surge

forward.           and myself were carried along with the crowd and we

were through the opened gates.     Thousands of people were going through

the gate and we just went with the crowd.      I didn't look for any

signposts.

Everyone headed for the tunnel which leads to pens 3 and 4 behind the

goal.     I didn't see any fans going in any other direction.   As we

approached the entrance to the tunnel it became very congested with

people.

Although the tunnel was blocked solid people kept pushing and they

moved very slowly along it.      There were no Policemen or stewards on

duty in or near the tunnel.

          and myself walked very slowly along the tunnel and then as we

came towards the exit at the terrace end the pressure eased and we

moved a lot quicker.

When we reached the terrace we couldn't pick a spot we were just

carried by the flow over to the right into Pen 3.      I couldn't see

where I was, I was just aware that the fans coming out of the tunnel

behind us were pushing us forward into the people lower down the

terrace.     It was extremely packed now, more so than in any other game
TRACEY                  SHANE   ANDREW                                       4


I've been to.     My arms were jarmed tight by my side and it was

impossible for me to push and make space for myself.      Gradually we

were pushed further and further down the terrace.       Everyone around us

was in the same predicament and people were beginning to panic.       I

heard people shouting "Let me out", I was trying to avoid getting in

front of any of the safety barriers because I knew I would be in

trouble if I got crushed against one of them.

I could see people up the front by the fence trying to jump up and

cling on to the top of it.      As they did so the space they had occupied

was immediately taken up by the crowd and if they were unable to hold

onto the fence then they fell back down on to a solid mass of people.

Then they gradually slipped down in a horizontal position until they

were buried by people.     There was nothing anyone could do to stop this.

I could see people stumbling over each other and everywhere people

were disappearing downwards from view.       I was vaguely aware that the

game was in progress but nobody was bothered about that.

Sane people who had got over the fence were trying to help those

trapped inside.    While all this was going on I heard a distinctive

cracking sound and there was a sudden surge forward with people at the

front piling on top of each other.       By this time        and myself

were towards the front of Pen 3 and we were being crushed.       I could

still feel this enormous pressure from behind and I could hardly

believe that people were still coming in from the terrace.       I could

feel myself trampling over bodies.       At times though my feet weren't in

touch with the ground at all.

Eventually I found myself near enough to the fence to make a grab for

it.   The people in front of us had no chance to reach for it as they

couldn't get back.     I managed to wriggle upwards and people were

pushing me.     I managed to grasp the top of the fence and pull myself
TRACEY                  SHANE   ANDREW


over.    As I looked down I saw that         had also grabbed the fence

and was climbing out.     The fence had by now bent down quite a lot and

this made it easier to get out.

The small gate at the front of Pen 3 had been opened by this time and

         and myself were trying to pull people through it.   I was close

to panic at the time as I knew people were dying.

I could see other people who had got out of the pen lying across the

top of the fence with their hands dangling down telling people to grab

them and pull themselves up.

All around the pitch there were people lying down either dead or

injured.    The Police and the St John's Ambulance were trying to help

the injured.    On reflection I think now that I went into shock as I

just stood there looking around not being able to believe what was

going on.    I didn't attempt to administer first aid because I didn't

know any first aid and in any case I was in no fit state to do it.

Gradually the crush eased in the pens and I could see bodies lying on

the terrace.    The advertising boards were being broken up and used to

carry injured people across the pitch.     Although I was in shock I can

definitely state that I did not see anything that I would consider to

be a criminal offence.

My recollection of what happened from this point on is very vague.      A

Policeman led           and myself off the pitch and the next thing I

recall is walking along a street outside the ground.     There were

supporters all around; some were crying, some were shouting, it was an

awful scene.

Having experienced the things that I did on the day of the tragedy I

would like to see a form of fencing introduced that was capable of

being automatically opened up in emergencies.     I would hate to see

standing on the terraces done away with.
        TRACEY            SHANE      ANDREW                         6




                                              SHANE TRACEY SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:        300589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC




                                                                        1645
                                                                         STATION

NAME:

•
ADDRESS:
                  l=^
                  _________
                                             DERBYSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 19

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 013 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 080689                                                            (SIGNED)



           I am               and I Live at the above address with my parents.

           I am a supporter of football and prefer Liverpool FC to any other club

           and have attended a few football matches this season.

           I purchased a ticket for the Liverpool FC V Nottingham Forest FC match

           to be played at Hillsborough Football ground on Saturday 15th April

           1989 (150489). tfy friend                 from                           1

           got the ticket for me and it was a   6 ticket for the Spion Kop end of

           the ground.

           At about 11am (1100) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), together

           with                  and              I caught the train from

           Chesterfield Railway Station to the main railway station in

           Sheffield. I was not subjected to any travel delays and we arrived at

           Sheffield railway station at about 12.15pm(1215).

           Upon arrival at the station I saw Police Officers who were directing

           people to various coaches that would take them straight to the ground.

           I also travelled on the train with

           and                 who were all Nottingham Forest fans and also had

           tickets for the Spion Kop end.
We all left the railway station together and did not catch a bus or

coach directly to the ground but decided to go for a drink in

Sheffield town centre.

We all went to the Bluebell Public House and following a pint of beer

we all again left about 1/2 hour later and caught a taxi to the

Hillsborough area.

We all again went into a pub but I can't recall the name of the pub

but it was approx 15 minutes walk from the ground and was packed full

of both Liverpool and Nottingham Forest Fans.

The atmosphere in the pub was very friendly and after having about 2

pints of beer we left the pub and we all walked down to the ground

together.

It was about a 15 to 20 minute walk to the ground and we stopped on

the way for a sandwich.

On walking to the ground I noticed that the Nottingham Forest fans and

a few Liverpool fans were carrying cans and bottles of beer. We were

approaching the ground from the south stand side and we all walked to

the ground along Penistone Road North. On route I noticed one or two

Police Officers but they were not doing anything specific. Although

one or two fans were drinking alcohol no one was drunk and there was

no fighting.

On getting to the c o m e r of the South stand and Spion Kop stand we all

seperated and             and         all walked off down Pennistone Rd

North into the Spion Kop and we all walked down along side the south

stand and came out into Leppings Lane.

Upon going into Leppings Lane I became aware of a large mass of

Liverpool supporters who were going towards the turnstile area in an

attempt to enter the ground.

It was our initial plan to go with our Spion Kop tickets to a steward
explain that we were Liverpool fans and see if we could enter the

lappings Lane stand, if we couldn't I would have gone back to the

Spion Kop stand.

However, due to the mass of people in Leppings Lane I was unable to

see a steward and we decided thats               and I to try and get

through the turnstiles.

We joined a mass of people who were around the main block of

turnstiles No's 1 - 16 and started making our way towards the actual

turnstiles there were no queues as such and the only Police Officers I

saw were on horse back and one who stands out in my mind was one who

kept moving his horse into the crowd and then turning the horse around

causing me to be crushed up against a barrier. I was able to move away

from the barrier but the button on my cardigan got stuck and I had to

pull it hard to free it causing it to stretch.

I was very tightly packed and was getting squashed by all the people

around me I did not have freedom of movement and had to go where the

crowd went there was continual pressure from behind and the sides.

I arrived at the turnstile I was going to go through facing backwards

and was only able to turn around on going into the turnstile.

I gave my ticket and stubs to the man on the turnstile.

(I don't know which number turnstile it was ) and he never even looked

at it, it was screwed up in a ball and he just picked it up. As I went

through the turnstile I became aware of two lads behind me who surged

forwards and came through with me. I didn't see them give any ticket

to the turnstile operator but we all entered the ground.

I stood in the back of the stand which was quite empty in comparison

to the outside and waited for Paul who came through a different

turnstile and having got my breath back we decided to go onto the

terraces.
 I didn't see any Police officers or stewards in the rear of the stand

 and as it was by now very close to kick off time we went into the

 tunnel. I hadn't seen any signs at the rear of the stand and had I

 have known that you could get to the side terraces by going around the

 side of the stand I would not have gone down the tunnel as we had

 planned to stand on the raised section to the left of the Leppings

 Lane terrace.

Upon entering the tunnel I had quite a free passage but just as I went

 into the tunnel I saw that a large blue iron gate to my right handside

had been opened and people were flooding through towards us. There

were hundreds of people ccming through in a continuous mass. As I went

through the tunnel I became aware of a surge of people

caning up behind me and I was then swept along with them crushed

against the person in front of me.

As I went down the slope into the tunnel I was having to walk very

quickly as I was being pushed from behind and was unable to do

anything about it.
                                          j

Upon ccming out the tunnel onto the terraces we all went into the left

hand pen (pen number 4) although I wouldn't have had any choice in

which Pen I wanted to go into due to the surge of people ccming in

behind me.

As I entered the pen we all tried to go over to the left but was

unable to do so and had no option but to move gradually more and more

forwards into the centre of the pen as more and more people came in

behind us and pushed us forwards.

By now I was separated frcm         and moving forwards towards a

barrier. I was trying to avoid hitting a barrier but I was unable to

see them due to the mass of people and the fact that I had to go where

the crowd went.
By now I was sweating and very hot, I was unable to move my arms at

all and had to shallow breathe, as my chest was crushed and I was

unable to expand my lungs.

Just to the left of the goal posts and about 2/3rds of the way down

the pen I got stuck on a crash barrier. My stomach was crushed against

the barrier and I could feel one of my legs was off the floor. The

pressure was building up more and more from behind and I was going

dizzy and in a lot of pain, I vomited and urinated as I had no control

over my bowels and just felt the pushing from behind me getting

tighter and tighter.         was next to me also crushed against the

barrier but he was sideways on.

I managed to bite a person in front of me as my hands were on the

barrier trying to hold off the people behind and this man of about

19 - 20 years turned around together with a middle aged man and tried

to help me by pushing against me to try and move people backwards but

due to the enormous pressure they were unable to. After what seemed

like an eternity the pressure behind eased off and I immediately

dropped down and went under the barrier. However due to

the amount of people in front I was unable to get back up and the two

men who had earlier tried to help grabbed me and tried to pull me up.

It took a long time to get me up and because I was exhausted and

winded I was numb.

I then upon getting my own breath back turned round and tried to help

another person behind me who was trapped as I had been.______ had

also managed to get away from the barrier at the same time as me.

Again it became really tightly packed around me and again I was

crushed and had no option but to move forwards with the crowd. My feet

were off the ground and I was trapped between people with my feet

about one foot off the ground and I was at about a 45 degree angle. I
was gasping for breath and unable to move in any way. After what

seemed like an age it must have been about 10 minutes the

pressure around me eased as by now people were climbing over the

railings and the Police on the pitch had managed to pull down a

section of the fence at the front of the railings and people were

climbing out onto the pitch through the gap.

I saw mainly kids being pulled out over the top of the railings by

other fans and the Police and as the pressure eased around me I was

able to get my breath back and get my feet back onto the ground.

Whilst we were waiting in the pen having got our breath back I

noticed that there were bodies laid out by the goal and as we hadn't

found      although I kept looking around the pen. I was studying the

training shoes on the dead bodies to see if it was

As the pen became emptier I saw a pile of bodies squashed up against

the wall. There were about 5 or 6 bodies together to the right hand

side of the hole that had been made in the fence.

Both myself a n d ______ then got out of the pen via the hole in the

fence and the Police and fans were carrying out bodies of people who

appeared dead by both the hole in the fence and the tunnel at the rear.

Upon getting out onto the pitch we both started looking for         and

upon finding him we all went over to the North stand and found a seat

and sat down and and watched, what was happening. Fans and the Police

were putting people on boards thatthey used as makeshift stretchers

and were taking them up towards the Spion Kop end.

About 15 minutes later Kenny Dalglish came on and made an announcement

over the tannoy and approx. 10 minutes after that. We all

left the ground and went to a local public house to make a phone

call. Later we caught a train




                                                                          1 651
                                                                                   7




         I feel that there was a lack of organisation   outside theground which

         in turn was a factor in what occurred inside   the ground.

         I feel that also there could have been more stewards inside the ground

         as the first steward I saw was on the pitch. I also feel there

         was a lack of communication between the Police and supporters in the

         pens because I remember when I was crushed against the barrier there

         was one Policeman who kept looking at me and telling me to move

         backwards not realising that I could not move anyway let alone

         backwards.




                                                                          SIGNED

^^TE M E N T TAKEN
            PLACE:         WDC

            TIME:           DATE:   080789

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE




                                                                                       1652
                                                                             STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                                          W YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 22

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 009 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 090689                                                                (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and I live at the above address with my parents.

           I have supported Liverpool Football Club since I was about ten years

           of age over the past six years.      I have been to watch Liverpool play

           on a regular basis at hone and away games.      I am not a season ticket

           holder.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I travelled with Anthony Bland

                                                             Keighley) and

                                                         Keighley) to Sheffield to

           watch the semi-final game between Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham

           Forest. The three of us travelled in         [s car, a brown metro.   I

           don't know the registration number.

           I have known               about two years and Anthony (BLAND) about a

           year.     I met Tony through        The three of us used to travel to

           Liverpool matches together on a regular basis.          and Tony are

           agents, selling lottery tickets .for Liverpool F.C.     That is how we

           usually get our tickets.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) we left Keighley at approximatley

           10 am. (1000) We didn't experience any delays on our journey and




                                                                                        1653
arrived at Sheffield sometime around 11.15-11.30 am. (1115 - 1130)

I don't know the name of the road where we parked the car but it was

about ten minutes walk from the ground.      I remember that there was a

pub and a betting shop and a few other shops nearby.

         Tony went to the same semi-final at Hillsborough last year

(1988)(000088).    So we didn't have any difficulties getting to the

ground because they appeared to know where they were going.

Once we had parked the car we walked to the Leppings Lane end of the

ground to see if I could get a ticket,        had already got a ticket,

it was for the North Stand and Tony had got a ticket for the Leppings

Lane terraces.    They bought their tickets through the developments -

Lottery tickets on the Saturday before (8.4.89) (080489) I couldn't

get a ticket.

I travelled to the game without a ticket but thought that I would be

able to purchase one from a ticket tout.      I don't know what I would

have done if I hadn't been able to get a ticket.

I was looking for a tout and I saw this chap in Leppings Lane.      I

approached him and asked him if he had got any tickets.     He asked me

where for, the stands or the terraces.      I told him I wanted a ticket

for the terraces and he said that he had got one but he wanted

#25.00 for it.    I bought a ticket off him for the price he wanted. I

had expected to have to pay more than that for a ticket. I could see

that this chap had other tickets but I couldn't say how many.

I would describe him as a white male, aged in his early twenties.        He

wasn't very tall approximately 5'7/8 (5'7 - 5'8) and of proportionate

build.   He had dark coloured short hair.    I can't remember what he

was wearing apart from a pair of jeans.     I haven't seen him before.

I think he had a Liverpool accent.

Just before I bought my ticket       and Tony bought some fish and chips



                                                                              1654
from a shop on route.     They ate than as we walked to the ground for my

ticket.

Once I had bought the ticket we went to look for a pub.     We walked

back towards where we had parked the car.     We passed several pubs but

they were closed..    We found a pub open, I don't know the name of it

but it was close to where the car was parked.

The pub wasn't that full when we arrived but gradually filled up.

They were both sets of supporters, Nottingham Forest and Liverpool

drinking in there.     There was no trouble at all, people seemed to be

in good spirits.     I had about five pints of bitter to drink.   That

isn't excessive for me and I was not drunk.      I think Tony was drinking

bitter and       was drinking lager, they would have had the same amount

as me five pints.

We left the pub at roughly 2 pm (1400) and the three of us walked back

towards Leppings Lane.     There was a steady flow of Supporters walking

to the ground.     I saw several Police Officers they were standing on

street comers.       I didn't see than doing anything in particular.

On route to Leppings Lane we left         on the main road, I don't know

the name of the road, so that he could go to the turnstiles for the

stands.   Tony and I carried onto the turnstiles for the Leppings

Lane terraces.

We arrived at the turnstiles at around 2.15pm. (1415) There were

people about but the queue was comfortable.      It took us about 5

minutes to get into the ground.      I think I was searched before I went

into the ground.      I handed my ticket to the turnstile operator and he

gave me the stub back.

We went straight to the tunnel and onto the terraces.      I didn't see

any signs indicating which way the terraces were but I wasn't really

looking for than.     We just followed the people infront and down
                                                                          4


through the tunnel.

I usually stand behind the goal so that was where we were aiming to

get.   As we walked down the tunnel we went into the pen on our right

(3).   We stood to the right of the goal as you look onto the pitch and

a couple of yards back frcm the perimeter fence.

Tony suggested standing at the fence but I don't like being that close

so we stood a few paces back.   I don't think that there was a barrier

infront of us.   We must have taken up our place on the terrace at

approximately 2.25pm. (1425)

Tony left me on one occasion to go to the toilet and when he returned

he stood to my right.   When we first got onto the terrace it was

fairly quiet, it wasn't empty but you could walk about.    The fact that

Tony was able to leave me go to the toilet and then return to his

original place proves that.

The pen gradually filled up to start with it was just like any other

game, you were pushed forward to the front and then moved     back. I

remember a beach ball being thrown around and we tried to     hit     itbut

we didn't manage to touch it.

At around 2.50pm (1450) the pen seemed to be fairly full, you weren't

actually being crushed but you couldn't move.    It was like a normal

crowd, you were still swaying withthe crowd.

I remember seeing the players come onto the pitch and warming         upand

at this point Tony was still standing to my right.    Around this time

the crowd seemed to really tighten up.     I couldn't see the pitch

infront of me, there were just people.     I don't remember seeing the

game start.   I could hear people around me screaming and shouting, "

let me out, let me out, I can't breath".

I didn't realise what was happening.     The crowd was really tight and I

was having to breath deeply, I had my arms infront of me across my
chest.    I saw a Supporter climb over the fence and onto the pitch and

a Policeman open the gate at the front perimeter fence and pushed him

back into the pen.    I didn't know what was happening, I knew something

was wrong but I didn't know what.

I saw a Police Officer open the same gate for a second time and at

this the pressure seemed to ease.     I fell onto the floor and

fortunately for me I was close to the Gate.      I held my hand out and a

Policeman grabbed me and managed to pull me through the gate onto the

pitch.    I was one of the first people to come through the gate.

I couldn't see Tony I had lost him shortly after the players had come

out to warm up.    I don't know if the game was still going on when I

first got onto the pitch.     I immediately tried to help pull people

over the fence, I was standing alongside Police Officers but it was

impossible to pull than over.     I could see people were purple in the

face it was awful.

I moved away from the fence and broke down, I was crying.      There were

people on the pitch they looked like they were dead.      I remember

someone comforting me.

I saw one man in particular lying on the floor in the goal mouth area.

He was a white man, aged around 30 years.      He was well built.   His

trousers and pants were pulled down to just above his knees, I don't

know why.    I think he had a T-shirt on.     There was a man with him

crying.     I didn't see any-one giving him mouth to mouth.    I went and

got a hoarding from the other end of the pitch and ran back with it to

the man lying in the goal mouth.     Together with other supporters we

got the man onto the hoarding and carried him across the pitch to the

other end of the ground by where the ambulances were.       Once we got

there we put him onto the ground and I left him.       I went back onto the

pitch.    There wasn't anything I could do.     I looked for Tony but I



                                                                              1657
couldn't see him I decided to leave the ground.     It was around 4pm

(1600) when I left, I left of my own accord and made my way back to

the car.     was already there.   We waiting for Tony and when there

was no sign we walked back towards the ground.     I was still upset.    I

managed to use saneones telephone to ring home.    The local residents

were brilliant they were giving Supporters cups of tea and let you use

the phone.

We didn't find Tony and sometime later I don't know what time,          and

I left Sheffield and travelled back to Keighly.    The first time I knew

about Tonys condition was on the Sunday morning when       phoned to

tell me.

On the day I was wearing a pair of blue jeans and a pair of blue lace

up shoes, a Liverpool away colours shirt (Silver/Grey short sleeved

top with round neck.   It has 3 red stripes down the sleeves)



(The shirt has crown paints - Adidas and Liverpool badge on the

chest).

I have handed to PS APPLETON my ticket stub (Ref            (Exh No     )

from 15.4.89 (150489) but would like to have it back.

I saw a photograph picture of myself in the                 Newpaper



Tony BLAND was also wearing




PD.   White male, approximately 5'11 tall & slim build. Mid-brown

collar length hair.
                                           SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:   090689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:   WPS7844 APPLETON

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                              STATION

NAME:

•
ADDRESS:
               l= ^
               I             I
                                 | CHESHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 22

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me,   is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 130689                                                                 (SIGNED)



           I am a single man living at the above address.         On Saturday 15th April

           1969 (150489).    I went to the semi-final at Hillsborough in Sheffield.

           I support Liverpool.

           Me and my mates all went together, I didn't have a ticket I was hoping

           to buy one there.     We made the journey in a hire car.      I didn't drive.

           We stopped at a pub in Sheffield for a drink before the match,

           everything was ok, we were having a laugh with the Forrest fans.

           We had a good    journey, no       hold ups.   Once in Sheffield Ididn't see

           drurikeness or   fighting or       anything.   Me and my mate ___________

           stcod on top of a bridge going over       the River Don, we weretrying to

           buy tickets to get in, but everyone       was asking   20 or 25.00 pounds     it

           was too much.

           We left our car at the pub car park, we stopped at for a drink, then

           walked to that bridge next to Leppings Lane, we didn't have any Police

           escort at all.    There wasn't any drunkeness or fighting at all,

           everyone was good humoured.

           We stood on the bridge until 2.25pm (1425) that day then walked down

           towards the turnstiles themselves. The scene was just one heaving,




                                                                                              1 6 6 0
crushing mass of bodies.    The Police were completely disorganised, no

directions, it was just one hell of a mess, no club stewards at all.

I was just carried along with the crowd, no person or lads could fight

their way out of the crush.     Anyway I got carried towards the Leppings

Lare standing terrace turnstile, then with the crowd movements I was

swept across the front of the turnstiles around the co m e r of the wall

and immediately left through an open blue coloured concertina type

gate.

I clso saw another blue coloured concertina type gate opened earlier,

but I can't remember which one.     I also saw a load of lads climbing in

over the turnstiles, no one seemed bothered, no one tried to stop them.

I then found myself behind the turnstiles inside the ground.        We were

then swept through the tunnel under the stand, it was a terrible

crush, I can't remember really going under the tunnel, but I can

rarember hitting a wall of people as we came out of the tunnel.        I

kept shouting to my mate                    [ "Go left, go left."

I cidn't have chance to see any signs telling us where to go, the

crowd dictated where I went.     I didn't see any Police or stewards at

either end of the tunnel.     There was no fighting, drinking or anything

like that, everyone was just concentrating on staying alive.

I cot separated from my mate and ended up in pen 3 at position N6, I

have indicated on a graph.      I felt like I was under water, I couldn't

breathe.   I just felt like I was going to die, I kept saying out loud,

"Dcn't panic.   Don't panic."

I couldn't see in the next pen to the right at all, I didn't see any

barrier break in there. I think the match had kicked off when I first

got into pen No 4.   I couldn't see the match or the pitch, I couldn't

see over the heads of the people all around me.

I can remember people climbing over our heads to get out.      I also saw
twc lads climbing out and getting thrown back in again.      The game was

still going on then suddenly the pressure increased even further, I

thought it was the end I was going to die.

Thet final crush lasted about a minute or so, then it eased slightly

with people getting out.   I suppose I had very sore ribs,



I heard some lads shouting behind me there's someone down.      I made my

way through the crowd to help.   I looked down onto the terrace floor,

I saw a man lying there on his back, he was a well built man, grey

haired, wearing a blue jacket and a jumper and round necked T-shirt

underneath.   Someone was trying to help him.

Scire other lad was trying heart massage so I stooped down by the man's

heed to give the kiss of life, his skin was very pale,



              I started to administer mouth to mouth.   He went blue

immediately, and I knew he was dead, so me and the other lad who was

massaging his heart, plus my mate                  ] who by this time

had found us, picked up the old man and carried him to the front fence.

I shouted to the Policeman, "Let us out, this man is dying or dead."

All he replied was, "Fuck off, there's room at the back."

We just couldn't believe the Policeman's reaction at the time, but

since I realise there wasn't anyway we could get through the front way.

A few seconds later another Policeman arrived from the back of the

per I think and then all four of us carried him out back through the

tunnel and to an area behind the turnstiles, then out through that

blue gate we came in through and to an ambulance that was backed up to

the turnstiles.

The ambulanceman just took his pulse and said to us just put him down,

let's get the injured out.    I knew then for positive we were too late,
          _________                                                                    4


           he had been dead for some time.     I said goodbye to old fella and

           walked away.     I will always remember his face, blue in colour with

           one eye open and one eye closed, the open eye had a film over it.       I

           would be able to recognise that man again for positive and when I read

           the list of dead, I narrowed it down to two men (1) a 62 year old

           frcm Birkenhead, whose photograph was in the Liverpool Echo, (2) a 67

           yeer old man frcm Preston, it must have been him.

           It was almost 3.40pm (1540) I think, I was totally dazed, I just

           walked away and waited up by the pub where we parked.     I didn't see

           any person stealing anything.

           I think there should be better communications between the Police, then

           if Officers who had been at the front of the pens could have told

           Officers at the rear to get people out and ease the crush.

           I Vkould like to go to the enquiry to tell the people there how it

           reelly happened.     The Liverpool fans were brilliant they saved a load

           of people.

            I v:ould also like to add that the authorities should now stop creaming

           off on the profits and make the stadiums safer.



                                                                            SIGNED

    STATEMENT TAKEN
              FLACE:

              TIME:              DATE:   130689

    WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

    OFFICERS SIGNATURE:        POL DC




!




                                                                                           1663
                                                                          STATION

NAME:             GARRY
£                 TAYLOR

ADDRESS:
                             ISHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of noy knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 010689                                                            (SIGNED)



           I am a married man and Live at the above address with noy wife.    I am

           b o m and bred in Sheffield but I have moved about the country with

           noy employment.

           I have been a keen football supporter for many years and used to be a

           season ticket holder at Hillsborough along with noy wife.   I ceased

           going to live football matches because of the increased use of foul

           language and violence.

           On Saturday 15th of April 1989 it was noy intention to meet a friend of

           mine              I don't know his address for a game of golf at

           Concord minicipal golf course in Sheffield.   Our intension was to meet

           at the course at 1pm.

           Having knowledge that the FA Cup semi final was being played at

           Hillsborough I decided to leave my house early to avoid any traffic

           congestion or delays.

           I left noy house at about 11.45am and drove in noy car towards the golf

           course.    I was suprised how little traffic there was.   Saw one or two

           supporters about but certainly no crowds at this time.

           As I was early I decided to go for a quick drink once meeting




                                                                                      1664
TAYLOR                 GARRY                                                2
there.    I stopped at the SICEY, at the top of Spicey Ave, Firth Park.

I parked my car on the car park.    There were one or two cars parked

but nothing out of the ordinary.

I went into the pub and ordered half a pint of lager.    The pub is

basically one big rocm and I chose a seat not far fron where 3 men

were sitting.    There were perhaps 15 people in the pub at this time.

Fran where I sat I could inadvertently overhear the conversation that

the 3 men were having.     It became apparent to me that 2 of the men

were Liverpudlians and 1 had a midlands accent, more Nottingham that

Birmingham.     I listened to there conversation for about 7 or 8 minutes

and during this time I heard them discuss how they were going to get

into the ground without tickets.    They appeared to know Sheffield well

as they said that the place to cause trouble would be outside Leppings

Lane because of its confined entrance they said sonething along the

lines of "We'll meet the boys in Leppings Lane, if enough start

pushing then the Police will open the gates".     They mentioned that

they had managed to do that before.     I also heard them say we'll

create havoc.     I also heard mention then wanting to get behind the

goal.    They each had a full pint infront of them, although I am unable

to say what they drank before I got there.

At sane stage I got the impression that they realised that I was

listening.     I felt rather uncomfortable so drank up and left.   I then

went and played golf.

I finished playing golf at about 4.30pm and then I heard on the       car

radio the news at the tragedy at Hillsborough.     I mentioned to ____

         my earlier encounter in the pub and he said that really I should

go to the Police.

I thought everything over and thought that my evidence seemed

insignificant until I heard about the trauma that Superintendent
        TAYLOR                  GARRY                                             3


        Marshall had suffered as a result of the gates being opened.

        It is ray opinion that the creating of the crush outside the turnstiles

        and the subsequent opening of the gates was orchestrated by the

        Liverpool supporters or I should say the minority.

        The 3 men in the pub were all white.     The 2 Liverpudlians were   in

        their early 20's and the other man was aged about 35.     I would not

        recognise them again.




                                                               G. TAYLOR SIGNED

^^ATEMEOT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:        010689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:    DS 8792 MsCOMBIE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                      1666
                                                                       STATION

NAME:         GARRY
£             TAYLOR

ADDRESS:                    I
                            SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH:

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 000 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 050689                                                         (SIGNED)



        I am a                          and live at the above address with my

        wife.

        On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I planned to play golf at Concord

        Golf Course in Sheffield and had arranged to meet some friends there

        at 1pm (1300).    The course is about 4 miles frcm my home, and my route

        there takes me past Hillsborough Football Ground.    Knowing that the FA

        Cup Semi Final was being played at the ground on that day I set off

        early, in case of traffic congestion in the vicinity, leaving home

        about 11.45am (1145).    I drove alone in my car, and was surprised to

        find very little activity near the ground as I passed.    My route was

        from Malin Bridge along Dykes Lane down Wynyard Road, left towards

        Leppings Lane traffic lights, up Halifax Road - passing along Leppings

        Lane, and past the ground entrance at that point.    I passed there

        about 11.50am (1150) and saw very few football supporters and traffic

        was light.     I saw that the Police had blocked off the side roads to

        protect residents' parking, and I saw, I think, about 50 policemen in

        that area.

        Having time in hand before meeting my friends, I stopped at the




                                                                                   1667
TAYLOR                GARRY                                              2


'Sicey' on Sicey Avenue to pass time until I met them.    I went into

the pub and ordered a half pint of lager, and sat down in the bar

lounge.

I sat just to the right of the main entrance.   There were

approximately fifteen people in the pub.    The room has 'bays' around

its circumference and I sat at the end of one of the 'bays' nearest

the entrance, with my back to the next 'bay'. Sitting behind me were

three men, who were already there when I arrived.

After a few minutes I became aware of their conversation.    I cannot

now ronanber the exact words, but I gathered first of all that they

were football supporters, intending to go to the semi-final at

Hillsborough.

As I went to sit down I had noticed that these three men were as

follows:-

1.   Mid thirties, black or dark brown hair, cut slightly longer

than normal, with a dark moustache.   He was wearing black leather hip

length coat, dark trousers.

2.   Mid twenties, light sandy hair, cut very short, but not a crew

cut, clean shaven, wearing red sweater, crew neck and a pink shirt

collar worn outside, light grey trousers.

3.   Mid twenties, hair light brown and cut ear length, wearing a tweed

sports jacket.    I cannot describe this man as well as the others as he

sat farthest away from me.

As I listened to this conversation, I heard this older man (no.l)

talking to the others, saying that they should not worry about not

having tickets.   They would meet up with 'the others' outside Leppings

Lane entrance.    They would organise as many people as possible to

cause whatever trouble they could.    If enough trouble was caused the

gates would have to be opened.    I gathered that this had happened
TAYLOR                 GARRY                                                3


before, and this man seemed confident that this action could be forced.

The sandy haired man (no.2) asked how the 'others' would know to meet

up at the right time, (no.l) The other man said if they got there for

about 2.15pm (1415) he knew most of the other lads and they could

quickly be got organised.      He said, 'We've got to get as close to the

turnstiles as possible'.     He said when the gate was opened, they would

force their way through to 'the back of the goal'.

At this point one of the three men noticed I was listening, and they

glared at me in an unfriendly way.      I hurriedly drank the remainder of

my drink and left the pub.      The time would then be about 12.20pm

( 1220).

I was in the pub for about ten to fifteen minutes.      I was able to see

these men as I walked from the bar to my seat, and as I stood up to

leave.

I know that these men were Liverpool supporters because no 2 and 3 had

Liverpool accents.    No 1 had an East Midlands/Nottinghamshire accent.

They spoke of the Leppings Lane end arrangments as though they were

well aware that this was their team's end of the ground.      I did not

place too much importance on the conversation I had heard, and went to

play golf.     On my way home in the car I heard on the radio that there

had been an incident at the semi-final and thereafter the conversation

became more significant to me.      The course of the public hearings of

the enquiry currently being conducted by Justice Taylor, prompted me

to tell this to the Police.      I must say that I gained the impression

that the Police were being unfairly blamed for this course of events.

On the day after the Hillsborough tragedy, I discussed with a golfing

friend,               what I had heard in the pub on the previous day.

He suggested I tell the Police about it, but I did not do so

immediately.
        TAYLOR              GARRY                              4




                                             G TAYLOR SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:     050689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:   A/INSP CLEVERLEY

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




*




                                                                   1670
                                                                       STATION

NAME:          JULIE DAWN
£              SHELLEY

ADDRESS:
                            |SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 27

OCCUPATION:    OFFICE   WORKER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 003 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 140689                                            J.D. Shelley (SIGNED)


•       My Auntie
                    ,              ,is the licensee of the Matilda Public House

        on Matilda St, Sheffield.

        On occasions when they are busy at the Pub I will go down and help

        them out and on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) this year my Auntie

        was by herself in the Pub, so I went down to help her out.

        We opened the pub at about 11.30am (1130), and business was quiet.

        At 12 midday about 3 or 4 Liverpool supporters came into the pub, they

        ordered their drinks and stood by the bar, talking to me they informed

        me that they were Liverpool supporters and they all had Liverpool

        accents, they were dressed casually not in the Liverpool colours

        although I think one was wearing a Liverpool scarf.

        Whilst they were in the pub they were well behaved in good humour and

        could be described as merry although they were not drunk.

        They were polite and talked to me on a number of occasions, in between

        serving customers from the conversation I had with them I ascertained

        that they travelled on the train from Liverpool to Sheffield, with

        other Liverpool supporters and although some of them had tickets for

           the semi final match it was their intention to go to the Hillsborough




                                                                                   1671
SHELLEY              JULIE   DAWN                                       2
ground and gain entry into the stadium.

They even asked me to go to the ground with them and I said that they

would not get in without a ticket, but although I cannot exactly

remember how they said that they were going to get in, they said it

would be easy ac they had done it before, and there were other

Liverpool fans who had come down with them, without tickets who were

going to get in the ground as well.

Also in the pub at the same time there were a small group of

Nottingham Forest fan, but they did not have any conversation with

myself or the Liverpool fans and these people left the pub at about

1.30pm (1330).

At about 1.45pm (1345) I was asked by the Liverpool supporters to call

them a taxi to take than to the Hillsborough football stadium, the

first two occasions I tried to phone for a taxi the line was engaged,

I eventually got through at about 1.55pm (1355) and booked a taxi for

them with a company called City Cars I think, this taxi eventually

arrived at about 2.30 (1430) to 2.45 (1445) and took the Liverpool

supporters to the ground.

During their stay at the pub I am unable to say exactly how much they

consumed in the way of alcoholic drinks, but they were drinking

steadily all the time they were there.

The group of Liverpool supporters were aged in their mid twenties,

well presented in casual dress, I had no doubt to believe that what

they told me about not having tickets was not true.

I left the pub at about 4.30 (1630) that day and make my way home.

The Matilda P.H. is situated about five miles from the Hillsborough

football stadium.
        SHELLEY          JULIE   DAWN                              3


                                             J.D. Shelley SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:               POL PC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                          STATION

NAME:         PETER KEVAN
£             MARJORAM

ADDRESS:
                             SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 43

OCCUPATION:   COMPANY DIRECTOR


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is txrue to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070689                                            P K MARJORAM (SIGNED)



        I am the Director of my own company,




        At 1.30pm (1330) Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I finished work at

        the above site and together with an employee,,                       I

        drove to                                  to pick up some furniture for

        a neighbour.      After collecting this, myself and           travelled

        along Halifax Rd towards an address at                         where we

        were to drop the furniture off.



        At this time we were in a Nissan pick-up truck belonging to the

        company.



        As we approached the junction of Doe Royd Ln, on our left, I saw that

        the pelican crossing at that junction has turned to 'red' as there

        were people at the crossing waiting to cross.         I pulled up at the

        crossing in the nearside lane and the two elderly female pedestrians

        began to cross from left to right in front of us.        Halifax Rd at this




                                                                                      1674
MARJORAM               PETER   KEVAN                                       2
point, the road is a dual carriageway road with two lanes on either

side.   As the two pedestrians passed in front of the van I became

aware of a car approaching the crossing from behind in the offside

lane.   I could see the vehicle clearly in the wing mirror and it was

travelling at high speed with the driver apparently unaware that the

lights had changed to red against him.     The vehicle was within 50 yds

of the crossing when it began to brake suddenly.     There was no

screaching of tyres but the vehicle dipped considerably onto the front

suspension and came to an abrupt halt at the side of my van in the

offside lane.   At one point I was extremely worried that it would not

be able to stop in time and put out my hand to try and attract the

attention of the two pedestrians shouting to them to stop where they

were.



After the vehicle had stopped they managed to cross the carriageway

and I looked down from the cab into the vehicle.      It was a dark grey

coloured family saloon either an Escort or Montego and contained 5

mates, 2 in the front and three in the rear.     They all appeared to be

dressed smartly in casual clothing with no apparent football favours

or clothing on them.      However I did see what appeared to be red

scarves in the vehicle.     All the occupants except for the driver were

drinking what appeared to be Heineken lager from green Heineken cans.

 The driver was slightly obscurred from my view by the roof of the

vehicle.



As soon as I looked down the front seat passenger seemed to take

offence and began shouting numerous swear words at me.     I could not

hear what he was saying due to the window being closed but it was easy

to lip read words such as 'Fuck off'.      I began to wind my window down
MARJORAM                 PETER   KEVAN


to say something to him but the lights changed to green and the

vehicle set off at speed pulling away from us quite quickly.         I was

very annoyed with the occupants of the vehicle and it was obvious to

me that they had been drinking heavily and displayed an aggressive

attitude towards myself and



I continued our journey, dropping              |at the Sicey Hotel Public

House, Sicey Avenue, Shiregreen.         I then returned to Oughtibridge

where I then called into the Pheasant Public House on Jaw Bone Hill.

On my arrival there I saw numerous people both inside and outside of

the pub.     These people were clearly not regulars at the pub and due

to their accents I took it that they were Liverpool supporters on

route to the Semi Final at Hillsborough.        It was 2.35pm (1435) when I

arrived at the Pheasant public house and I would estimate that there

were 25 Liverpool supporters present.



I entered the bar of the pub and saw two colleagues drinking at the

*3ar' ____________ a n d ____________      I joined them a n d    bought me

a pint.     I then became aware of two men behind me who were drinking

shorts.     From their accents it was obvious they were Liverpudlians

and I began to talk and joke with them.        The time was now 2.45pm

(1445) and I said to them something to the effect that they were

leaving late to get to the ground for the 3pm (1500) kick off.       One of

the two men then said to me 'Don't worry about that, we know either a

gate will be open or opened'.       At this, both men laughed to each

other.     This statement struck me as being very strange; I was puzzled

as to how they could be so sure that they would find a gate or gates

open at such a late time.        Neither men made any mention of a ticket

or showed me a ticket.      I have attended numerous football matches at
       MARJORAM                  PETER   KEVAN                                       4


       Hillsborough and other grounds and the statement from the man made me

       wonder how he could be so sure that they would find a gate open at

       that late time.        After my initial thoughts on the matter I dismissed

        it from my mind and continued drinking with my colleagues.        The two

       men then left the pub at 2.45pm (1445).         As they left they shook the

       hands of         and              It was apparent to me that     and

       had also been speaking to the two men prior to my arrival.



       Following the news reports of the disaster and circumstances of it,

       the statement made by the Liverpudlians in the Pheasant Public House

       the day before came to mind again.          It again struck me as being a

       very strange statement from a supporter attending a match at such a

        late time.      It became apparent from the news that a gate at the

        ground had been opened to allow late comers into the ground and I

       conjectured that the statement made by the man and the opening of the

        gate was connected.       It was for this reason I contacted the Police

        and reported what this man had said to me prior to attending the match.



        P K MARJORAM




                                                               P K MARJORAM SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:                DATE:     070689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:           POL PC




                                                                                         1677
                                                                          STATION



•              ^
NAME:


ADDRESS:       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE,
               SNIGG HILL, SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 49

OCCUPATION:    SCENES OF CRIME PHOTOGRAPHER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 002 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 180889                                                             (SIGNED)



           I am the above named person and am employed as a Scenes of Crime

           Photographer, by the South Yorkshire Police, currently at Police

           Headquarters, Snigg Hill, Sheffield.



           On the 15th of April 1989 (150489), I was on duty at the F.A. cup

           semi-final at Hillsborough.   My brief was basically to photograph

           where I thought necessary or where I was directed.     I believe that

           the films that I took on the day have already been handed to

           the West Midlands Police.



           On Sunday the 16th of April 1989 (160489), I reported for duty at

           the Medico Legal Centre, Sheffield, where I took front position

           photographs as directed for the following bodies:-



           Body number 61, the Pathologist being Doctor SHORTLAND.



           Body number 80 - the Pathologist being Doctor JONES.




                                                                                     1678
        Body number 82, the Professor being Doctor UNDERWOOD.



       At the conclusion of each post-mortem, I was handed a blood sample by

        the Pathologist which I handed to POL DS       , along with the

        roll of film.




                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

£         TIME:            DATE:   180889

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:    G.J. MeCombie

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:      G.J. MCOOMBIE
                                                                            STATION



•
NAME:

              D
ADDRESS:                        I
                                    LANCASHIRE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 51

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 270489                                                           1 (SIGNED)



         I am a widower living at the above address, I have three children,

        two daughters, and a son who all live away from hone.        I am a

                                       working for_________________________

        On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I attended the FA Cup Semi final

         at Hillsborough, Sheffield.       I am a Liverpool supporter and have been

         since 1947 (000047).       On that day I went to the match, with

        ___________________________________        We went in my private car, and

         not in an organised party. I am a season ticket holder at Liverpool

         football club and obtained my ticket through them.      The price being      6

         and was for the Leppings Lane, standing area.

         On route to the game we did not stop on the way and were delayed a

         short while on the M62, just east after the M61 junction, because of

         a road traffic accident, there were no further delays and we arrived in

         Sheffield at about 12.15 hrs (1215).

         With regard to the consumption of alcohol, on our arrival in

         Sheffield we went to the 'Fox' public house in FOXHILL LANE,

         SHEFFIELD and had a drink prior to the match.       I had three pints of

         bitter, I had hoped to have same food there but there was none




                                                                                          1680
                                                                           2
available.    Also at the pub there were other football supporters,

mainly Liverpool, probably about one hundred people, they appeared to

be in groups of two's and three's and four's but same groups up to ten

who were obviously in transit vans, as I saw same parked on the car

park and in the side streets.     I didn't see any coaches.   All the

people or the majority were consuming alcohol, and there was same

singing of the usual football supporters songs.

I left my car, near to the pub in a side road off FOXHILL LANE, I

cant remember the name of the road.

After having something to eat from the Fish and Chip Shop across the

road, my friend and I walked to the ground, the time was about

1350 hrs. I did not receive any Police direction or escort from where

I parked my car to the ground a distance of about one and a half

miles.     There were a lot of supporters walking the same way.   I did

not see any fighting or drunkeness on the way to the ground.      I

arrived at the entrance to the ground at about 14.25 hrs (1425).

At the Turnstiles in Leppings Lane there was no queue, just a solid

mass of people.     I can't estimate how many I saw.   There were at

least two mounted Police Officers at this entrance.      I thought I

recognised one with a large bushy moustache who is a mounted Police

officer, who I had seen attending football matches at Anfield.         I

thought he was a Liverpool Police officer, but am not absolutely

certain,     I also saw three or four foot Police officers outside the

turnstiles.     They were trying to contain the width of the crowd and

contain it in that area, but I can relate to my experience at Anfield,

where there are orderly queues     and the officers shout instructions at

the supporters to keep in orderly lines appropriate to the number of

turnstiles, there was none of this at Hillsborough!

I saw no Stewards at the Turnstiles, but my ticket had the letter B on
it, and I easily saw the entrance marked B.     The volume of people

made entrance to the ground difficult, after about ten minutes outside

the turnstiles the outer gates were closed.     Shutting the supporters

behind us out.     Within a couple of minutes of these gates being

closed the sheer volume of people pushing against them forced them

open.    There are three gates here all joined together and there were

two foot Police officers one on each smaller gate and a mounted

Police Officer on the larger centre gate, one of the smaller gates

opened first and then they just gave up, and all the gates came open.

 At this the crush at the turnstiles just got worse, after about

another ten minutes of not getting anywhere I remember looking at my

watch and it was 14.50 hrs (1450).     Such was the crush in that area, I

felt, that there was a danger of the wall containing the seven

Turnstiles collapsing there was also a wall to my left and it is my

view that the same would apply.     Also the crowd was milling around

that much if any one had lost there footing and fell down, they would

have been trampled on, they wouldn't have stood a chance. Also the

efforts of the mounted Police forcing the crowd to the left put

additional pressure on the left hand wall.     At this point I noticed

an exit gate to the right of the turnstiles open, I did not see it

opened but it seemed to ease the crush and we were able to walk

quickly into the ground.     I feel that this was a    sensible decision

because of the dangers I have outlined.     I therefore did not enter

through a turnstile and have my ticket complete with the tear-off

slip.    The serial number of this ticket is 150489,      LL2.45.15

(Ex No         )   I want to retain the ticket at this point in time

but can produce it if required to do so.

Once inside the ground I did not see any signs directing me to my

match viewing point, nor was there any Steward or Police officer



                                                                            1682
                      I_____________________ |                               4


giving directions.   The only entrance I could see was that which I

now know to be the tunnel, prior to going through this entrance I went

to the toilets to the left of the tunnel, and then followed other

supporters into the tunnel, there was no pushing at this point, and

had free passage along the tunnel, but I remember thinking that it

wasn't well illuminated, and rather a strange way to enter a ground.

I did not see any Steward or Police presence in the tunnel, I did not

witness any incidents of disorder, or consumption of alcohol

throughout this time.

My friend and I got to the end of the tunnel, I could see the players

kicking in which identifies the times being 14 55 hrs (1455).       It was

apparent that after making our way into pen four that it was full,

and we started to make our way to the left where we could see room

on the terraces beyond.    After some distance we realised there was a

longitudinal fence going down the terrace steps making further

progress towards pens 5, 6 and 7 impossible, so we took up a

viewing position P5, which I have marked on the grid (              )

(Ex No         ) on a separate sheet of paper.      This viewing position

was tight,   my arms were down by my sides and it was diffficult to

lift them towards my head.      It was so tight, we were behind a barrier

and decided to get in front of it to give us some protection, we

struggled, my friend managed to get underneath it, but before I could

follow, there was a surge and I was pushed against the barrier which

went right across my stomach injuring me.        I was forced tightly

against the barrier , I felt pain in my stomach, I couldn't push

myself off, because my arms were up and there was insufficient room

to get them down.    People were screaming and shouting all around me,

guys in front were shouting, "Get back" others were shouting 'Open

the gate"I could     see there was a gate in the pitch fence to the
                                                                   5


right of where I was, I remember, there was a Policeman by the gate

and he was taking no notice of the pleas to open it.     Meanwhile the

crush and pain was increasing and I began to vomit over the people in

front of me, the contents of my stomach was being squeezed out, I

couldn't breath properly and I could feel myself starting to pass

out.   After about two minutes no more, I remember having to fight

mentally to avoid blacking out, I remember thinking, "I'm going".

During this time I must have been carried along the barrier to a

point where I suddenly came off and was free.    Had I not been

surrounded by people I would have collapsed, because my legs were

weak but the crowd kept me up.   All I wanted to do was get out, the

longitudinal fence dividing pen's 4 and 5 was no more than ten

yards (yds) away,   and I made towards it somehow.     I also remember

seeing a man on the floor, his back was towards me, I couldn't see his

face, and I don't know whether he was unconscious but I remember he

was wearing a white and cherry red hooped sweat shirt.     He had short

dark hair, he lay there motionless.    The reason I remember him is

because in my mind I was thinking, "That could be me I must keep on my

feet". There might have   been a second person but I'm not absolutely

sure. I should add here that the surge that pushed me on to the

barrier occured at a time before the kick-off, but I can't be specific

on a time, but it was before three pm (1500). When      I got to the

fencing somehow I got over it with the help oftwo people in pen 4

and a person in pen 5, who kept saying "Put your hands on my

shoulders and fall on me".

Once over the fence I fell on the floor, I was helped up by two

people and taken on to the pitch.     One of the people was a St Johns

Ambulance man and I was led along the side line and round in front of

the North Stand.    I recollect that the playerswere    still on the
pitch at this time, and they were still playing.    At this point I was

laid out on the ground in front of the North Stand.    Somebody got me

a carton of Orange juice, I had a swig of that and passed it on to

the next person.   There was at least three or four other people lying

next to me.   I Jay there for sometime, I don't know how long.    I was

then moved, I remember someone saying, "We'll have to move you"    So I

was carried on a hoarding further along the North     Stand touch line

towards the east end of this stand, where I was laid out on the

pitch and the people with the hoarding ran back.    A lady St Johns

ambulance wcman checked to see if I was alright. I just said, "Yes"

I gradually got my breath back and stood up.   A St Johns Ambulance man

asked if I wanted to go to Hospital, but I said I would be alright,

and that I needed to find my friend.   So I walked back to where I

had come from through a cordon of Policemen across the pitch, I

remember looking up at a clock on a mast and seeing the time 3.47 pm

(1547). I remember asking someone what the score was, I knew that the

play had been stopped but I had no idea what had happened I was half

dazed I suppose.   I couldn't find my friend inside the ground and at

about 15.55 hrs (1555) I left the ground and walked slowly back to the

car.   At the car on the radio I heard 70 people had been killed and

thought my friend may have been one of them.   I went to the Police

control point, at a Police Station, adjacent to a boys club, and it

was there I met up with                 He drove me back to Lancashire,




I feel that the circumstances leading up to my being injured was that

too many people were allowed to go along the tunnel into pens 3



                                                                          1685
       ______                                                                  7


       and 4, and there was no control of numbers going into those pens.

       Also I feel that these people who had got into pens 3 and 4

       once inside there was no escape.   There was no indication on the

       ticket that there was different pens or at the ground there was

        no direction to other entrances to the stand, other than the tunnel.

        I should also like to add for a crowd that was present outside the

       lappings Lane entrance there were too few turnstiles.




                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                  PC




                                                                                   1686
                                                                       STATION

NAME:

•              l= ^
ADDRESS:
                         ] SHEFFIELD, S YORKSHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 32

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of Oil pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070789                                                          (SIQffiD)



        I am a married man with two children, living at the above address.         I

        have lived in Sheffield on and off since I was seventeen years old but

        am originally from             Merseyside and have supported Liverpool

        Football Club ever since I was a child.     I intended to go to see

        Liverpool play Nottingham Forest in the FA Cup semi final to be played

        at Hillsborough Football ground, Sheffield on 15th April 1989 (150489)

        and to that end my brother                    of

                    Merseyside obtained a ticket for me from Anfield about a

        week before the match.

        On Friday 14th April 1989 (140489)           came to my house and stayed

        the night so that we could go to the match together the following day.

        He brought the ticket with him, it was for the Leppings Lane terraces

        and cost    6.00.          had a ticket for the West stand and I would

        have preferred one of these myself but        took any ticket he could

        get.

        At approximately 12.30 pm (1230) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489)

        my brother and I set off for Hillsborough in my car.     I took the back

           roads to the vicinity of the ground to avoid the traffic and on route I




                                                                                       1637
didn't see any police giving directions.    I parked in one of the side

roads in the Hillsborough Wads ley area but I don't know its name.    I

parked the car at approximately 2.10 pm (1410) and       and I made our

way on foot to the ground.    There appeared to be just the usual amount

of fans making their way to the ground at this time and they were all

in good spirits and well behaved.    Whilst walking to the

ground I saw groups of six or seven police officers standing on

various street comers who just seemed to be talking to each other.

We arrived at the Leppings Lane entrance at approximately 2.25 pm

(1425) and outside the turnstiles there were just masses of people

and no orderly queues.     The crowds spread from the turnstiles right

out beyond the blue perimeter gates and almost out into the road.    All

I could see were two or three mounted police amongst the crowd and

groups of five or six police on foot standing around beyond the crowd.

    joined the crowd to the left to make his way to the West stand

turnstiles and I joined the crowd to the right to mate my way to the

terracing turnstiles.

Almost irrmediately I became engulfed in the crowd and started to get

pushed and jostled around.     I started to attempt to get closer to the

turnstiles but was finding it very difficult with all the crowds and

realised that it was worse than any other game.     I was astonished at

how few police were outside the ground and there was absolutely no

organisation whatsoever.     I attended the same match in 1988 (000088)

between the same two teams and on our approach to the ground we were

stopped by the police at the junction of Halifax Road and Leppings

Lane and were checked to see if we had tickets.     This did not happen

this year. Also last year there were many more police outside the

ground and entry into the ground was very easy with orderly queues.

Also I saw a large number of fans who were sitting on fences and walls
-----------------                                                                 3


 around the bridge area in lappings Lane and it was obvious to me that

 they didn't have tickets as they made no attempt to get into the

 ground.        I would estimate that there were two hundred just sitting

 around.

The crowd around me started to get very tight and the police on

horseback were right in amongst us shouting out instructions for

everyone to get back but this was impossible to do.            At one stage I

was standing right next to the policeman who had a large moustache and

a Liverpool accent.            Fans were shouting out to the police that they

should move their horses because they were causing more trouble than

they were helping as everytime they moved people had to scramble out

of the way to avoid being trampled.            Everyone was getting very

frustrated at not being able to get to the turnstile and being

crushed.            It was becoming very uncomfortable and even I started to

shout out for organisation and I am usually very quiet.           One of the

other police on horseback then started to shout and point his finger

at one particular fan who had been shouting out for the police to get

sane order.           Then a policeman on foot came into the crowd and dragged

this fan out.           I can't remember any description of the man dragged out

of the crowd.           I noticed that there was an iron barrier about 3'(3'00)

high which ran out from the right hand side of the turnstiles and was

stopping people from filtering out to the access road which runs round

to the players entrance.           I thought that the best thing I could do was

get to this barrier so that I could then get a straight path with the

turnstile.           I managed to reach the barrier after about 10 or 15

minutes of being part of the crowd.           I also saw 2 or 3 policemen and a

steward attempt to close the large perimeter gates to stop any more

fans entering the turnstile area.           They just about managed to do this

but they only remained closed for about two minutes as the pressure of
________                                                                   4


people outside forced them open.    It was foolish to only have so few

police to try and hold such a large crowd.

I was right next to the barrier when I saw a policeman in a flat cap

appear from the ground to my right.    He was with a steward and another

man who I don't think was a policeman or steward.    The policeman said

something like "Don't panic lads, we've opened the gates for you."      He

then told us to duck under the barrier and walk through a large

concertina gate.     I believe I was amongst the first ten to enter

through this gate.     I didn't hand my ticket in as no one asked me for

it.   As I walked through the gate I saw a tunnel directly in front of

me and I could see daylight through it and I asumed that this was the

only entrance to the terracing.    Although I have been to the ground

before I have always had a seat and I was not aware of any other

entrance to the terracing.

I made my way straight down the tunnel walking at a quick pace so that

I could get onto the terrace before the thousands of people behind me

that would have come through the same gate as me.     There were no

police or stewards in the tunnel area and only one or two police just

on the inside of the turnstiles.     I got to the end of the tunnel and

saw that the terrace was already packed right back to the mouth of the

tunnel.    I thought at that time that it was more packed than usual and

something was likely to go wrong.     I could just see over the tops of

the heads of the crowd that the players were out on the pitch have

their pre kick-off kick about.     I joined the crowd to the right hand

side of the tunnel at the back and immediately saw a man who was

holding his seven year old son in his arms.     The lad was screaming and

crying and the father said "Dont worry son they'll spread out in a

minute."    I can't give any description of the man and his son as at

the time I was being pushed and jostled and couldn't take much
_________                                                                    5


notice.     I too believed that the crowd would spread sideways as I was

not aware that there were fences dividing the terracing into pens.

Almost immediately I became crushed in the crowd and felt a great

surge from behind which carried me forwards down the terrace.       I had

absolutely no control over where I was going and my feet were hardly

touching the floor.    One minute I was at the back of the terracing the

next I was right in the middle.     Everyone around me was screaming

and shouting out for help.

I have been shown a plan of the tunnel and pens 3 and 4 which I can

produce as an exhibit (produced       ) (Exhibit No.     ).   Initially I

had stood at position 1 but was only there for a matter of seconds.

Within a minute I had been carried down to position 2 in a diagonal

path.     I found myself crushed up against the end of a barrier.    The

barrier has a piece overhanging about 9" to 12" beyond the stanchions

which support it.     Then somehow, I just don't know how, I had one of

my legs wrapped around one of the stanchions and the other

leg wrapped over the other stanchion and the overhanging piece of the

cross bar on the barrier was sticking right out into my groin.       I was

now facing pen 2 and I started to get unbearable pain around my groin

and legs.     The pressure of the crowd was forcing me more and more

against the barrier and there was no way I could get off or move. I

had my hands out on the barrier in front of me trying to support

myself and stop myself from falling forwards.     I have drawn a diagram

on the same page as the grid of pens 3 and 4, to try to show the

position I was in on the barrier.     I was screaming out in pain, it was

more pain than I had ever experienced before or could ever have

imagined.     I just cannot describe it.   I was screaming out for my life

and soon the pressure was so great that I was forced down onto the

barrier so that my chest was being crushed so that I couldn't breathe.
                                                                           6


I was looking round and managed to push myself up so that my arms were

straight again but I just couldn't move my legs and the pain was

excrutiating.   I could see people being crushed up against the front

fence and everyone was screaming at the police on the other side to

open the gates and let us out.     The police just stood there and

shouted for people to get back.     I was astonished that they did not

have the sense to open the gates as it was obvious that the fans were

being seriously injured and I felt that people would die.      Surely

those police could see the people being crushed up against the front

fence.   I saw some fans being pulled up into the terracing above and

some climbing over the front fencing all desperately trying to avoid

being killed.

I started to scream for help to someone to get me off the barrier as I

felt that I could take no more.     Then two or three men to

my right had their feet on the barrier trying to push the crowd back

so that there would be some roan.     They managed to make a space of

about 2 or 3 feet (2'or 3') to the back of the barrier and it was

then I saw a man lying on the floor below me.     He was lying at right

angles to the barrier and his head towards the back of the terrace.

He was awake and conscious with his eyes open but he just seemed to be

lying there unable to move.    He made no attempt to get up.    This man

had black greasy type hair and I would say he was in his late

thirties.   He was clean shaven.    This is all I can remember about him.

I can't remember his clothing.     As the men tried to push the crowd

back with their feet against the barrier they would at times be pushed

forward onto the barrier.     This must have happened four or five times

with them repeatedly going backwards and forwards.     At one stage the

pressure from behind me was so great that I could not hold onto the

bar any longer and was pushed down so that my chest was against the
________                                                                     7


barrier and both ray arms were to the left of the barrier.    I knew that

if I did not get up I would die so I started to push myself back up

by pushing on the heads of people below me with ray fists.    I used ray

clenched fists because I felt if I used ray open hands then I might

have been dragged down further.     I knew that I was probably pushing

those people down but at the time it was the only way I could save

myself.    I still to this day cannot forgive myself for doing this but

I managed to get myself back up.    Still the pain was absolutely

unbearable.

At one time when the lads were trying to force the crowd back I saw

the mans hand who I    described earlier lying on the terrace.     I could

not see    his face or the rest of his body.   I could just see        hisarms

come up    through the people around him.   My natural instinct        wasto try

and get    him up so I leaned over to my right and reached out         to

him with both arms and grabbed hold of his hand and tried to pull him

up but again the pressure from behind was so great that I was forced

down again and had to let him go.     I then managed to get my hands back

onto the bar and I didn't see anything of this man again.

I continued to scream out for someone to help me and then a man to my

right said to me that the next time he would come forward to grab him

round the neck and he would pull me back.      I did this when he came

forward trying to grab hold of his neck but as he pulled backwards the

pain became too much for me to bear and I had to let go.

I then started to get weaker and weaker and could not breathe and knew

that if I did not get off that barrier then I never would.        It

was my last chance and as the man came forward again I made a lunge

for him and managed to grab hold of him around the neck.     As he

pulled back I thought my legs were going to snap but somehow I managed

to get my right leg free.    He continued to pull me and I was twisted
                                                                            8


 sideways with ray left leg still trapped.   He told me to go back so I

 let go of his neck and took hold of his arm and managed to drag ray leg

off the stanchion.   He then pulled me back up the terrace two or three

steps until I was in position 3 on the plan.     By this time there

was some space and I was able to stand up without being pushed or

jostled about as a large number of people had got out through the

front gate and over the fence and up into the stand.     As I stood there

I saw a man on the floor just to ray left and in front who was

obviously dead.   He was lying down the terrace with M s head towards

the back.   His face was purple and his eyes were half open but bulging.

He was a white man, 6' tall (6'00), stocky build, slightly podgy,

approximately 36 years old, with light sandy coloured hair which was

wavy on top and curly just over the ears.    He had a moustache and was

wearing a light coloured shirt which was halfway up his chest which I

believe was hairy.   I think he was wearing blue jeans



think his shoes had been pulled off.    I was going to bend down and

close his eyes but suddenly realised I could not move ray arras at all.

I just had to stand there helpless.    Then someone came over and put a

newspaper over the mans face.

I also saw a girl dragged backwards up the terracing from the area

around the barrier which I had beentrapped on up to position 5 on the

plan.   She was obviously dead.   She appeared to be about 17 years old

with light brown straight shoulder length hair.    Her face was a dark

purple colour and the features weren't distinguishable as a female so

I cannot be 100 % (percent) on the fact that it was a girl but this

was ray first impression.   I cannot remember anything about her

clothing except that she was wearing trousers.

Then to ray left beyond the first man I saw another man face down on



                                                                                1 694
________             I
                     ______________ I                                       9


the terrace.   A friend of his was on his back astride him slapping his

face trying to revive him screaming at him but the man was awake.       I

looked around at the scene, people being revived on the pitch, the

cordon of police across the pitch and then looked back at the man who

was slapping his friends face.    Just then the man on the floor made

what appeared to be a last gasp for breath and then his eyes closed.

Again I cannot describe either of the two men as everything around me

was so terrible and I was very dazed.

Gradually the terrace started to clear and people were being taken out

from the terrace.   I realised that there was nothing I could do so I

moved to the back of the terrace and just stood there trying to

comprehend what had happened.    While I stood at the back a fireman

appeared from the tunnel but they were too late to help.     I stood on

the terrace for 20 to 30 minutes and watched as fans carried bodies

off the pitch to the other end of the ground.     I saw a few police

helping to revive bodies but the majority seemed to just stand around

especially in the cordon across the pitch.

I left the ground at about 3.50 pm (1550) to meet my brother outside

on the Leppings Lane bridge.     He turned up at about 4.10 (1610).    I

was still in considerable pain and had to double over because of the

sharp pains in my chest.   I did not attend hospital




Throughout the whole incident at Hillsborough I did not see any

disorder or drunkeness between the fans and I did not see anything I

consider to be a criminal offence.

On the day I was wearing stonewashed black jeans, a plain red round
       neck sweatshirt and black with white striped training shoes.

       White male, 6'(6'00) tall, dark brown straight collar length hair,

       proportionate build.



                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:   070789

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                PC
                                                                          STATION



•
NAME:


ADDRESS:
                                      CHESHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 23

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 120589                                                            (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and I live at the above address with my parents.

           On Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I travelled to Hillsborough

           football stadium, Sheffield, to watch a football match between

           Liverpool and Nottingham Forest football clubs.     It was the semi

           final of the F A Cup competition.     I am a Liverpool supporter.

           I travelled by car to the ground with a friend _____________

                                             I had a   6 ticket for the terraces in

           the West Stand.   I obtained the ticket from Anfield through the

           season ticket holder scheme.

           We left Hough Green at about 11am (1100) and went straight to the

           ground in Sheffield arriving at about 1.45pm (1345).     We were delayed

           in our arrival due to traffic jams on the M62 motorway. I would       say

           it added about an hour to the journey.

           When we arrived we parked the car in a side road off the A61 just to

           the north of the ground.    We would have been    about onemile from the

           ground.

           Having arrived we went for something to eat it was a pizza from a take

           away.



                                                                                       1697
We did not receive any police escort or direction to the ground.        In

fact we just followed the crowds.

We walked to the ground and I saw supporters drinking alcohol outside

one pub in a beer garden type area.     All the way to the ground I did

not witness any disorder, fighting or drurikeness.     The people were in

good mood.

I arrived at the entrance to the ground with                    at about

2.10pm (1410).      We got to the entrance in Leppings Lane.

As I arrived at the entrance I saw groups of people standing outside

the ground gates.      It was not congested at this point.     There were

numerous people in this area.     We both poured through the gates into

the area leading to the turnstiles.      The turnstiles we wanted were in

B block for the terraces.

There were no queues in this area but one mass of people.       The people

inside this area were tightly packed in.

In order to keep out of the crowd we skirted to the right of the crowd

where there was a gap, leading to the South Stand and club offices.

As we got near to the turnstiles we cut back towards the entrances.

Having got through the crowd at this point, we moved slowly for about

six yards and then came up against a barrier which we hadn't

previously seen.      We were unable to get any further and we had to

walk to the end of the barrier to get in.      However, there was a

police horse at the end of the barrier which started to get excited

and turn around.      People including ourselves, moved towards the fence

by the river to get out of the way.

By the time we had rejoined the crowd to get in, more people had

arrived and the crowd inside this area was even worse.

The policeman on the horse was still near to the end of the barrier

and was shouting to people near to the ground gates to move back, they
in turn were shouting that they wanted to come in.

The people inside the area by the turnstiles had shouted previously to

the policeman to sort out the queues.         They were annoyed because they

could't get inside the ground, and the crush was getting worse.

I saw two police officers, I think one was a woman close the ground

gates for about ten seconds.

The gates were not locked but held closed by the officers.          The force

of the crowd outside forced these gates open again and from that

time they were unable to close them again.

The gates I am referring to at this time are the blue perimeter gates

leading to lappings Lane.         I also saw a steward by the above gates

standing by the two police officers.

Eventually we got to the turnstiles.         It was a very bad crush.

There were walls between each turnstile and as I got to the stile I

had to pull myself into the gateway.         Children were being passed over

heads and through the turnstiles.

A lot of people were screaming for the large gates at the sides of the

turnstiles to be opened.         I wanted them open.   I believed there to

be serious risk of injury to people, outside the turnstiles.            People

were still screaming to the police officer on the hope to sort it all

out.

I entered through a turnstile and in my relief to get through I gave

the attendant the wrong half of my ticket.         I still have the other

half (Ref                   ).    The time was now 2.55pm (1455).       I did

not see anybody climbing in over the walls or people paying cash at

the turnstiles.

I did not see any other gates open other than the turnstiles at this

point.   However, once inside the ground, myself and                waited

inside the area behind the turnstiles to get our breath back.



                                                                                 1699
I saw a policeman standing by a wall to the left of the area.           I saw

a supporter walk up to him and grab him by the lapels, I heard the

supporter say, 'I'm not having a go at you, but if you don't get it

sorted outside then people are going to die'.

Myself a n d w a l k e d    around to the right of the West Stand.        We

wanted to get around to the right hand of the terrace.        We were

prevented from doing so by two stewards at a gate who were stating,

'Stand tickets only'.      The tickets that they were collecting were

red and ours were blue.

They also said something about terrace tickets to go down the tunnel.

We turned around to go back.      At this point I    saw the gate behind the

turnstiles, block B, opened.      At this point I realised that if we

didn't get down the tunnel quickly we were going to get caught up

amongst a lot of people.

So we rushed towards the tunnel, just as the people came through the

gates.     We were at the head.

The people came through in a rush.      It was now kick off time.

We got to the tunnel and went down it.      There were no police or

stewards at this point.

It was a horrible way to get      into the ground.    I saw people stood in

the tunnel itself with theirbacks to the wall.        There was no way     of

stopping at this point with the crowd behind you.

As we got to the back of the crowd I said t     o     t   o   get towards

the right side of the tunnel and away from the front of the tunnel

entrance.      We didn't get away far enough.

As we entered the terracing we were pushed forward as we tried to get

over to the right.      The result was that we went diagonally across the

terrace.

We finished about two thirds of the way down the terrace, directly in
front of the gate which was in the perimeter fence.        The gate was

shut at this point.      The teams were about to kick off.      I*saw that

Alan HANSEN was playing.      Then there was another surge which pushed

us further forward.     The crush got worse for about two minutes.          The

screams were just terrible.      Everyone was screaming.

I was not taking any notice of the game, I was just trying to get my

breath.     My arms were stuck, they were crossed in front of me and

pressed into my stomach.      I was concentrating on my breath.     I was

taking shorter and shorter breaths all the time.

At this point I thought that I was going to die.      You couldn't take

in any breath, I remember shutting my eyes and that was it.         I don't

remember anything else.      Just before I shut my eyes I remember a

further surge from behind, which caused me to lose consciousness.

When I woke up I was out of the crush at the back of the tunnel at the

rear of the West Stand.

I woke up, and I was sick.      It was like coming out of a deep sleep, I

didn't know where I was.      I was aware of someone rubbing my back and

a Scottish voice was saying, 'You're alright, keep breathing'.         Then

he said, 'He's alright now, he'll pull through'.      I heard

voice say, 'Yes.'

I looked up at this point and saw            crouched by me.      It was at

this point that I came round.       I saw a sign saying Sheffield

Wednesday and I realised where I was.

I was lying on the floor and the policeman said to stay where I was

and to stay there until I had come round.       I looked round and there

were bodies all around.      There was a girl to the left of me a couple

of yards away.      She was dead.    I would say she was in her early

twenties.    She had a blue coat or was wearing something blue.         I

looked and looked away.
                                                                           6

There were other people like me in the same condition.      There was a

young lad not far from me who was also dead.

A woman police officer asked if I was alright.      I sat there for about

five minutes.     The woman police officer asked if I was okay to walk.

 I said that I v»as and then she said, that I would be better off going

outside the ground.     She led me outside, and sat me up against a wall

at the side of the road.      I was told to wait for an ambulance.

Injured people were on one side and dead people were on the other side.

Ambulances were coming along picking people up on stretchers.        Across

the road I saw people being put into ambulances and some being revived.

A woman came over and asked if people     could walk, as there was an

ambulance.




I did not see the crush barrier break in the terrace.

Looking back I believe that the main causes were that there was no

organisation of queues outside the ground.      The policeman on the

horse was not doing his job properly, i.e. forming queues.      The game

should have been delayed and the people outside informed of the fact.

Had the people been told it would have helped out a lot.

I should have been allowed around to the side terrace instead of being

told to go down the tunnel.

Once inside pens 3 and 4 of the terrace, it was like a big cage that

you couldn't escape from.      I think that the ticket allocation for the

fans was wrong.     There is no way that we should have had that end of

the ground.     A lot of fans, especially some of the season ticket

holders were not allocated tickets.      This lead to fans attending the



                                                                               1702
                                                                       7


       game without tickets.   There should be a way of ensuring that the

       regular fans got an allocation.

       There was nothing stopping fans without tickets getting to the ground.

        I give the police permission to have access to my medical records




                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:    120589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                DS
                                                                          STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                         LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 39

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 000 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED:                                                               (SIGNED)



           My friend and I arrived at the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground at

           2.40 p.m. (1440).   There was already a large crowd around A.B.

           anc C turnstiles extending beyond the blue metal gates.    Two mounted

           Police where inside the gates, and two outside, they made no concerted

           or organised attempt to form the growing crowd into orderly queues.

           This they could have done with four horses, and careful use of the

           blue gates, Instead they moved sideways across the openings, causing a

           lot of agitation in the crowd, which because of the numbers caused a

           lot of crushing against the walls    and turnstiles.   When a decision

           was made to close the blue gates, to relieve the crush on the

           turnstiles, there was no attempt at all to tell the crowd locked out,

           why this had been done.    I believe that if this had been done, and

           much earlier, there would have been none of the crushing outside.        I

           say this, because when the were closed, I was on the outside of the

           gate, and my friend on the inside, many fans with tickets in hand,

           believed that the gates were closing permanently, and that they would

           not get in.   I told several very irate supporters, that they were

           being closed to relieve the crush on the turnstiles, they seemed to




                                                                                        1704
accept what I said and calmed down, but I couldn't relay that to the

crcwd.   Suddenly the left hand blue gate, under pressure of the crowd

whc hadn't a clue what was happening, burst open, and I and a few

others were forced through.   The gate was closed by a Policeman and a

Steward, but then the right hand gate opened, and two people fell to

the ground, I helped them to their feet, and then that gate was closed

again.   I saw my friend by the right hand fencing, and he called me

over to him, he noticed the blue concertina gate, to the right of the

turnstiles being opened.   As we approached this gate, two mounted

police were positioned to the right hand side, apparently oblivious of

the chaos. I told them in no uncertain terms, that they should move

down and help their colleagues, the reply from one of them was, "Don't

worry mate, you'll get in easy."    My friend and I then went through

the gate and to the toilet, came out and proceeded down the tunnel

towards the terraces, the tunnel was relatively empty of people, as we

approached the end of the tunnel, I said to my friend "Try and go to

the left" I had know sooner said that, when we were hit from behind by

a irass of people, I was pushed straight down the terrace to within 15'-

20' of the perimeter fence, (I had lost contact with my friend) and

then became static, unable to move in any direction.      I estimate that

the time was about 3.03 pm. (1503) The only glimpse of play I saw,

was Grobelaar and Aldridge on the Liverpool goal line and I assumed

that Nottingham Forest had a c o m e r kick.   The pressure of people

crushing was becoming almost unbearable, and on two occasions I

thought 'this is it, I've had it', by this time I had seme how been

turned around so my back was towards the pitch.      The pressure eased

off slightly, and I managed to turn around towards the pitch, and get

in front of a crush barrier, by this time I could see the gate in the

perimeter fence was open, and that fans were also climbing over the
_______                                                                         3


fence to avoid the crush.    I made my way to the left of the terracing,

until I came to the separating fence, running down the terracing.          I

found my friend leaning on a crush barrier about 10 yards (Yds)to my

right.    Within a minute of being re-united, he said to me "They are

punmelling that bloke there" pointing towards the pitch, I said I'll

have to go and help, I 'am a first aider the time was approximately

3.15 p.m (1515)    I went down the terracing to the perimeter fencing,

which had been pulled off by supporters and Police, a Policeman

stepped me, I told him I was a first aider, and he let me onto the

pitch.    The first casualty I came across, had a W.P.C. kneeling beside

hirr, she was very upset, I asked her "How long has he been like this"

she said "a long, long time" I felt for a pulse, but he was clearly

deed.     I moved along the pitch towards the North Stand, and passed six

or seven also clearly dead, until I came across a young man in his

early twenties, lying on his side, conscious but very concussed, I

asked him if he had any injuries, and he pointed to his head and his

ribs, his friend was with him, who said his name was I think

         fans with hoardings came along, and I helped them to put him on,

then they took him away.     I then moved back towards the other side of

the goal area, I tried to help one other man, two people, a man in a

white shirt, I think he was a St John's Ambulance man, and a wonan,

whc said she was a doctor, were already with him, but despite their

great efforts, it was clear he also was dead.     I removed the

casualties wrist watch to feel for a pulse, when a stretcher came

alcng, I put his watch in his trouser pocket.     I estimate the man to

been in his late thirties, he was heavy set, with a beard.        Seeing

that I could help no further, re- joined my friend on the terrace.             We

remained in the ground until the announcement that the game had been

 abandoned, and left at about 4.30p.m (1630)    My overwhelming
       corelusion is that, this disaster should have not occured, and was

       totally preventable. The prime reasons in my opinion, why it happened

       are:

       1) The total lack of organisation by the Police, particularly

       the Mounted Police outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles, they had

       a perfect opportunity, with the position of the blue gates, to

       clcse them early on, and with the assistance of foot Policeman and

       Stewards, both to check tickets, and allow an orderley number

       through to the turnstile, so avoiding any crushing at all.

       2) Total lack of ccirmunications both outside the ground and inside,

       anc between both, and by the Police to the crowd outside.    As I

       said early, when a decision was made to close the blue gates, it

       was too late, approaching 3.00pn, (1500) and no attempt to camnunicate

       with the crowd, as to why the gates were closed.   These crucial

        factors in my opinion, led to the fatal decision to open the

       concertina gate, allowing direct access via the tunnel to the

       centre terrace.



                                                                       1SIGNED

  iTEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                            STATION

NAME:             MATTHEW     COLIN
                  GOULD

ADDRESS:      I                                     WOLVERHAMPTON
                  I                                             SHEFFIELD

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 18                        ~

OCCUPATION:       STUDENT


Who states:- This statement consisting of 025 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 150689                                                    M C GOULD (SIGNED)



        I am a student studying                                                 at

        Sheffield Polytechnic.

        During my working term, I reside at

                      Sheffield.

        When I am not at the Hall, I would reside at my parents heme address

        at                                         Wolverhampton.

        Although I am a Wolverhampton Wanderers supporter, I also follow

        Liverpool Football Club when I can.

        On the 15th April 1989 (150489) Liverpool F.C. were to play Nottingham

        Forest F.C. in the semi final of the FA Cup at the Hillsborough ground,

           in Sheffield.

        On this occasion, this event was scheduled to be an all ticket game.

        Unfortunately I was not in possession of a ticket.

        My student colleague,                        who resides at

                                      Sheffield is also a Liverpool follower.

           He too was not the holder of a match day ticket for this semi final

           event.       However, knowing that ticket touts would probably be in the

           vicinity of the ground, we decided to go the ground with the intention
GOULD                  MATTHEW   COLIN                                    2
of purchasing a ticket from them.

Although we obviously wanted to be with Liverpool supporters, we would

have purchased a ticket with the Nottingham supporters if the need

arose.

On the day of this event, Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), together

with                    we left our Polytechnic address in Sheffield at

about 12.30pm (1230).

We caught a pjublic bus from our residence into Sheffield City Centre,

and then got on another bus in the city, to the ground at Hillsborough.

Unknown to us, if we had stayed on the first bus, it would have taken

us near to the ground in any case.

The bus drove us to a point in Middlewood Road, next to Hillsborough

Park.

We alighted from the bus at this location, and I believe the time was

about 1.15pm (1315).

Together, we then walked along Catchbar Lane crossroads and into

Leppings Lane, arriving directly outside the main Leppings Lane

entrance seme ten or fifteen minutes later, at about 1.30pm (1330).

Whilst walking from our alighting point to        the    ground which is a

distance of only about 400 to 500 (four to five hundred) metres,    I

witnessed numerous supporters drinking intoxicants (beer and lager)

from glasses, bottles and cans up to 2 litres in volume, in the street

and outside a pub in the area of Leppings Lane and Catchbar Lane.

Although the supporters, who to my knowledge were Liverpool

supporters, were drinking, there was no abusiveness or drunkeness at

this time.

I did in fact see Police Officers advising         the   supporters not todrink

heavily, otherwise they would not get into         the   ground.

On arriving outside the main Leppings Lane entrance, although there
GOULD                MATTHEW    COLIN                                      3


were supporters in the area, it was a lot less than I originally

anticipated for the fixture.

Supporters were forming orderly queues for the purpose of entering the

turnstiles, at this point without     any problem.

I remained with                  in   this immediate    area for aboutten to

fifteen minutes, hoping to obtain tickets.

We had already decided that we would not pay any more than fifteen to

twenty pounds for a six pound standing ticket, and in view of the fact

that touts were asking     an average price of about    thirty pounds,we

decided to walk around     the ground to see what other tickets were

available for the match.    The supporters at the Leppings Lane

entrance, was still about the same numbers in volume as the ten

minutes previous.

We walked along Leppings Lane in a northerly direction towards Herries

Road/Penistone Road traffic island against the flow of supporters who

were going towards the ground.

The volume of supporters was not great, but it was a continual flow,

who were walking on both sides of the road.

Although, again I saw Liverpool supporters consuming intoxicants,

there was no abusiveness or drunkeness to my knowledge.

On reaching this traffic island, we turned right into Penistone Road

towards the main entrance of the ground, which is the rear of the

Spion Kop.

The number of supporters in this area was a lot less than in Leppings

Lane area.

Between the traffic island at Penistone Road/Herries Road and the

ground there are two or three side streets.     I did in fact see

barriers across the entrance to these streets and Police Officers were

also at these locations.
GOULD                MATTHEW   COLIN                                     4


There were no problems from supporters along Penistone Road at this

time.

We continued to walk along Penistone Road and whilst we did this, we

were approached by supporters and asked if we had tickets to sell.      To

my surprise I did not see anyone selling tickets in this area, which I

would have expected at a big fixture like this semi final.

When we reached the end of the ground and the main ground entrance, we

turned right into the entrance which allowed us access to rear of the

stand, I now know to be the South Stand.   We walked along the rear of

this area, under a covered area by the club reception, and went to a

point which was blocked off by safety barriers and the television

camera vehicles.

We walked back along the rear of the South Stand, and past the

reception and the players entry point.

At this time, which I believe was about 2.00pm (1400), about three

mounted Police Officers, entered through a heavy crowd of supporters

who had gathered around the players entrance.   I could see that

immediately behind them was the Liverpool team coach.

The Liverpool players and staff alighted from the coach, and entered

the ground.

Immediately after the players entered the ground, myself and

left this area and continued walking back into Penistone Road.     On

reaching Penistone Road, the Nottingham team coach arrived at the

ground, and went to the rear of the South stand.

We continued to walk around with our objective still to try and obtain

a ticket.

We walked into a side road at the South side of the ground which gave

us access into Parkside Road, and then into Catchbar Lane.     At a point

at this location, we could see across the river to the rear of the
GOULD                   MATTHEW   COLIN                                   5


South Stand.

At this time, I saw a young boy, probably about 14 yrs old, climb over

the river wall and gain access in to the area where the television

vehicles were parked.

We stood at thir point for about five minutes watching this boy

attempting to evade Police who were trying to catch him.    The boy was

eventually caught by Police and he was put into an area behind the

South Stand but outside the perimeter of the ground.

We continued along Catchbar Lane to its junction with Leppings Lane.

On reaching this location, we sat down on a perimeter wall to a flower

bed and remained there for about fifteen minutes.

Whilst waiting at this point, I witnessed hundreds of Liverpool

supporters walking towards the grounds.   Although they were quite well

behaved, they were rowdy, chanting football songs, and the

majority were in possession of sane sort of intoxicant, and they were

consuming it as they walked along the street.

We also heard a lot of people asking for tickets and ticket touts were

being pointed out to different ticket seekers.

The one ticket tout was asking #40 (forty pounds) for a standing

ticket.

In view of what we had seen and heard with regards to the ticket

situation, we decided to retrace our footsteps and go back around into

Penistone Road.

We walked back along the entire length of Parkside and turned left

into Penistone Road.

During this time we did see an increased number of supporters in the

vicinity, but there were no incidents to my knowledge.     We continued

to walk along Penistone Road and reaching the turnstiles at the end of

the Spion Kop which I believe to be turnstiles 77-88 (as per the map)
GOULD                MATTHEW   COLIN                                       6

we turned around and started to walk back along the rear of the Spion

Kop.

On reaching the main entrance gate next to the river, with             I

remained there for about five minutes whilst we tried to obtain

tickets.

One particular person, a West Indian youth was apparently selling

standing tickets for #10 (ten pounds).    This youth actually passed

us, whilst we stood by the river and he was followed by a second youth

who stated that the West Indian youth had tickets to sell.

Together with         I tried to see this coloured youth but he

disappeared in the crowd which by this time had started to increase

very quickly, which made it difficult to walk freely.

After losing this youth in the crowd, we decided to go finally back to

the Leppings Lane end of the ground.     This was about 2.30pm to 2.35pm.

(1430 to 1435) We walked back into Parkside into Catchbar Lane, and

turned right into Leppings Lane.

Once we arrived at the mouth of the main gate at the Leppings Lane

entrance, the volume of people in this area was extremely dense, to

such a degree that it was virtually inpossible to move of your own

accord.

Together with       L I stood on the c o m e r of the bridge, marked (X)

on the map (Exhibit No         Reference No          ) for about ten

minutes just observing the crowd.

During this period of time, people were entering the ground through

the turnstiles but only at a very slow pace.     It was also about this

time I witnessed supporters climbing onto the top of the turnstiles

and disappearing over the top, presumably gaining access to the ground.

Although I cannot give a detailed description of individuals, I would

say that approximately fifty people aged between 15 to 30 years old,
GOULD                 MATTHEW    COLIN                                      7


gained access by this means.

Whilst observing the situation, both myself and           stood next to a

video cameraman, who I believe was a Policeman recording the situation.

I believe this is so, because the pictures I have since seen on T.V.

show this particular area in question, and the presenter on television

allegedly say the incident was recorded by a Police cameraman.

Whilst standing next to the cameraman, I did in fact see people

entering the ground via a gate at the side of the turnstiles, which I

believe to be gate ' C .

I saw the gate open, but I could not say who opened it.     It was only

opened for about a minute at the roost, and I would say that only about

twenty or so people entered at this time, before the gate was closed

again.   I did see two Police Officers on foot, in the opening to this

gate before it was closed.      I believe these two Officers remained

inside the ground side of the gate.

My initial thought to the gate being opened was that the supporters

who had climbed over the turnstiles, had possibly opened the gate from

the inside.

At this point, we decided to go into the crowd and if the gate (Gate

C) was to be opened again, we may possibly gain access by this means.

We tried to get down the right hand side of the crowd, but we were

pushed towards the centre of the crowd and the middle of the railing

gates, which at this time were closed.

After about a minute or so, the railing gates were pushed open by the

force of the crowds, which caused us to go beyond the railing gates

and the turnstiles.

Immediately prior to this, I saw Gate ' C again opened and I would

estimate about 100 (one hundred) supporters gained access at this

point.
GOULD                  MATTHEW   COLIN                                     8


I believe that it was Gate 'C' being opened on this second occasion,

that caused the crowd to surge forward and cause myself and           to

be forced forward and made us be in front of the railing gates.

When we had gained access past the railing gates, the volume of people

appeared to become slightly less, because we were able to move

that little more easily.   As soon as we got past the railing gate,

Gate 'C' was closed.

At this point, I could see supporters punching out at the mounted

Police Officer and his horse, who at this time was immediately behind

me.

The supporters started to strike out at the Officer when they were

told to move back and stop pushing forwards.    They retaliated by

punching the horses body and head and also punching the Officer.

Although I didn't see the Officer draw his staff, I did in fact see

the Officer hit the supporters with it, in retaliation to their

actions.

The atmosphere at this time was obviously getting very tense with

supporters swearing at the mounted Officer and he too was shouting

back.

The physical confrontation took place for about 30 seconds but the

verbal confrontation took place for seme minutes.

After this, myself and           managed to move towards the right side

of the crowd next to the river fencing.

At this time, I did in fact see three people leaning against this

fence and they appeared to be in a distressed condition.

One of the people was a lady who appeared to be hysterical, crying and

I heard her say something to the effect 'Someone's going to die in

here.'

The other member of the group of three, was a boy aged about ten years
GOULD                MATTHEW   COLIN                                     9


old and he had suffered grazed arms and hands.

When we got near to these three people, we also stood with our backs

to the fencing for a few seconds, discussing whether to enter the

ground.

The gate, 'Gate 'C", was again opened, and had been opened for about

two minutes when we decided to enter through this point.

The behaviour of the people who entered the ground was orderly and

they walked rather than ran as they entered through this opened gate.

The reason we entered was because no-one was checking tickets,

although stewards and Police Officers were obvserving the people

entering and also the people beyond the gate, still outside waiting to

come in, which still amounted to thousands, in my view.

We entered through the gate and immediately walked towards the tunnel

which was directly in front of us.

The time at this point, was between 2.50pn and 2.55pn (1450 and 1455).

We walked into the tunnel and into the rear of Pen 3 which was to the

right, as you walked along the tunnel.

Although the tunnel was full of people, they moved continuously and

the passage through it was unobstructed.

I was still in immediate contact with         when I entered Pen 3 and

we were immediately pushed towards the front of the Pen.

We never actually stopped from the time we entered the Pen until we

reached the bottom left hand third of the terracing.

When we entered the Pen, we were continually moving backwards and

forwards and I found it very humid.

People around me were behaving in a way that they panicked, became

distraught and some were pleading for help.

The situation was very chaotic, tense, and generally the spectators

were panic stricken due to the crush.
GOULD                MATTHEW   COLIN                                     10


I felt in my own mind, that the situation was getting desperate, with

people shouting out the Police, who were looking into the crowd from

the other side of the perimeter fence, which surrounded the playing

area and the terraces.

People were shouting out to the effect that they were being crushed,

suffocated and that they were in pain.

There was at this time supporters shouting at people behind them to

move back, because of the crushing situation.

At this point, I was pushed further down the terracing and then I was

forced over to the right.   I remained at this point for about two

minutes and this was the first time I became static.   (I would call

this my first viewing point with regards to Question 36 on my

questionnaire).

Whilst I was at this point, I became quite breathless, and started to

get pains in my chest.   I felt I was being crushed and I was trapped.

I could not move my arms.

I tried to shout out but couldn't because of the lack of air in my

lungs.

People were continually shouting at the Police to open the gates at

the front of the pens, so that people could get out of the crush.

It was at this time, that I became aware of a young boy aged about

twelve years, who was wearing what I believe to be silver rimmed

glasses and he had short light brown hair.

He was standing directly in front of me with a person I believe to be

his father, due to their similar features and he too wearing glasses.

The crowd around us was still very tightly packed together and due to

the continual movement of the crowd, I could see that the boy was

getting lower and lower to the ground, as though his feet were trapped

and he could not move other than fall forwards and sidewards.
GOULD                MATTHEW    COLIN                                     11
The boy started to wimper out cries of help and his facial expression

was that of sheer fright.

At the same time, the boy's father was screaming out to help his boy

and the people around us.    He was directing these pleas for help at

the people and indeed the Police who were standing behind the

perimeter fencing in front of him.

At this point, I was feeling physically tired and helpless.

I was obviously concerned for my own safety, because the people behind

were continuously pushing down on us, and the situation was getting

very desperate indeed.

The young boy was physically forced down, causing his right side of

his body to come into contact with the terrace floor.

At this point, due to the boy falling to the floor this created a

little gap inroediately in this area, but although I could not move my

feet, I was able to move my body.       The boy's father who was to our

immediately left was still trapped and when he saw his boy fall to the

floor, he became frantic, screaming out to help his      boy.

The boy's father screamed out    pleas similar to 'For God's sake help

him' and 'Open the gates.'

When the gap opened up, which    allowed me to move my upper body,I

desperately tried to grab the    boy who at this time, was looking

directly at me.   Although I touched him, on his arm, I was unable to

grab him sufficiently to try and pick him up.

Almost at the same time I moved my upper body forward, I felt people

behind me pushing my back, which caused me to fall forward.       However,

when this happened I felt that if I was to fall to the floor I would

be unable to get back up, I felt that I was going to die, so I

frantically fought for my own life, and managed to get upright again.

Once I managed to get upright it was at this point I saw a safety
GOULD                MATTHEW   COLIN                                    12


barrier irrmediately behind me and about six or seven adult persons

lying over the barrier.

They appoeared to be doubled over the barrier, which I can recall was

buckled forward.

I also recall that these people were trapped between the barrier and

the crowd behind them, which amounted to a continuous pressure on

their backs.

One of the trapped persons actually spoke to me and told me to 'Push

everyone back.'

I could see that these people were unable to move for themselves and

as a result of this, I attempted to push the people back by facing

them and pushing them with my hands and upper body.

This did not have any effect and I turned around and tried to push

back the people with my back to them and push by using my legs as a

wedge to the floor and leant backwards.

I was in effect pushing against the people and the barrier.

Although I realise now it was a situation I could not help, I felt it

was the only thing I could have done at the time.

All the time I was doing this, people in general were in a desperate

situation crying out in fright and panic, for assistance.

I believe it was at this time I caused an injury to my back which

amounted to slight cuts and abrasions to my lower spine area of my

back.   I believe this occurred when I was pushing against the barrier.

Although I believe it felt like minutes pushing the people back it was

probably only about fifteen to twenty seconds, at which time I felt

helpess because I was obviously not going or getting anywhere with my

actions.

I stopped pushing and I could see that there was still a slight gap in

front of me, and the boy who was forced to the floor was still there.
GOULD                 MATTHEW   COLIN                                   13


He was trying desperately to grab the trouser legs of people by him,

but he appeared to be' desperately tired.

When I saw the boy still lying there, I then leant forward and tried

to grab him again, but unfortunately I was pushed forward from behind

which caused me to go in front of him.

I can remember forcing myself to the right of the boy in order to

avoid trampling on him.   The force of the push from behind caused my

upper body to go before my legs, which resulted in me going forward at

an angle.   I eventually struggled to get my body upright again, which

left me about 5 metres from the front of the perimeter fencing,

directly in front of the entry/exit gate in Pen 3.

The gate at the front of Pen 3 was I believe, in the process of being

opened by an official, not a supporter and when I saw this being done

I felt a sudden psychological boost within me, and I could see that

people were at last getting out of the tragic and desperate situation.

Unfortunately the supporters were only getting out very slowly.

Police were assisting supporters out of the pen and onto the track

area of the ground.

At this time, although I could not see                 I felt that he

was big and strong enough to look after himself, and I was obviously

concerned in getting myself out of the situation.

I concentrated on the gate and due to the fact I was directly in

front of it, I do not feel I had problems in getting to the gate,

other than being lack of breath.

I would say it took me about one minute from the time I saw the gate

open to the time I managed to get out through it.

I did see people in the front of the pen trapped against the perimeter

fencing who were ovbiously not able to move, although I could not

describe any of them.
GOULD                  MATTHEW   COLIN                                       14


When I got to the gate, I was supported by a Police Officer and I was

actually escorted to Pen 2 which was to my right .Although I cannot

give a precise time at this point, I can say that

the football teams were still on the playing area, and the Police were

trying to prevent supporters entering that area.

Whilst I was being escorted from Pen 3 to Pen 2, I genuinely felt that

by putting the supporters in this area, the same situation was likely

to arise, and I didn't like this possibility happening again.

However, I went into Pen 2, but only for about two minutes.       The gate

was left unattended for a short period of time, during which I saw my

friend                 on the playing area in the penalty box, looking

in a distressed condition, and looking into the terracing area of the

Leppings Lane end.

The players at this time were in the process of leaving the playing

area.

Due to the fact I could see              in this state, I left Pen 2 and

gained access to the area where             was standing.

I ran to him and approached him from his left hand side.

When we met, I stated that I was okay, and he flung his arms around

me.     He was in a very distressed condition, crying and stating 'He had

seen the young boy with the glasses on on the floor and that he could

not do anything to assist him' and he kept repeating that it was

'Horrible, that people were dying.'

We remained in the area for a short while and it was evident people

had been injured but I still didn't think it was a serious as we now

know.

We looked into the Leppings Lane area in general and we could see

people being lifted into the seated area, above the terracing.

The area around the goal was slowly increasing with people and I would
GOULD                  MATTHEW   COLIN                                     15


describe the situation as shock and confusion.

We both moved to point in front of the South Stand about ten to

fifteen metres up from the West Stand.

We sat at this location for about fifteen minutes during which time I

continued to comfort          and observe what was happening.

Whilst we sat at this point, a young boy was placed in front of us,

and he was given medical assistance by two supporters. This boy was

given the kiss of life and I believe the boy vomitted on at least 4 or

5 occasions.    However I believe the boy later died, because the man

assisting him eventually gave up, after liasing with an ambulance

official.

The only description of the boy is that he was white and about 14/15

yrs old.

Whilst sitting at this location I did witness numerous other people

being given medical assistance and apparently died, but I cannot give

any other details.

We later walked around the playing area, and saw people who were

apparently dead.     A lot of people were assisting injured person and a

lot of people were just walking around.      I would describe the

situation at this time as confusion and disbelief.

Together with            I then went to a point in front of the South

Stand by the players staff dug out.      We both assisted in removing an

advertisement board, and carried it to the far side of the pitch and

left it by an injured person.     We did not assist in conveying the

injured, because they all appeared to be taken care of.

We then returned to our position by the dug out and remained there

until about 4.30pm at which time we then assisted in clearing the

ground of litter.

By this time the majority of people had left and gone heme.
GOULD                  MATTHEW   COLIN                                   16


We eventually left the ground at about 5.00pm (1700).

Finally may I make the following details known that I feel are

important to this inquiry.

When I was in Pen 3 and I tried to assist the young boy who was on the

floor, may I say that I believe I was eventually pushed past the boy

at about the same time that Peter Beardsley hit the crossbar, causing

a loud noise to be made and a sudden surge forward by the supporters.

I can only assume this was the time, due to the fact I could not see

any of the play at this time.

I feel a contributory factor in the number of deaths and injuries was

caused by the sheer volume of people in the West Stand area and the

fact that people without tickets were allowed in the ground, which

obviously includes myself.

However there was no apparent checking of tickets made.    If it had of

been done, then perhaps not so many people would have gone into the

ground.

I also felt that the     start of the game couldhave    beendelayedto

assist the entry of spectators in the ground.

I also feel that the      loudspeaker should havebeen   usedmore

effectively, because to my knowledge, peopledid not know what      was

going on.

Finally I felt the ambulances should have gone directly to the injured

rather than around the playing area. M.C.GOULD.
        GOULD            MATTHEW   COLIN                      17


                                           M C GOULD SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   160689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                         STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                                                      LIVERPOOL

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 35

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 041089                                                           |(SIGNED)



           On Saturday the 15th April 1989 (150489) I attended the Liverpool

           Nottingham Forest game at Hillsborough, Sheffield.     I had a ground

           ticket for Entrance B at the Lepping Lane End.    We arrived at

           approximately 2.25pm (1425) and because of the amount of traffic

           parked our car some distance from the ground and I walked.

           I arrived at the Leppings Lane End at approximately 2.50/2.55pm (1450)

           (1455).     Unlike at Liverpool Football Club where fans are marshalled

           into ordinary queues, the Police presence at the ground appeared

           sporadic.     There were a large number of fans arriving late although

           as I approached a pair of outer perimeter gates painted blue two

           mounted policemen told us to stop and physically close the gates

           holding them in the closed position to allow a small number of

           supporters who were at the turnstiles to enter the ground.     There

           were very few fans within the outer courtyard between the blue gates

           and the turnstiles for Entrance B.     As a result of this a large

           number of fans started to congregate on the outside of the gates

           behind me.    I was within touching distance of one of the mounted

           policemen and there was a heated exchange between other fans and him
                                                                             2


claiming that they had tickets.    The police officer in question, who

was shown prominently in the Television News coverage, indicated we

would have to wait.

As it was approaching kick-off time the crowd were becoming agitated

and urging him to let them through although he refused.     After what

appeared to be an eternity although it was probably no more than five

minutes he finally allowed the fans to pour through the gates and

there was an immediate rush for the turnstiles.     Being at the front I

was able to reach the turnstile and go through.     There then appeared

to be an inner courtyard between the turnstiles and the main stands at

that end of the ground.    As I had never been to the ground before I

did not know where to go and there were no stewards who I could see or

even police advising fans where they should go.     There was a large

tunnel which appeared to lead up into the ground which seemed the only

and obvious entrance.     I along with many others hurried through this

although as we reached the end of the tunnel which led onto terraces

it became clear that the section of the ground was already completely

full.   By this time it was impossible to go back down the tunnel

because of the number of fans coming in behind you and the only

alternative was to move forward into an already overcrowded section of

the ground.     It also became apparent that unlike the kop where once

you had entered you can go into any part of the kop that there were

steel barricades dividing the whole standing area into three separate

sections.     As the crush became greater I realised there was likely to

be a disaster and did notice in the stand above me a policeman

screaming into a walkie-talkie.      Other fans were being pulled into

the stands.     I decided to try and move sideways as best I could.      I

tried desperately to keep my feet because I realised that if one fell

down you were likely to be killed.      Eventually I made my way with
_____________________                                .                   3


difficulty to a crash barrier near the side of the middle section.

There was a small space of about six foot (6') wide between the three

main sections of standing area sane fans had already entered this and

were encouraging others to climb over to escape the crush.    I managed

to clamber onto a crash barrier and then onto the top of the metal

fence and jumped down being helped by another Liverpool fan already

there. By this time large numbers of fans were doing this and even

this small section was becoming overcrowded and the police opened a

metal gate leading onto the pitch to allow us to escape.     I seem to

recall that there were two or three steps and people were clambering

up these and were being pulled onto the pitch.

Once I got onto the pitch I realised the utter carnage and there were

large numbers of policemen hanging around who did not appear to know

what to do.   In fairness I suspect they did not know whether this was

part of a pitch invasion or a genuine tragedy although I made my

feelings abundantly clear to one policewoman by saying that if you did

not get the fans out of the centre section there would be a tragedy

she appeared to ignore my remark.   Although I tried to provide some

assistance to other fans the police started to usher you off the pitch

and into the two side sections of the standing area which appeared far

less crowded and in fact the area which I eventually went being a

standing area next to the main north stand had plenty of space.    The

situation was not helped by the lack of any information provided by

the public address system.   In particular the fans inside the ground

at the Liverpool end were insensed by the shouts and the taunts of the

Nottingham Forest fans who clearly failed to appreciate that a major

tragedy was unfolding. Had it been explained to them clearly and

immediately, it is unlikely that they would have adopted such an

attitude and indeed once they realised there was a major tragedy the
______                                                                   4


behaviour was exemplary in that they applauded those Liverpool fans

who attempted to tear up hoardings to provide make-shift stretchers.

While I can well appreciate the reason not to make an announcement

that the match would be abandoned thereby causing thousands of fans to

leave the ground and hampering the efforts to rescue services

nevertheless a great deal more could have been done to keep people

informed.   It was extremely difficult to hear the public address

system.

Even though I had seen people lying on the ground I did not

immediately realise that there had been fatalities although obviously

there had been injuries.   At about 3.30pm     (1530) a rumour went round

the Liverpool end that about 14 people had died.     People including

myself, were sitting on the terraces crying.     I eventually left the

ground slowly following the announcement that the match was abandoned

and made my way back to the car.

I consider the major cause of the tragedy was lack of effective

policing firstly ensuring that only those supporters who had tickets

actually reached the ground itself.   This could have been easily done

by a police cordon on the outskirts of the ground ensuring that only

those fans with tickets were allowed through.      Secondly, by

attempting to close the outer perimeter gates thereby depriving the

fans of the opportunity of going directly to the turnstiles which

clearly caused a back-log at a most sensitive time a few minutes

before the kick-off when tempers began to rise.      Thirdly, by not

ensuring that all fans with tickets were put into queues, policed by

horse-men leading to the turnstiles stretching back if necessary into

the road, which frequently happens at Liverpool heme matches.

Fourthly, by ensuring that those fans once through the turnstiles went

into the two side sections of the standing area and not into the area
______                                                                    5


immediately behind the goal.     While I do not know whether it was

possible to go directly into these areas once through the turnstiles

there was no stewards or police to advise fans to go into other areas

or to block off the tunnel leading to the main standing area behind

the goal.     As this appeared to be the only obvious entrance into the

whole of the standing area everyone went through it.     Quite why this

area is segregated into three separate standing areas I do not know

given that Liverpool were to occupy the complete end of that ground

which merely meant that once inside the centre section it was

impossible to move sideways into other less crowded standing

areas.      Finally there appeared to be a lack of appreciation by the

police of what precisely was happening and what to do about it.        Our

final point is that having the turnstiles leading to an inner compound

and not directly into that section of the ground was clearly a

mistake.      If the fans were to be divided into three separate standing

areas then the turnstiles should have led directly into those areas to

ensure that the capacity for each area was not exceeded.      I went

through the turnstiles marked 'B' because that was the entrance for

the ticket I had.      Even if it had been possible to go directly from

the turnstiles to other standing areas of the ground this could

obviously lead to the fact that the majority of the fans wished to

congregate behind the goal, that the section was clearly going to

become overcrowded.      I can only be thankful that because I arrived

shortly before the kick-off that I am probably alive whereas had I

been standing near the front of that enclosure I would either be

dead or seriously injured.

P.S.

At no time either outside the ground or while inside did I see any

fighting actually on the terraces.      The only trouble was after the
        tragedy had occurred when the Nottingham Forrest fans failing to

        realise what had happened began taunting the Liverpool fans who

        appeared to be invading the pitch.




                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:   041089

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

   ICERS SIGNATURE:      POL DC




                                                                               1730
                                                                             STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                            HUMBERSIDE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 24

OCCUPATION:                        ASSISTANT


Who states:- This statement consisting of 016 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 310589                                                               (SIGNED)



           I am a                    Assistant employed by

                    at their works in                         I reside at the above

           address with my parents.

           Since the corrmencement of the Football Seasonin 1988 (000088).       I

           have been actively supporting Liverpool Football Club.        I obtained a

           season ticket frcm Anfield Football Ground and I try to attend as many

           home matches as possible.      I had an interest in the club prior to this

           time but I have only attended fixtures during the past 12 months.

           About the beginning of April        1989 (000489), I applied by post to

           Liverpool Football Club for a standing ticketfor their F.A. Cup Semi

           Finaltie against Nottingham Forest which had been scheduled to be

           played at Hillsborough Football Ground on Saturday 15th April

           1989 (150489).

           About a week before the game was due to take place my ticket came back

           through the post.       It was a #6.00 standing ticket for the terraces

           at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.       We actually had two tickets

           returned as I had planned to attend the game with a friend

           I        Iof I                            I
At about 10.40 am (1040) on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), ny mate

       collected me from my home address, we were going to travel to

Sheffield in        3 car.   We then drove direct to Sheffield city

centre arriving at about 11.30am (1130).    We didn't experience any

delays on the journey nor did I witness any unusual or untoward

incidents. Upon reaching the city centre we joined the ring road

system and drove towards the ground although we intended to stop

somewhere first for a drink.     Whilst we were driving on the ring road

we looked for somewhere suitable to park.     We came upon a car park

which was near to the central railway station.     We parked on this car

park and then walked a short distance into the city centre to find a

public house.

The first pub we came across was the Ledgings wine bar.    We had a sit

down meal in there and a drink.     There was also about 20 Notts Forest

fans in the restaurant area of the pub, they too were having a meal

and a drink.    They were generally well behaved and there were no

unpleasant incidents.    We stayed in the Ledgings for about 30 minutes

and then walked to another city centre pub, I can't recall the name of

it but it used to be called the 'Pig and Whistle' at one time.        We had

a quick drink in there staying for about 15 minutes at most.     I saw 3

Liverpool supporters in there, they were also drinking but again as

before there was no trouble.

We then walked around to find a third pub and came across 'the

Stonehouse", located in the City Centre.     We had a couple of drinks

there and stayed in all for about 45 minutes.     I saw 4 or 5 Nottingham

Forest fans in there, they were sitting together in the c o m e r of the

bar.   They were no trouble and well behaved.

After leaving the Stonehouse pub we walked back out of the city centre

to where we had left the car, it was about 2.15 pn (1415) by the time
_______                                                                   3


we eventually got back to it.    We then drove out of the City and

along the Penistone Road towards the ground.    We passed perhaps four

or five pubs on our way to the ground and I noticed fans standing

outside the pubs drinking.     The numbers of fans outside these pubs

varied between 20 and 50, they were all Nottingham Forest fans.      I

could tell by their regalia.     Generally the fans outside the pubs were

well behaved although I recall at one pub we had a Liverpool

supporters coach travelling infront of us and I saw a group of Forest

fans outside the pub jeer and put up two fingers to the supporters on

the bus.   It appeared to be good humoured and not made with any

malice.    I could see that the Nottingham fans were laughing as they

jeered the coach.     I don't know the name of the pub.

We reached Hillsborough at about 2.20pm (1420) and we drove to a small

side street off Middlewood Road where we parked.     It took us about

five minutes to walk back to the ground and into Leppings Lane.      As

we walked along Leppings Lane I saw a large crowd walking down

Middlewood Road next to the park, this crowd had blocked the main road

and were making their way towards Leppings Lane behind us.     When I

looked towards the ground along the lane I also saw large numbers of

people standing in the road near to the road junction which gives

access to the turnstiles for the West Stand.

As we neared the ground I saw that there were even more people packed

outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles.     I was amazed at the amount of

people about, I initially thought that we would miss most of the start

of the match because of the crowds outside and in view of the masses

of people arriving.     I was also concerned about getting stuck in a

crush outside the turnstiles.

We both followed the general flow of people to the turnstile area, we

had tickets to go through turnstile 'B'. We had a view of the
lettering above the turnstiles and we made for 'B' turnstiles itself.

Outside the turnstile area I saw very little Police presence, myself

and      moved with the crowd and between a retaining wall and the

river, I noticed that on the ground side of the river was a blue

barrier about 3 feet (3') high.   Standing next to the barrier and

about 12 yards from the block of turnstiles was a mounted Police

Officer, he was amongst the crowd and shouting instructions, there

were so many people packed together through that I don't think what

he was shouting was doing any good.    I didn't notice any other Police

Officers at all except one officer on foot who was standing behind

this barrier behind the Mounted Officer.    I suddenly saw this Officer

on foot rise above the crowd as if he was standing on something and he

pulled a young lad out of the crush.   The lad would have been about 10

or 12 years of age.   The officer took hold of his arm and pulled him

out, people nearby were helping to push the youth towards the barrier.

I couldn't see if the lad was in any difficulty where he was but it

was a tight crush as we neared the turnstile block and I could well

understand him being pulled clear of the crowd.

We found ourselves being carried forward in this flow of people

towards the turnstile and I had great difficulty in moving my arms,

they were literally pinned to my side, it was very uncomfortable in

the mass of people.   As I passed by the Mounted Officer I

noticed perhaps 10 or 12 youths climbing up onto the block of

turnstiles, they were mostly youths of about 17 or 18 years, they were

dropping down inside, no-one was outside the turnstiles to stop them

climbing up.

We both eventually arrived outside turnstile 'B' after suffering some

discomfort in the crush, I went through first and handed my ticket to

the operator.   I was closely followed by          Having got through
_______                                                                    5


the turnstile it was much easier inside the enclosure at the back of

the stand.    There were lots of people in there but there was no crush.

We entered the enclosure at about 2.45pm (1445).    We moved through the

crowd in the enclosure to a programme seller where I purchased a

prograirme.

As I stood by the seller I watched more youths climbing over the top

of the turnstile block which I had just entered through.     They were

dropping down inside but were being caught by a number of Police and

ground stewards.    The Police were talking to these youths but I

couldn't see what happened to them after that.

Myself and         then looked for a place to go in order to get onto

the terraces.    There were no directions telling you where to go and

we were facing a tunnel in the centre of the stand, through it I could

see the pitch so we decided to go down it to find a place to view the

game.     It wasn't a conscious decision to go down the tunnel it was

just because it was handy and there were no directions to indicate

otherwise.    Whilst we had been in the enclosure at the rear of the

stand at no time did I witness the opening of any gates, they remained

closed at all times.

We walked towards the tunnel virtually alone, our passage through the

tunnel was unobstructed, I couldn't see that many people in the pens

and I had no concern at this time about any overcrowding.      I didn't

see any Police Officers or ground stewards on duty either outside or

in the tunnel.

When we entered the pens at the end of the tunnel there was a barrier

dividing the centre pens and we decided to go to the right and

into pen 3.     This pen was approximately a third full.   We walked

halfway down the terracing and stood behind the goals and about 3

yards from the dividing barrier with pen 4.
I have been shown a sketch plan of Hillsborough Football ground and I

have marked upon it both my entry point to the ground and also my

match viewing position as I have described above.

As I stood in pen 3 I noticed it filling up steadily, there was a

constant flow of people entering via the central tunnel.    After about

5 minutes the pen had more or less filled and most of the spaces had B

been occupied.   This would be about 5 minutes before kick off and

although it was quite full the pen wasn't uncomfortable and I had room

to move about within reason.

I then saw the teams come out of the players tunnel in the South Stand

and there was a roar from the crowd, around the ground.    It was

immediately after the entrance of the players and this roar from the

ground that I felt a surge forward in the crowd from behind.     I was

forced downwards and into the people infront of me, the crowd closed

in from the sides as a result of the pressure from behind.     I was

uncontrolably pushed forwards and down the terrace towards the

fencing.   I had no control whatsoever over where I was going and I

was just carried along.    I'd lost       at this stage and I couldn't

see where he had gone.     I was pushed forward for about 3 or 4 flights

of terracing.    I recall some people hitting a barrier on the way down

and injuring themselves, I could hear them shout out in pain,

the barrier was just to my right.

At the end of the surge forward there then appeared to be another

violent surge from the left and again I was carried along this time

narrowly missing a barrier myself.     My final position was more or less

in the centre of Pen 3, I came out of it unhurt although I was

shaken, to the rear of where I was standing there were gaps in the

crowds and I was able to make my way back to my orginal position near

to the dividing barrier.
When I took up my original position the crowd in the middle of the pen

was quite loosly spaced in groups and I had no problems in moving

about.    I don't know what it was like at the front at this time as I

couldn't see because of the people moving about.     I'd only been back

at my original position for about 30 seconds when the crowd packed in

again tightly around me.    There was no movement in the crowd and I

remember holding both of my arms infront of me to try and give me some

space to breath, it really was tightly packed, I pushed my head back

and started taking deep breaths.    The pressure of people pushing

against me at this time was very great and I found it difficult to

hold my arms infront of me which I did in order to give me the space

to breathe.    As I was holding my head back to breathe I heard my name

called from behind me.     I looked back and saw my mate,       in the

crowd about 2 or 3 feet (2' or 3') behind me, he said that he was O.K.

I remained in this position for what seemed like a couple of minutes

and then the pressure from the crowd eased a little allowing me to

move my arms about.     I then noticed a man standing in the crowd to my

left, he was being pushed along in the crowd and was pushed against

me.    As he stood next to me he shouted, "my leg, my leg, I've broken

it".     I looked at him and he was red faced and sweating profusely.

Together with another lad I helped this man up out of the crowd and

above the heads of those infront.     The people infront then

took hold of the man and he was slowly passed down the terrace and

towards the fencing at the front.     I didn't notice the mans injury at

all and I didn't have time to ask him any questions although it

was quite obvious that he was in some distress and I readily assumed

that he had infact broken his leg.     He was passed down the crowd

infront and I think he eventually was taken through one of the gates

in the fencing which bounds the pitch.
                                                                          8


I would describe this man as being 25-30 years of age, of stocky

build, 5'8" tall, he was fair skinned and had short dark brown hair.

He was wearing a blue track suit top.

As the crowd eased around roe I made a conscious decision to escape

from the pen as I knew that if I stayed I may have been injured or

killed myself.   A gap then opened up in the crowd infront of roe and I

saw that there was an exit route for roe to follow.    I took the

opportunity and moved forward through the crowd towards the fencing at

the front of the pen.   The gap extended to a barrier, possibly the

last one before the fence.    The barrier would have been between 2 and

3 yards ( - 3 yds) from the fence itself.     I made my way to the

barrier without too much difficulty and upon reaching it I put my left

leg up onto the barrier and pushed myself up onto it with my other leg.

I was able to stand on the barrier and 'spring' off it towards the

fence.   I really made a determined effort to reach the fence although

I fell short and I must have landed on the crowd infront of the fence.

Just out of instinct I kicked out and jumped up off the people below

me and I took hold of the top of the fence.     I was able to pjull

myself straight over the fence and I dropped down on the opposite

side. Once on the track on the pitch side of the fence I sat down to

compose myself, I only really then saw exactly what was happening.

People were lying on the pitch and were being given first aid.        I

noticed that by this time the match had been called off and the

players had left the pitch.

I sat for a couple of minutes and then decided to look for my mate,

         I spent another couple of minutes walking through what was

by now hundreds of people massed together on the pitch infront of the

West Stand.   I couldn't find        so I went to the gate which is

built into the boundary fencing in pen 3.     The gate was open and
police officers were standing next to it on the track.    The pen itself

was by this time quite empty except for pockets of people still

standing inside.   I then saw that behind the gate and lying for quite

sane distance either side of the gate on the terrace were the bodies

of numerous people.    They were all positioned at the front of the

terrace and behind the fencing.    The bodies were lying on top of each

other. As I looked through the gate I could see in excess of a dozen

bodies lying together.I waited at the gate and police officers just

inside the pen began to carry bodies to the gate.    Standing next to me

was a lad with black curly hair which was shoulder length.     He was in

his early twenties and was of slim build.    I can't recall anything

else about him other than he was wearing a blue jumper.    Together with

this Lad I began to take from these Police Officers bodies which we

carried from the gate and onto the playing area.    I hadn't

received any instructions to do this, it just seemed the thing to do

at the time, I gave it no thought at all.

The first of these bodies was picked up from the terrace at the back

of the gate, it was a white male, early thirties, he was of average

build and possibly 5'8" or 5'10" tall.    He had light brown hair which

was cut short into his neck although quite long on top.    He had quite

a thick moustache which was trimmed to the comers of his lips.        I

don't recall this man being facially discoloured as I'd seen others

although as we carried him out through the gate he was motionless and

limp, I don't think any of the people we carried out were alive.          I

don't remember what this man was wearing.    We laid him on the playing

surface adjacent to the gate in pen 3 and about 10 yards (10yds) in

from the touch line.

We returned to the gate and met four Officers waiting at the gate with

a middle aged man.     As before me and this dark haired lad took hold of



                                                                              1739
                                                                          10

him, I didn't see where this man had been taken from in the terrace.

We took hold of an arm each and we were then joined by two other

Police Officers who held his legs.    Again the man was motionless and

limp.   We carried him to the same place about 10 yards (10yds) in from

the touch line pud we laid him next to the first man.

I would describe him as being mid to late fifties, average build, 5'8"

to 5'9" tall, light skinned, he had collar length grey hair

which was thinning on top.   I noticed that this mans face was bright

blue as if he had been deprived of oxygen.     I can't remember every

detail of what he was wearing but I do recall he had a light brown

overcoat on, possibly three quarter in length.

We then returned to the gate and the same four officers met us with a

young woman.   I don't know where they had collected her body from.      Me

and the dark haired lad had an arm each to carry her and one Police

Officer had both her legs.   We carried her passed the 2 men we had

already taken onto the pitch and we laid her perhaps 8 or 10 yards

(8 or 10 yds) further into the playing area from the touch line.

I would describe this woman as being in her late teens, fair skinned

of slim build and about 5'2" to 5'4" tall.     She had dark brown curly

hair which was quite long and hung past her shoulders.     I didn't

notice any blue colouration to her skin although she was motionless

and limp.   I can't recall what she was wearing.

We returned to the gate again although when we got there we were told

that everyone had been brought out.      I looked into the pen and it was

quite empty apart from a few people walking around inside.      I then

continued to look for        although without success.

The pitch was crowded with people at this time, it must have been

about 3.40pm (1540).    I couldn't see         anywhere so I assisted seme

people who were struggling to carry someone on a hoarding. The body
                                                                                  11

       on the hoarding was that of a young girl although I couldn't see her

        face because her head was covered over.   We carried her body across

       the field and around the back of one of the stands to a gymnasium.

        Inside the gym there were numerous bodies lying on the floor and we

       laid this girl at the end of a row of bodies.    This girl had long

       dark brown hair and thats about all I can recall of her.

        I returned to the pitch briefly before leaving through the gate in the

       fencing where I had collected the bodies. I walked through the

       pen and back along the tunnel below the West Stand.    There were very

        few people about at this time and I saw no one at the rear of the

       stand. I made my way back to where we had left the car and I there saw

             who was fit and well.    We returned hone later that evening.

        I did not suffer any injury as a result of the events at Hillsborough

       Football Ground although I was badly shaken.

       The view I have of how the disaster was handled was that everyone did

       what they could and I have no criticism of anyone.    No matter what led

       to the deaths no one could have forseen it and with this in mind I

       think that people coped very well.

        I would be willing to give evidence at any subsequent hearing.



                                                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:     310589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:      DC]




                                                                                       1 741
                                                                           STATION



•
NAME:


ADDRESS:
                         LIVERPOOL,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 23

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of Oil pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 090589                                                              (SIGNED)



           I am a single man residing at the above address with one friend.        I

           graduated with a Honours Degree in Law, at

                              I am a football fan and support Liverpool football

           club, where I have a season ticket for the 'Kop End'. I have attended

           every game that Liverpool have played in the present, 1988-89 (000088

            - 000089), season and would guess that over the last 7 or 8 years I

           have been to about 90      percent of the games that Liverpool have

           played.   This includes Hone, Away, Friendlies and matches abroad, a

           couple of times. On the 15th April 1989 (150489) I went to the F.A.

           Cup semi final at Hillsborough.      I had purchased my ticket through

           the allocation for season ticket holders as soon as they went on sales

           at Anfield.   I paid    6 for a standing ticket at the Leppings Lane end.

           I travelled to Sheffield with four friends. (1) _______________ of



           (2)           Df                             Liverpool

           (3)           of                             Cheshire.

           (4)                of                         Liverpool.

                     drove us in his (and his brother's) father's Vauxhall Estate




                                                                                       1742
car.

We left Liverpool at about 10.30am (1030) on Saturday 15th April 1989

(150489) and travelled via the M62 and Ml (South). We stopped on the

M62 at a Service area to use the toilets and f     o    r    w   h   o

suffers from travel sickness.

Some roadworks slowed us down and at one point I can remember being

stationary on the motorway.     Although we were definitely delayed I

wouldn't say that we were unduly concerned, because we knew the way

and we had set off pretty early.

We arrived in Sheffield at about 1.15pm (1315) and went to the Fox

Public House, Foxhill Lane, which was about 100 yards (yds) from where

we parked in a residential side road.     I had noticed that all the

Public Houses on the main road from the motorway were closed.            However

I had been to the Fox in 1988 (000088) and knew where it was.

Before we got the Fox, I had consumed one can of beer and

              had consumed 2 cans of lager.   None of the others had

drunk anything on the journey as far as I am aware.

As we came off the Ml    I saw a Mini bus pulled up on the side of the

road.    There were police officers with the mini bus       and they were

pouring cans of drink    down the drain on the side of the road in a

little layby.    There was a slight traffic hold up at this location but

it cleared quite quickly.

When we got into the Fox there were 50 or 60 people, mostly Liverpool

supporters drinking. We sat out on the car park and had 2 pints

only had Shandy and           didn't have anything. Of the people around

the pub there were family groups and a wide age range, people were

eating chips and using the shop® nearby.      Some football songs were

being sung in and around the pub but I wouldn't say that anyone was

rowdy.    There were some locals about and no-one seemed to be offended
_________                                                                  3


or upset.   It was a generally happy atmosphere.    I didn't see anyone

who was drunk, although     a couple of the crowd were merry though

definitely not aggressive.

We left the Fox at about 2.20pm (1420) and walked to the ground, it

took us about 10 minutes.    Once we got onto the main road there were

several groups of 2,3 or 4 uniformed police officers, there was no

need directions as everybody seemed to know which way to go. Between

the Fox and the ground,     I didn't notice anyone with any alcoholic

drink.   There was no disorder or obvious drunkeness.

When we arrived at the area outside the turnstiles in Leppings Lane,

there was a mass of people, it was between 2.30 (1430) and 2.35pm

(1435) and I realised that we would have difficulty getting in the

ground for 3pm (1500).    I didn't really pay that much attention to the

turnstiles for the seated areas and concentrated on getting in

position for the end block of turnstiles which I knew was for the

terraced areas.   There wasn't any queue and we all joined the edge of

the mass of people, we were very quickly split up.

I can remember seeing a mounted policeman by the outer gates.     He was

trying to do the best he could to control the crowd that were heading

for the terrace turnstiles, but he was virtually helpless because he

was on his own.     I was aware of another 2 mounted policemen just a

little further away, but I couldn't say what they were doing.     There

were also seme police officers in the approach road, with possibly a

couple standing outside a little shop but as far as I am aware there

were none in the immediate vicinity of the turnstiles, other than the

mounted officers.

I did not see any club stewards or other officials outside the

turnstiles.

I started off towards the right hand side of the mass of people and
gradually moved forward, obviously people were getting through the

turnstiles but it was nowhere near a rate quick enough to accommodate

the crowd that was there or even ease the discomfort and pain that

seme people were in.    There were nowhere near enough turnstiles for

such a large crowd and the pressure might have been eased by making

use of the turnstiles set aside for seated fans.

I was having inmense difficulty in getting near to the turnstiles and

as I got nearer the crush worse.     In fact its the worst situation that

I have ever been in, so much so that I was breathing heavily.

As well as moving forward albeit very slowly I was also being moved in

voluntarily to my left.    About half way I came across two girls, I'd

say they would be about 18 years old.    They had Liverpool scarves.

One had a denim jacket on, as far as I can recall she seemed to be in

control of herself, as much as any one could be.      However the other

one was in a bad way.     Her head was tilted backwards and it seemed to

be loose.   She was crying and squealing with pain.     I put my arms

either side of her from behind to try and shield her from some of the

force of the crowd.

I suggested to her that we could pass her back over peoples heads, to

get her out but she said "It'll be worth it to see Liverpool get to

Wembley".

She was getting worse and a minute or so later she seemed to be

foaming at the mouth, and was loosing control of her faculties.         At

this point I got quite agitated and started shouting and swearing at

people to move back and to tell the others further back to ease off

the pushing.

Another couple of men around me began to shout with me for the people

in front to make way and let her through to the turnstiles.      Although

she was only 3 or 4 yards (yds) away from the turnstiles in the left



                                                                             1745
hand c o m e r it still took a little vdiile but she was assisted forward

and through the turnstile.     Her friend went with her.   I'm not sure

whether I saw her again after this.     It was evident to me that if she

hadn't got out then, she would have been in grave difficulty.

I continued in the crush and I was aware of a great crush against the

large gates to my left.     I ended up right up against the wall and I

was very scared of being crushed against the wall.     I was eventually

pushed into the c o m e r by the wall and the start of the turnstiles but

managed to dip my shoulder and get out and then through the end

turnstile on the left.

Having got into the ground I felt relieved to have got out of the

crush.     I was winded and excitable, I'm pretty certain that a

policeman frisked me.     I remember saying to a policeman, probably the

same one that he had got to open the gates, before someone dies

outside.    He pointed to the gates on the far right and told me that it

had just been opened.

I remember seeing a flow of people caning through the large gates to

the right of the turnstiles.     It was not a surge there were quite a

lot of people, but they were filing through.     There was plenty of

room on the concourse and I stood talking to a friend from the Kop.

I only know him as          and he comes from Edinburgh.

The gate to the right was the only one I saw open.     I didn't see who

opened it.     I can recall seeing 3 or 4 police officers in the area of

the gate, although they probably were meant to be frisking people

coming through the turnstiles.     I don't remember seeing any stewards

or other officials in that area.

I did not see any other gates open before or after the turnstiles.        I

had t o m the stub off my ticket as I went through the turnstile and I

am certain that I handed it in.     However, I was left with two parts to
ray ticket, and have handed them to Inspector Smith of the West

Midlands Police.     Identification Reference

Having stood in the concourse area just inside the turnstiles for a

minute or so I met up with         and          I did not see anyone coming

over the walls.

I went to the toilet with          I don't know what happened to

While we were in the toilets we heard a roar.        I thought that it was

the kick off.        rushed off.    I came out of the toilet and couldn't

see    |or any of the others in the concourse area.        I assumed that he

had gone down the tunnel and went there myself. I took a couple of

steps down the tunnel and saw that it was packed on the terraces.

There were people massed at the end of the tunnel where it opened out

onto the terraces.

There were definitely no Police, Stewards or other officials in or

around the tunnel and no one was directing people to their match

viewing points.     I didn't see any signs directing me to ray match

viewing point but then I didn't need them because I know the ground.

I came out of the tunnel back onto the concourse area and started to

walk to the outside terrace area.        I knew that there were some steps

to the stand on the way and deliberately looked to see if there was

any way up.     There was a gate half open and a Steward was behind it

trying to check tickets.     About 4 or 5 young lads were trying to get

into the stand and I saw them      walk up.    I don't know if they should

have gone up but I just walked past the steward and up the stairs.

The steward wasn't paying attention to me, he was looking up at these

lads as I walked past.

When I got up in the stand everybody was all squashed up, it was more

than one person to a seat in some parts, I just asked a lad to move up

which he did and I sat on the end of a row.


                                                                               1747
                                                                          7


Between entering the ground and arriving in the stand I did not see

anyone with any alcohol, there was no disorder or other incidents.    It

was 2 or 3 minutes past 3 (1502 - 1503) when I sat down, and I watched

the game, people were still caning into the stand.

After a short while Beardsley hit the crossbar at the far end and

there was a roar from the crowd, the next thing I remember is seeing a

few lads caning over the fencing at first onto the edge of the pitch

then onto the pitch itself. At first I feared that they were trouble

makers but then saw them trying to draw the attention of the players

to something that was happening on the terraces.

The referee stopped the game and a few police came along the edge of

the pitch.   Meanwhile more people were trying to get out.   At first I

remember seeing Police Officers stopping more people getting out and

directing others back onto the terraces, there was a tannoy

announcement for people to get back onto the terraces.

There were 2 or 3 minutes of total confusion when the Police Officers

didn't know what to do and a few more people got onto the pitch.     Then

every body seemed to realise the   gravity of the situation.    A small

gate was opened in the fencing and people were having difficulty

getting through it.

The people on the pitch seemed to be milling round while all this was

going on a lad seemed to just run up the pitch with his arms up, he

 ran into the Forest penalty area before running back, he was

 eventually stopped by police which I personally felt relieved by.     It

 took a while for the extent of the tragedy to become apparent and in

 this time a group of 20 or so Liverpool supporters started to walk

 towards the Forest end, because the Forest fans hadn't realised what

 was going on and were taunting the Liverpool supporters.

 A line of Police formed up and prevented any confrontation.    Before
________                       H                                         8


during and after this the vast majority of people on the pitch were

trying to help in any way they could, if they were not injured

themselves.   Individual Police Officers were assisting in every way

that they could, but nothing seemed to be co-ordinated and no-one

seemed to be in charge.

It seaned to take along before medical assistance was at hand and

even then it was vastly inadequate, as supporters and police were

having to tend the injured and dying.   There didn't seem to be proper

communication before Kenny Dalgleish made a short statement over

the tannoy.

I believe that the side fencing, which divides up the terracing was

as much a cause of injury and death as the fencing at the front,

although there were obviously too few exits from the front fencing.

Major contributing factors, were omissions, by way of lack of adequate

and proper policing outside the turnstiles and lack of

direction and stewarding inside the ground.   There was obviously a

lack of communication between the police who opened the gates and

people who should have been there to direct people once they were

admitted.

I eventually left the ground at about 4.30pm (1630) of my own accord.

I had located                  but was still very concerned for my

other friends.   The total number of fatalities surprised me.

I would like to add a corrment on the subject of identity cards, no-one

can legislate for unexpected delays and at popular fixtures the police

will be faced with similar problems as existed outside the lappings

Lane turnstiles, When stewards are having to check the ID cards of

everyone entering the ground, as well as collecting entrance monies

and tickets. Finally I would like to say that the person who opened

the gate outside, or ordered it to be opened should not be blamed
        for this tragedy.



                                              SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:         J SMITH INS3553




                                                       1750
                                                                             STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                               LIVERPOOL,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 26

OCCUPATION:       UNEMPLOYED


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 260589                                                               (SIGNED)



           I am a single man and live at the above address with my parents.On

           Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I attended the FA Cup Semi Final

           match at Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield played between

           Liverpool & Nottingham Forest.      I am a Liverpool Supporter all my

           life and have been a regular attender at matches for many years, and

           mainly go to away games.

           I went to the match in a privately organised party travelling by mini

           bus to the match from Liverpool      the trip was organised by



           I don't know everyone that travelled in the party but on the mini bus

           were          |& his son,        they live in         they have already

           been seen by the Police, Gary JONES,                             |he died at

           the match,                                the others were friends of

           theirs.

           I cot my ticket from                        I paid   6 for it and it was for

           the Leppings Lane standing area.

           We left Liverpool at about 10.30 am (1030) and we travelled directly

           to Sheffield, we did not stop on the way.       We were slightly delayed




                                                                                          1751
by heavy traffic &      road works on the M62 motorway.   We arrived in

Sheffield at about 1 pm (1300).     We parked on the A616, about 1 mile

frcm the ground.      We all went for a drink and lunch at a pub, I can't

reirember its name.     People were obviously drinking alcohol but I saw

no drunkeness it was just high spirits.

We left the pub at about 2.15 pm (1415) & walked down to the ground.

Whilst walking down I received no directions or escort from the

Police.    I saw at no time any drunkeness violence or disorder.

I cot to the ground at about 2.30 pm. (1430).      When we got there it

was packed.   There were no queues, it was just a mass of people.

Nobody was trying to get it by pushing we just trying to get to the

turnstiles, but it was just a bottleneck.      The crowd despite this was

good   humoured, people were singing & chanting. It was bit confusing

at first to see which turnstiles to use, but I quickly figured out

which ones to use & made my way towards them. Our party had split up

by this time, and I was on my own.      There were four Police horses

there trying to control the crowd, but as time went on they became

agitated with the crushing & in fact I was butted in the head twice

by one of the horses.      People were beginning to get concerned with the

horses & trying to get away from them & that increased the crushing.

I tecame crushed up against the metal barrier to the right hand side

of the terracing turnstiles, this was at about 2.45 pm (1445). The

crushing    became unbearable with people pushing from my left to get to

the right hand side. People were screaming by now for the gates to be

opened to relieve the pressure.      I became crushed against the wall

next to the turnstiles, but I managed to squeeze into the turnstile

and handed my ticket. Other than the four Police horses I saw no other

Police or Steward directions outside the ground.

Whilst trying to get into the ground I saw others climbing onto



                                                                             1752
                    ___________                                           3


the wall above the turnstiles and obviously climbing into the ground.

Once in the turnstiles the mechanism that lets you through had jammed,

probably due to the mass of people pushing against it.    I in actual

fact had to climb over it to get in.

As I entered the ground I saw a PC standing next to the turnstile.

I started shouting at him to open the gate on the right of the

turnstiles as you come out of them.    The Officer said nothing to me,

he just stood there blank featured.

I vent back to the turnstile & helped a couple of people back over

the barriers there as they were getting crushed.

This was about 2.50 pm (1450).    I then saw the gates being unlocked &

opened by a Police Officer.   I turned to go into the ground & headed

towards the tunnel, as far as I was concerned it was the only way into the

terracing.

As I was in the tunnel I saw the terracing was already packed & I turned

to see if I could get back out, but I saw a large number of people coming

down behind me, although they weren't running it was just a mass of

people.

As I reached the bottom of the tunnel I went left.    I saw no Police

Officers or Stewards at any point in the tunnel either at the entrance

or at the end.

As I entered the terracing the flow of the crowd took me forward and

left.

Eventually I came across a barrier, but I managed to go round it, but

I was continually pushed forward.     The crushing was getting worse and

was becoming far worse than normal.     I thought the only way out was

towards the front, but I couldn't get there as I just came up against

a barrier of people & we stopped, but the pressure was continuing

 from behind.
I knew nothing of what was happening on the pitch.         I was just

concerned with my own safety.       Suddenly there was a massive surge from

behind.   I don't know what caused it, but I've heard since that it was

Peter BEARDESLEY hitting the bar.

This surge knocked the breath out of me there was no relief from it.

The only part of my body I could move were my eyes.            My hands were

agsinst my chest and a man in front of me had his elbow in my neck.

It was become very difficult to breath.        My body was being pushed one

way & my head was being pushed the other way.         By now I wasn't

breathing at all.       I began to feel my self becoming drowsy and

sleepy.   Other people were screaming to open the gates & let them

out.   I tried to but no sound would cone out.        I thought I was dying,

my eyes felt heavy & I remember thinking how tired I was, I thought

that I should stop struggling.

I knew a man next to me, his name is                       he lives in

          Liverpool Q     its on the co m e r o f __________

He has since told me that he managed to pull the elbow away from my

throat, although I didn't see that.        I remember then my head flopping

to the side and my face was pushed into this mans PVC coat & I then

becan to panic as I felt as if I was suffocating & I managed to

struggle my face away from his coat.

My body was still being pulled to the left & as I struggled my head

free I fell down onto the floor.        As I fell I was right by the side

railings into the next pen, the small one.         I was able to start

breathing again but people were standing all over me and I managed to

curl up into a ball.

The people were standing on me and using me as a springboard to jump

over this side fence.       I grabbed the leg of a man who was jumping over

& as he went up he pulled me up and I grabbed the railings & between
being pushed from behind and being pulled from above I was pulled over.

I sat down for a while I don't know how long and I saw the gate out

onto the pitch open, as I headed towards it I saw man impalled on the

side fence trying to get over, I helped then over.

I then saw a man standing on the co m e r of the front fencing and the

sice railings he was pulling people out and I instinctively jumped up

& joined him & helped him pull others out.

All I could see was a sea of hands all waving and asking to be pulled

out.   This was about 3.20 pm. (1520) I could see there were fans &

sore Police all along the fence at the front pulling people out, but

there only 6 or 7 police, lots of others were standing around, but

just didn't seem to know what to do or comprehend what was happening.

Whilst helping people out I began to go weak again & collapsed & fell

backwards.   I think it was a policeman that caught me, the next thing I

rerrember is being on the pitch being treated by a St Johns Ambulance man

& vranan.

Next to me was a man being give mouth to mouth & heart massage by

two police officers.   The man being treated was a white man about BO­

BS years, he had collar length gingery coloured hair, he had blue

eyes that turned grey, his face had gone blue & his body was white,

he was wearing canvas trousers which had been pulled down & his

shirt had been ripped off.   He had freckles all over.    We were lying

on the pitch just to the right of the goals as you look at them from

the pitch.This man appeared to revive, because he vomited & the officers

asked for a mouth piece from the St Johns man, he fumbled about for one

but I don't think he found one.     The officers continued to try & revive

him, but they lost him & he died.

I just lost my self control then with seeing this man die & seeing

others being pulled out obviously dead.      I walked round in a daze I



                                                                             1755
                                                                        6

couldn't speak & I was crying uncontrollably.    I was taken to the

side lines by the North Stand & sat down.

I remember an ambulance ccming past me, it almost ran over my foot.     I

rerrember seing a mate standing near me called

                  11 think he was in the North Stand & came down to

help.




My views on the whole incident are that it appeared so badly organised

in that the crowd weren't controlled outside the ground, although I

wasn't there last year, I have heard there was a cordon round the

ground controlling the flow of fans to the ground. That wasn't there

this year, everyone was allowed to crowd round the turnstiles.    The

people in the control room should have seen the crushing in the terracing

& should have been able to commmicate to the people outside the ground

whet was happening & have been able to control the flow into the

terracing & control the way the place was filled.

The escape routes that existed when trouble started were non existant.

I had to climb iron railings to escape from the crush, escape routes

should exist be it for crowd crushing or any other disaster.

Why were we penned in as that is an area used exclusively for away

supporters why do we need separated.   I thought that once down the

tunnel we would be able to fan out as at Anfield.

The emergency drill didn't seem to exist, all public places have



                                                                            1756
       emergency exits in case of fires or bomb scares, but they didn't exist

       at Hillsborough.

       The first aid provided wasn't sufficient, there wasn't enough basic

       equipment, although you don't expect a disaster like this, there were

       so few pieces of equipment like stretchers or mouth pieces.

       The fans needed more basic information to help evacuation, nobody knew

       whet was going on or what to do.   They needed to have loud

       hailers or use the scoreboard or a better PA system, no one was told

       anything.

       If we are penned in like animals then we deserve the rights given to

       animals in that they are allowed to walk round freely. I accept that

       fences are needed because of the idiot element at matches, but these

       fences need to be able to be safe & not prevent one thing & cause

       another.

       The vast majority of terracing fans like to stand behind the goals, so

       why at Hillsborough is there a fence right down the middle of that

       area & its only fed from one place the tunnel.

       All grounds in the future must ensure better & safer facilities, we

       pay every week & deserve to be treated like human beings.



                                                                     SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:               PS




                                                                                1757
                                                                             STATION



•
NAME:


ADDRESS:
                             |LIVERPOOL,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 34

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 006 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 121289                                                               (SIGNED)



           I reside at the above address with my family.

           I am a Liverpool Football Supporter and season ticket holder, and

           attended all home and away games.

           I attended the Semi Final Football Match at Hillsborough between

           Liverpool and Notts Forest on 15th April 1989 (150489).       I obtained a

           ticket for this game from Anfield and was for the Leppings Lane

           terrace and cost #6.

           I have been to Hillsborough Football Ground on a few occasions and

           attended the same game the previous season.       On this occasion I again

           had tickets for the Leppings Lane terrace but on entering the ground

           the tunnel which leads to the terrace had been closed by the Police

           who were directing supporters around each end of the stand because the

           terrace in the centre was full, at this time it was almost kick off.

           In 1989 (000089) the latest match I travelled to Sheffield in a car

           driven by                       [ who lives in                        but I

           don't know the house number, also in the car was ___________

                       and                 all these people have been interviewed by

           the Police.
                                                                             2


We left Liverpool at about 10.15 am (1015) and travelled to Sheffield

without any serious traffic delays arriving at about 12 md (1200).      We

went to the Blue Ball Public House where we had been to before.    We

all had a drink at this pub and then drove the car nearer to the

ground and parked near the Horse and Jockey Public House.    From here

it took us about ten minutes to walk to the ground. As we walked to

the ground I saw Police around directing traffic.     There were crowds

of people making their way to the ground but I did not see any trouble

there were several people asking for spare tickets.

We arrived at the Leppings Lane turnstiles at twenty to three (1440)

and the crowd was all pushing towards the turnstiles there was no

orderly queues.   I saw one mounted Police try and organise the queues,

he was a Liverpool Policeman and was shouting to the crowd to stop

pushing.   Another mounted Police man who started to follow the other

did not continue into the crowd but backed his horse out of the crowd

and because of this the other officer had no chance to organise the

crowd.

I had now lost touch with all my friends now because of the crowd

crush.

I had moved away to the side near to a barrier by the river.      I saw a

blue concertina gate open up to let a little lad in who was getting

crushed, the gate was then closed again.   After a few minutes the same

gate was opened again.   I did not see who opened the gate but I saw

stewards and Police stood near it.   On seeing the gate open I walked

towards it held up my ticket and walked through at this time there was

no rush.   On the inside I met a person who I see at away games.     I do

not know his name but he lives in Luton, we waited and after a short

time, I met the other four, from our car, they had all entered through

a turnstile.   At this point it was about five minutes to three (1455)
and on looking at the gate which I had come through I saw it was now

closed again.

We all entered the tunnel which leads to the terrace, it was busy but

not crowded and we were not pushed along.    On reaching the terrace it

was very crowded.   Because of the crowd I lost touch with my mates and

someone shouted that someone had fallen over.    I helped hold the crowd

back and the person got up.

I have marked two positions on a separate grid plan which I produce Ex

No (      ) Ref N o t h e s e   positions are marked as numbers (1) and

numbers (2).

I remember seeing the players on the field on entering the terrace and

the game was about to kick off.     Because of the crowd crush I decided

to push back and further across to my right in Pen three.    On reaching

this position I met                  and looking to my rear I saw my

brother         he held his hand up, It was very tight in this position

my arm were up across my chest and we were all jammed together.        I did

not have any trouble breathing.

The game was going on and I could see people climbing or trying to

climb the fence around the pitch.     I remember thinking what are they

doing now, they must be trying to stop the game I did not realise it

was so bad at the front.    I also remember Beardsley hitting the bar

and the crowd surging forward not long after this the crowd pressure

eased a little.

I could see Police on the fence around the pitch bending down the

spikes on top the fence so that people could get over.     I also saw

Police at the gate in this fence which was open.     The game had stopped

by now and the players had left the field.

We stood there for about five or ten minutes the crowd in front

cleared and we made our way down to the front of the terrace.     As I
ducked under a barrier I saw a young lad on the floor his face was

blue and his mouth and face was covered in sick he appeared to be

dead.   I would say this lad was about 25 yrs brown hair, I cannot

remember his clothing and few days later I saw pictures of the

deceased, in a newspaper but I did not recognise this lad as one of

them.   This lad was about half way down the terrace in Pen three and

near the dividing fence with pen two.     I also saw another lad who was

lying face down on the terrace near the first lad I described this lad

was wearing a leather coat, big build aged about 20-25 yrs.     This lad

appeared to move and I shouted to a Policeman who was on the terrace

but the Policeman just looked at me, I again shouted at him but he

didn't move, he could have been in shock.     I saw a lot of bodies all

on top of each other near to the fence.     I tried to pull one person up

but I could not move him.    A Policeman nearby told me to leave him and

they would sort it out.

I saw a man fran my work who shouted to me he was standing near the

fence between pen three and two.    The mans name is                  he

has since died of cancer.    He told me that a man standing there had

just lost his daughters, and that h e _______ had put his scarf over

one of the girls faces.     I remember a man standing near the girls, but

I do not look at the girls and could not describe them.     I asked

         if he was alright and he told me that he had crushed his ribs,

I asked him if he could get home and he told me that he was OK and

was travelling on the train.

Soon after this my brother         joined me and I made my way out of

the tunnel and my brother followed me.

Before I left the terrace I saw a lot of people on the pitch but I did

not go on the pitch at all.

I waited outside the tunnel and saw two people on the floor injured



                                                                            1761
                     _______________                                       5


and an ambulance arrived for them.     I saw a man arguing with a Police

Inspector, he was shouting it was his fault if some dies.

It was now about twenty to half past three (1520) (1530) and I made my

way back to our car and eventually all the car passengers arrived.     I

knocked on a door to ask if I could use the telephone to ring home,

the house holder told me to carry on and I rang my mum.

We made our way back to Liverpool and heard on our radio the total

which had died.   I got home to Liverpool about six oclock (1800).

I do not remember seeing a barrier broken in Pen three.

I was not injured and did not loose any property.

I am 5'10 tall, slim build, with dark shoulder length hair, with a

moustache.   I was wearing black and white trainers, blue jeans, black

V necked long sleeved jumper.

Tile organisation outside the ground was so different from the last

year, last year you had to show your ticket and join an orderly queue

near the turnstile this year there was none of this.     As I previously

stated last year there was a line of Police near to the entrance to

the tunnel not letting you go down because of the crowded terrace this

year there was no one there.    Police or Stewards.

It was when I was moving from position 1 on the grid to position 2

that was when Beardsley hit the bar and it was when I reached

position 2 that I saw people climbing the perimeter fence.
                                     SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC




                                              1763
                                                                          STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                                      CHESHIRE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 36

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 140589                                                             (SIGNED)



           I am a married man with four children and have lived at the above

           address for the past two years although I have lived in             all

           ny life.

           I am a lifelong Liverpool Football Club Supporter and attend a handful

           of matches at Anfield every year with my children, when I do

           go to Anfield I always sit.

           I purchased a #6 ticket for the terraced area of the Leppings

           Lane end of the Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield where this

           years semi final match was held.   I managed to get my ticket from my

           nephew                1                                           and two

           of his friends are season ticket holders at Anfield and got tickets

           that way, one of his friends was unable to attend the match so I

           brought the ticket off him at the face value of #6.

           On the morning of the game I travelled with           and his friends who

           I don't really know we travelled to Sheffield by coach which was

           organised by the Official Liverpool Suppporters Club at Deeside,

           Clywd, North Wales.   On the day two coaches went to Sheffield frcun

           Deeside and we left North Wales at about 11 am (1100).     As it was an
                                                                         2


Official supporters Club operation there was no alcohol allowed on

either of the coaches and everyone travelling was in possession of a

ticket for the match.

I cannot remember the route which the coach took but I do recall that

about halfway to Sheffield we experienced about a thirty minute

delay as the three lane motorway on which we were travelling was

reduced to two , this resulted in the delay as obviously there was a

great volume of traffic travelling towards the match.   The delay was

such that we were not able to stop off for any refreshment or toilet

break as has been planned.

As I had said there was no alcohol on our coach and when we got off

the motorway just outside Sheffield the coach was stopped by the

Police and two Officers got onto the coach and checked for alcohol and

made sure that everybody had tickets, the Officers were friendly and

professional and I thought that the organisation at this point was

very good.   I noticed that a lot of the Public houses en route to the

area of the ground were shut and I did not observe any drunkness.

The coach parked up on the main coach park which was on a hill about

ten minutes walk from the ground at about ten past to quarter past

two (1410 - 1415). Although we received no directions to the ground

from Police Officers there were plenty about if needed, there was a

steady stream of people going to the ground from the coach park so we

tagged along with them, the crowd at this time was in very good

spirits with plenty of singing and good humour, I saw no disorder or

drunkeness I can't recall seeing too many Police Officers in the

imnediate area of the ground and as I got my first view of the

turnstiles at the Leppings Lane end of the ground I thought 'where do

I go' the reason being there was just one disorganised mass of people

trying to get into the ground, there were no queues at this stage the
time being about two thirty (1430).

As I got outside the blue wrought iron gates a couple of mounted

Police Officers were trying to organise the people on the pavement as

it was obvious to me that there was a problem in the irrmediate

turnstile area.   However, due to the large influx of people this

was failing and the crowd was building up even more.

I got past the mounted officer into the irrmediate area in front of the

turnstiles at about twenty five to three (1435), I had never

experienced anything like the crush there, I had no control over where

I was going being carried along by the crowd.    Again I saw very few

Police Officers in the area only recalling three mounted officers who

at this point had lost control and were obviously getting concerned

for their own safety as well as the crowds.     At this point there was

no organisation and it was very much every man for himself, the

officers on the horses were trying to organise but may have been

causing more havoc it was obviously too late to start organising the

crowd there it should have been done far earlier.

The crush was getting too much for me and           so we managed to move

through the crowd to the side, infact we went and stood by a wire

fence at the side of the river, the crush was still bad at this point

and I even contemplated climbing the fence for safety.     At this time I

saw one mounted officer move into the crowd and shut one of the

wrought iron gates.   I felt that this would ease the situation but

due to the mass of people within a few minutes the gate was open and

the crush starting again.

As I stated earlier the mood of the crowd was very good, but as time

went on the crowd started to turn a bit hostile I saw someone in the

crowd throw a beer can at a Police Officer, I thought at this stage

that the crowd was getting out of order, people were shouting for the
large blue gate to the side of the turnstiles, to be opened, at about

twenty to three (1440) it was actually opened or forced open and about

30-40 people ran in, a mounted officer saw this and shut the gate

to.   From where I was I could see about 10-20 teenagers climbing over

a wall above the turnstiles.

At about ten minutes to three (1450) the blue gate to the side of the

turnstiles was opened fully by a Police Officer, I was standing by the

gate and walked through followed by a large number of people, the

procession through the gate was orderly, no one running or pushing, I

left the main flow of people to go to the toilets which were to the

left of the tunnel entrance.

I came out of the toilets and looked for any other entrances to the

terraced areas as it was obvious to me that the central area would be

very full, I could see no signs or directions and thought that the

only entrance to the terracing was through the tunnel.    I thought that

at the other end we would be able to spread out to the side areas, if

I had known that that was not possible I wouldn't have gone along the

tunnel.

I j o i n e d a n d   together we entered the tunnel, the tunnel was

full of people but everyone was moving along quite briskley, I went

down the tunnel on the left hand side right against the left hand

wall, I noticed that there was a steady trickle of people, one line

fighting to get out of the tunnel against the wall.

As I got out of the tunnel I could see that the terracing was very

full, I managed to move about 2 yards (2 yds) to the left and then the

crush was on, the people were still caning up the tunnel and the crowd

was being slowly compressed.    I tried to turn round to get my back

against the wall but due to the massive crowd I couldn't turn round

due to the force from the back I was forced forward,          told me
that there was a barrier caning up to avoid being crushed against the

barrier.   I went down to go underneath it, my head got temporarily

crushed against the top bar of it, at this point nobody could have

helped or even seen me, I managed to free my head and went underneath

unfortunately my left arm got trapped against the leg of the barrier,

I was on the floor for what appeared to be about two minutes, I was

actually lying on my back and was being forced forward by the weight

of the crowd, my side and arm were very painful but I managed to put

my arms in the air and someone actually pulled me to my feet at this

point I was feeling quite exhausted.     I had even lost my shoes, my

glasses my watch and scarf, I was very concerned for my life. The

crush was terrible, unbearable I had no control over where I was going,

I was aware of two crowd surges during which I lost my breath twice.

I have been shown a grid map of the Leppings Lane end by PC             of

the West Midlands Police on which I have marked my entry point as (1)

and my final resting point prior to getting out as (2), I produce this

as e x h i b i t ( e x h   ref     ).

I was forced further and further forward I was aware that I was

standing on people but could not do anything about it, the teams were

out the pitch, people were shouting to the Police to open the gates or

cut the fences down, the Police I don't think realised what was

happening and were telling people to get back.

The teams kicked off and I was very frightened I had lost a lot of

strenth and realised I couldn't survive much later, I was aware that

the Police had opened a small gate at the front of the terracing

everybody fought to get towards it as it was the only apparent way out

making the situation even worse.     We stayed like that for a good ten

minutes the crushes were getting worse I managed after a time to get

my arms above my shoulders.      I was trying to get up to in effect walk
over people to get out I didn't want to but it was every man for

himself. Suddenly at about 3.15pm (1515) almost unbelievably I saw a

gap open in the crowd to my left I thought that was my way out, I

hung about momentarily to make sure          was alright, I then noticed

a man about 45 years old, wearing a white shirt lying on the floor, he

was a bit podgy thats all I can remember he was bleeding from his ears

and appeared totally lifeless I have marked the approximate location

of this body on the grid map as (3).

On seeing that        was Okay I went to the side fence and was helped

by a Liverpool fan and a Policeman to get over as I was getting over I

saw how sparsley populated the side area was and couldn't beleieve

it.   I went straight onto the pitch and started to recover, I was

totally exhausted and couldn't offer any assistance to anyone, the

game was stopped a long time by this point.

I couldn't understand why so many Policeman were just standing about,

there was obviously a breakdown in communications as they didn't seem

to realise what was happening, unfortunately again the Police showed

little if any organisation and I didn't see any leadership shown by

any senior Police Officer.

I heard no loudspeaker announcements and decided to leave the ground

at about 3.30pm (1530) by a gate at the far end of the ground.

I feel that the crowd should have been organised away from the

turnstiles not left to what in a small area outside them.    At 2.30

(1430) it must of been evident that there was a severe problem it

should have been   evident that there were too many people in the

Centre pens and the tunnel should have been blocked off with

directions to the side terracing.     I feel that the kick off should

have been delayed, this would have lessened the urge to get quickly

onto the terraces and eased the crushing.     The organisation at the
                                                                               7


       ground for the disaster was terrible, if the Police had had access to

       wire cutters people could have got out easier and more quickly, the

       tannoy system was to me non existent and should be inproved.   There

       appeared a lack of conmunication between the Police, the large numbers

       apparently doing nothing served to fuel the crowds anger.



       Further to the above I stated that I was injured this consisted of

       bruising and tenderness to my chest, ribs and legs,




                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

          TIME:           DATE:   140589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                          STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                        WIRRAL, MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 27

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 000 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 130589                                                             (SIGNED)



           My name is                              I am a single man and I live at

           the above address with my parents.   I am a lifelong Liverpool

           supporter and a season ticket holder.    About 2 weeks before the semi­

           final at Hillsborough a friend collected my ticket from Anfield

           Football Ground, the usual arrangement made via the season ticket.        I

           paid #6.00 for a ticket in Leppings Lane standing terrace.    Four car

           loads of friends had made their way up to Sheffield.    I travelled up

           to Huddersfield on the Friday night with

           of                                      from           We went by car in

           my Austin Maestro. In another car, leaving the same day as myself were



           we met up with the other 2 car loads about half an hour from the

           ground on Saturday.   Our group stayed at friends of                  m

           Huddersfield.   Saturday morning we set off to meet the others but we

           took a wrong road and ended up by the ground at about 12.00.     We were

           amazed at the amount of people that were already in the Leppings Lane

           and down the street if it was like that then what was it going to be

           like at 3.00pm. (1500)   The crowd was very orderly but very large for 3
                                                                           2


hours before kick off.    There was a lot of police about especially

away from the ground, on the routes to the ground, not specifically

around the ground.   It took us at least another half an hour to get

back to the pub, 10 miles outside Huddersfield.    The reason we met

there was because it was a nice country pub and we'd been there last

year.   We noticed on travelling away from the ground that the incoming

traffic was building up a lot, that was just after 12.(1200)      We got

to the pub about 12.45pm, (1245) I had about 4 pints of Bitter and I

had a meal.   The pub was full of Liverpool supporters, almost exactly

the same bunch of people that were in there last year.   We left the

pub at about 2.10pm( 1410) and made our way back to the ground.     We

took the wrong road again and we came in at an angle, from the other

side of town, so the traffic wasn't that intense arriving in the town

at about 2.35(1435) - 2.40pn. (1440)   We couldn't see the ground from

the side we came in but we did see a lot of notices saying Toilets

and Refreshments, 5 minutes walk to the ground.    We parked the car

about 15 minutes run from the ground, in a school playground.

Somebody was organising us into the playground, not the police or

wardens they didn't charge us.    The one thing that struck me as we

went along there were a hell of a lot of people going down that road

and the police were telling us not to run. This must have been about

2.50pm( 1450).   I couldn't appreciate how many police were about now on

the way to the ground, because of the number of people about it

didn't register at all.    Everything was normal, people were just keen

to get in for the kick off.    We got outside the main entrance to the

ground, roughly about 2.50(1450) - 2.55pn(1455) it was just a mass no

organisation whatsoever. There seemed to be a lot of police massed

around the far terrace turnstiles by the bridge on the river but there

seemed no attempt to get people into queues or split the mass up.
___________                                                                 3


There were so many people there, there was no control whatsoever

they'd lost it, thats the feeling I'd got.    I had ran ahead of the

others because I really wanted to get in.    A couple of mounted

officers were in the crowd outside the main gates, I got right up to

the far side main gate, and it was just ajar and there was one

policeman on the gate, he had hold of the gate and it was his

responsibility to try and keep people from getting through.     Pressure

on the gate was enormous I don't know how he did it.     If the other

officers who were standing just a few yards away had come across they

could have formed a filter, so the fans would have had to go through

them, but that poor man was opening and closing it by himself.       He was

only small and glasses come to mind, I would not know him again.      When

the gate was ajar I just forced my way through into the terrace

turnstile section.    There was a crush in this space, it was very very

tight.     There was a mounted officer halfway up in this crush, which

was causing problems because people were being pushed into the sides

and the turnstiles because they didn't want to be stood on by the

horse, really there was no room for this horse, there was just nowhere

to go and the officer couldn't really control anything.     As I got into

a turnstile the steward took my ticket off me and told me to hurry on

through.     He took all of the ticket, I never had the stub back.    The

turnstile was clicking people through at this point.     In the crush

there were quite a lot of people in distress I had been in the crush

quite a few minutes and there was a wall between this area and the

West Stand. Police were standing on this wall and they were lifting

people up, there was a lot of screaming and shouting.     I was about 5

or 6 people deep, away frcm the turnstile.     I actually saw a policeman

open a metal concertina gate in the side of the wall.     He actually

opened the gate with a key.     The whole pressure was just released then
___________                                                                4


as soon as the gate opened people flooded through and the place just

cleared around me. I thought I'm so close to the turnstile I may as

well stay and get in that way, which I did. I thought it was a good

idea to open this gate, because at the time a lot of people were in

distress, I thought it was a good idea.   I feel sorry for that man.

Obviously I go to all the big games, I'm used to being crushed and

treated like cattle, I was very uncomfortable but I thought it wasn't

out of the ordinary, but its the first time I've experienced a gate

being opened to release the pressure. I knew the game would have

started by now and my mind was just to get into the ground.    I

remember telling Dad not to go behind the goal for a spec, but to the

sides by the c o m e r goal, because people who had been last year in the

pens said it had been uncomfortable and it was murder by the goal.

When friends of mine heard this years semi-final was to be held at

Hillsborough again they hoped they didn't get behind the goal because

of the conditions they experienced last year.    The crowds in the

courtyard area weren't too bad.    People were milling about waiting for

friends to come through the turnstiles I didn't notice any police or

stewards in this area. I followed the people in front and went to the

tunnel, there were no police or stewards at the entrance or in the

tunnel. I had free passage down the tunnel.     Just at the back of the

pens there were a mass of people caning back into the tunnel, people

were trying to jockey their way into the standing area.    There was no

hooligan element, no scuffling and pushing others out of the way.      I

thought if there were queues of people by the tunnel trying to get

into the pens with a few thousand people still outside waiting to get

in what was it going to be like.    I wriggled through the crowd and got

to the back of the terracing and turned left into Pen 4 and it was as

tight as could be.   The first thing I saw was Alan Hansen heading the
___________                                                              5


ball, and as I looked down into the pitch I could see people climbing

the front perimeter fencing and I saw policemen physically push them

back down into the pens.   People were still caning in through the

tunnel, it was an impossibility for people to cram into that pen, but

people obviously wanted to get in there.    I saw about 4 minutes of

football. My thoughts were to get away from behind the goal, get to

the sides, but there was nowhere to move.   People in front were saying

'Push back, push back' and people behind were saying there was nowhere

to go.   Somehow, I forced my way down a little further, then people

started screaming, there were people on the floor and I was standing

on somebody.   I didn't see any barrier break in that pen, I wasn't

near one.   There was no space, it was as tight as you could get.

Normally if a crowd sways forward it comes back but here there was no

movement at all.   It was a crush from every single direction.   I

noticed a lot of people were in distress they were saying people were

on the floor, people were fainting there was screaming going on,

calling for people to push back, shouting at the Police to do

something, they just stood there.   It was mayhem, it was panic then

because something terrible had happened.    People were climbing over

the front fencing, the first influx of people over the front fencing

was against the the police's wishes, but that did change, a lot

of people were getting over.   I saw a fan run onto the pitch and go up

to Alan HANSON you could see he was in distress, he was pointing at

the pens, obviously asking for the game to be stopped.    The game was

stopped by this time.   People in the pens were still stumbling over

people on the floor, but they couldn't help it because there was

nowhere to put your feet. Someone said there was an old man on the

floor he was by me in his sixties, I got him up by his shoulders, but

he was completely limp, his eyes were closed, I was sort of hugging
                      |               |   '                               '6


him for about 5 or 10 minutes, slapping his face, it didn't get a

reaction. People around me were starting to shout that people were

dead around us.    There was so much happening at this time its

difficult to put them into order and timing.    I remember there were a

lot of people on the pitch at this time and I could see one man

getting his heart pumped, and that's when it really registered that

something awful had happened.

It had obviously got to a saturation point in those pens, people were

still coming through the tunnel into the pens, there was no way

forward for the people at the front of these pens.    Normally there is

room for the people to sway forwards and backwards, but not here.

There was no one at the mouth of that tunnel, to say thats enough no

more, I could see that the side pens were more comfortable you could

see the barriers, so there was a lot of roan left in them, but no one

was able to get into there.     The communication from getting in from

the turnstiles to the terraces was nil, I think this was a major cause

of people dying that day.     I can't remember what I did with that old

gentleman because through the crush and the heat I blacked out a

couple of times.    I wasn't in any great pain. I noticed a lot of

people standing around me, they seemed to be in a sleep, some of them

had completely white faces, fans just in front of me were trying to

rip the fencing down, the Police tried to stop them but then realised

that people were hurt, fans pushed the police and then the police

helped the fans rip the fencing down and help people out.     But I

remember the Police did at first try to stop the fans ripping the

fence down. A lot of them stood there in disbelief and didn't react to

the situation at all.

People on the pitch were trying to do first-aid on bodies on the

pitch.   Lots of fans doing the kiss of life, helping people, seme
___________                                                               7


police were reviving people, others appeared to do nothing, or not

know how to do it I would say the medical facilities were next to nil.

I saw fans rip the hoardings down and use them to carry fans.     I

recall in the first instance a St Johns stretcher being used but

otherwise all the fans were put on the hoardings.    One ambulance

came across the pitch.   There were stacks of firemen they went

straight into the fencing, they seemed to respond very well to

everything from what I saw. I saw jumpers and T-shirts being placed

over the heads of people on the pitch I was in shock, I couldn't

believe what had happened.    The fans were marvellous in everything

they did.    Those allegations in the press about what fans did

afterwards was 110% LIES, everyone was in such a physical and

emotional state that was the last thing anyone would have     done. In

fact the crime rate has dropped in Merseyside since this.

By now, the fencing had been ripped apart and bodies werebeing put on

the pitch.    I turned around and saw people being pulled up into the

West Stand and I told myself that's where I'd go to get out, so I

weaved my way between people and got to the back c o m e r of the pen.

I lowered myself onto the back stanchion held my arm out, and someone

pulled me up into the stand.    From there I could see everything going

on. I could see the firemen in Pen 3 helping people. I was worried

about my friends and my Dad.    I was like an on looker then as the

scenes below me didn't sink in I knew when I was in the terracing I

knew there were dead people around me.    I said to people in the stand

that about 15 people must be dead down there.    I recall Kenny DAICLISH

make an announcement. There was nothing during the trouble only

after.   I stayed about half an hour there and left after they

announced the game was abandoned. I just haven't got a clue about

the time. I later saw the elderly man I helped on the pitch later and
______________ I                                                              8


he was alive, that was a relief to me.       He was white male, 60's, grey

hair, balding on top, he wore a coat, which I thought must have been

hot for him.       I probably would recognise him if I saw him again.

Normally, at big games you got hundreds of people outside the ground

asking for tickets I was only aware of a few asking for spares at this

game.I would like to say, I've hardly missed any games for the past 16

or 17 years with Liverpool but the only games where I've felt

uncomfortable or threatened due to large crowds in a given section,

have been at FA Cup Semi Finals.       In similar enclosures to the

Leppings Lane eg White Hart Lane, 2 years before, same conditions

behind the goal, where there were more people than space.         That size

and type of terracing, through my experience does cause problems

unlike the large area of Liverpool kop.       Old Trafford as an example in

away games, if you go by train or coach it just becomes routine that

you arrive at 2.30pm( 1430). The Policing is very strong and everyone

is escorted to the ground.

There just was any communication in sending people to where there was

room to stand.       In fact, fans outside were asking the Police if the

game could be delayed.       There was hardly anyone going through the

North and West Stand turnstiles. In fact turnstile A was totally

empty.     I couldn't say if they were open or closed. I would say

the Police outside approaching the turnstile, they didn't seem to

react to the people around them.       They didn't seem to stop

people further up the road to try and channel people in a better way.

There was no supervision once inside the courtyard and I

would say that that was the major factor for the tragedy. I reckon the

main reason the crush occurred in the middle sections was because

there was no control between the turnstiles and getting into the Pens.

 I reckon if that side gate had not been opened at that time there
___________                                                                9


would have been more casualties outside.   My thoughts at the time was

that I was relieved some one had taken the responsibility to relieve

the pressure on the outside crowds.   Police at the control

point must have been able to see on their video screens that from at

least 2.20pm(1420), the two middle pens were getting overcrowded.        Why

wasn't there any communication to stop people getting into that tiny

area?   I think thats one of the questions that should be asked.     I

think also regarding the allocation of the tickets, for semi finals

and finals there will always be more demand than can be supplied with

Liverpool averaging 39,000 a home game it is obvious that many true

supporters who would like to attend the game are going to miss out.

The supporters have never been asked their opinion, its only now

they've been asked, its always the players, the officials, the FA who

sit round a desk and make the decisions for the every day fan.

The people in power do not realise or appreciate through experience of

standing on the terracing of how the fan feels and what the fans wants.

For supporters like myself an FA Cup Semi Final or Final is one of

the highlights of the season, if not a part of your life, so you can

understand how supporters feel if they do not get a chance to be

present at an important game such as this when they attend every other

normal match.   We should take advantage from this now and be consulted

as to our views and opinions at club level, at police level andboard

level, because it is a    game for the fans and the game needs the

supporters if it is to carry on.

In hindsight the other occasion which I felt was close to disaster was

the FA Cup Final between Liverpool and Everton when a major crush

occurred one of the turnstiles between 2.30 and 3.00pm (1430 - 1500).

This was caused by the   everyday supporter who pay their money weekin

week out trying to see   probably the biggest game of their life. A
                                                       ■'                 10

mixture of supporters with and without tickets tried to enter the

turnstile which caused a crush, similar to the events at Leppings

Lane.   Again it is because of the distribution of tickets, it is

ridiculous that a team such as Liverpool should only receive 25,000

tickets when the demand is nearly 50,000 and there are people who have

probably never seen a game all season or ever, that are in the ground

watching the game in which they do not really care who wins or loses.

Whereas there are people outside whose life is watching the team they

support and love are frustrated and rightly so because they cannot and

do not have the muscle to purchase a ticket at a sensible price.

Because of the demand for semi final and final being so great, we need

to bring ticket allocations up to a realistic level to club

distribution; as ticket allocations have probably not changed for 50

years or more but transportation etc, has.   The game needs to move

with the times.

Last year when I attended the semi final at Hillsborough I stood in

the North Stand.   The crowds were comparable; I didn't suffer any

problems getting my view last year, but I know from friends in the

pens that it had been very bad there last year.   As soon as we heard

it was at Hillsborough for 1989(000089) a lot of people reacted with

oh no, I don't want to spend another 90 minutes in Leppings Lane.     I

can't give comparisons to Policing standards for last year as I

experienced no trouble, but if I had of been in the leppings Lane end

last year I would probably give a different answer.




        The fellow who died was Ray CHAPMAN I've been back to Anfield 5
       ______________        I_________________ I                                 11



       times and that helped, I felt at ease at Anfield, even though it

       was sad.    I couldn't keep away from the place.   Afterwards, Liverpool

       reacted impeccably to the situation and the pressures that the FA put

       on Liverpool EC and the bereaved was a disgrace.     Just to sum up, I

       thought the problems were initially due to ticket allocation and the

       supervision between turnstiles and the tunnel in question.     The rest,

       I don't think anybody could have envisaged the disaster which occurred

       it is something which I think would have happened in time, through the

       experience of attending big games year by year.     The view and the

       feelings of the supporter will now have to be strongly heard and

       listened to for the future of the game which is for the supporter.

       For the people who have died I would like them to look down and see

       that something is being done for the supporters and not for the people

       who sit in their plush offices and make their decisions.     They died

        for the game that they loved.     Lets make sure that these people

       haven't died in vain.

       White male 27 years 5'11"(5'11), slim build, short dark brown hair,

       wearing on 15.11.89(151189) a white short sleeved crew neck T shirt, a

        red peaked cap, jeans, brown leather, lace-up shoes.

        I have no objection to my statement being used in the enquiry.



                                                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:             DATE:     130589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                 PC




                                                                                       1781
                                                                           STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                              LANCASHIRE.

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 22

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 290589                                                             (SIGNED)



           I am a single man residing at the above address with ray parents.       I

           have supported Liverpool Football club for the last twelve years and

           for the last season I have had a season ticket.

           On Saturday 15 April 1989 150489 I attended the FA Cup Semi Final at

           Hillsborough having purchased a ticket through the allocation for

           season ticket holders, it was for the Leppings Lane terraces.

           I travelled to the Semi Final with Andrew SEFTON, Tony CAMPBELL,

                         and 1               | Andrew drove us in his Vauxhall

           Astra motor car.   Initially Andrew was only going to take us to the

           match as a favour because he hadn't been able to get a ticket.      He

           usually worked in Weston Super Mare and supported Tottenham Hotspur.

           On the morning of the match Andrew came round to pick me up,

                  was already with him.     A lad called_______________ frcm

                 came over to us and asked if he could have a lift to the game.

           I told him that there was already five of us in the car and that

           there wasn't any room in the car.

           Andrew offered to b u y___     s ticket and gave him   10 for the   6

           ticket.        sold the ticket to Andrew without argument.




                                                                                       1782
I then went with Andrew and         and we picked up Tony and

from their homes.   We eventually left Skelmersdale at about 11am 1100

and set off for Sheffield.    We used the motorway following the signs

for Leeds.

We stopped at a motorway service area and had something to eat and

used the toilets.   We had a resonably easy journey without hold up.

After we had cone off the motorway and were driving into Sheffield, we

had a puncture.

Andrew hadn't got a spare tyre so him and           got a taxi and went to

Rotherham to get the puncture repaired.       I waited at the car with

       and Tony.    I think that Andrew and         were away from about

one to half past 1300 1330.

When they got back the taxi driver waited until we got the wheel back

on then he showed us a quicker way, as he said it was.      He parked us

up in Fairbank Road which was half an hours walk from the ground.        He

charged me,         &         11 for the journey.    Tony and Andrew had

followed in the Astra.

The taxi driver was white, his car was foreign, blue in colour and had

a 'fare meter' inside it.

After we had parked up we walked to the ground.      We were mainly with

Nottingham Forest supporters.    I can remember seeing a couple of

policemen on duty outside a pub but no directions were given or needed

as everyone seemed to know which way to go.       We all set off together

but Tony and Andrew dropped back as we went along.       I would say that

we had parked the car at        about twenty to two 1340and      [

and me got to the ground        at about 2.15pm 1415.

During the course of our        journey to Sheffield andthe     walktothe

ground I can only remember seeing supporters drinking outside one pub.

These were Forest supporters.    I didn't witness any drunkeness,
fighting or disorder at any point on our journey.             \ Tony and me

had had one can of beer each in the car on the journey.             and

Andrew didn't have anything.

When we arrived at the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground there were

queues for the terraces at the turnstiles.    Policemen on horses were

trying to keep the queues organised but people were pushing and

shoving and the horses were being made to move as the crowd pushed

towards them.   I ended up being pushed right up against one of the

horses, it kicked out at one person so I decided to move out of the

crush because I was frightened of being hurt.    The policeman was

shouting for us to move away from the horse because it would kick.          It

ended up with the suporters and policemen shouting abuse at each other,

he could only have moved the horse into other people.      Everyone was

being pushed from behind.

I'd managed to stay with         who'd got hold of           | We decided

to get out of the crush and went and stood on the c o m e r just outside

the outer gates.   We had been there for about 15 to 20 minutes, we

were getting squashed against the wall by the bridge because the crowd

outside the gates was very big and everyone was anxious to get in.

They seemed to be taking too long to get the people through the

turnstiles.

There was then a surge which carried all three of us along back

through the outer gates and down the side of the turnstiles.       It

wasn't a fast run but it was more than a walk as we went along and

through the large open gate into the ground.     I didn't see any

policemen directing the fans and only noticed a couple of stewards in

the area of the open gate.     No-one checked our tickets.

I'd gone through the gate with          and          but got split up from

them about 10 yards from the tunnel.     There were no signs directing me
which way to go so I went into the tunnel, which was pitch black.       I

was expecting to find steps in there but there wasn't.    There was no

running, just walking but there was still pushing.     I got to the end

and turned left into pen 4.

There was no Police or stewards directing fans inside the ground and

none in the area of the tunnel.     I did not see any consumption of

alcohol in the ground and there was no disorder or unusual incidents

between entering and getting onto the terace in pen 3 at kick off,

3.00pm 1500.

I have marked on the metrix the number 1 (M3) which was my first match

viewing position.    I got there fairly easily although I'd got split

up from        and            There were people all around being pushed

tighter and tighter together.     People were shouting and screaming

for everyone to get back.     I could see people being pulled up into

the stands.

I very quickly got pushed further over to position R5 (marked 2) as

more people came in from behind.     When BEARDSLY hit the bar I was

holding onto the railings by pen 5 so I didn't go any further

forwards, so people went even further forward in the surge that

occurred then.

Although I was badly squashed I wasn't injured and was able to walk

back through the tunnel about five minutes after the game had stopped.

I hadn't seen anyone injured when I was in pen 4 but as I came back

through the tunnel there were 4 or 5 people who had fainted actually

inside the tunnel, there were people and a couple of policemen helping

the injured there.

When I got out of the tunnel in the concourse area there were 3 lads

and a girl who were dead lying there.     There were some lads trying to

revive one lad and they were calling to the ambulance men to come and
       help, but they didn't hurry and just walked over as though they were

       going shopping.

       I wasn't able to help anybody and waited outside the ground by the

       bridge for a while then I walked back to the car to wait for the

       others.

       I was the first one to get back at the car and began to worry about

       the others.    A Mrs           from            took me in because I

       was very upset and worried about the others.   My parents came over to

       Sheffield to fetch me back and I eventually returned to Liverpool at

       about 2am 0200 Sunday 16 April 1989 160489.




       The only point I'd like to make about all of this is that the queues

       weren't going down at all, the same people were in the queues for 40

       minutes without getting near the turnstiles.



                                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:

    DSS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                                1786
                                                                          STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                                  LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE, ]

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 33

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 021189                                                             (SIGNED)



           I am a married man and I live at the above address with my wife and

           two young daughters.   I am a supporter of Liverpool Football Club and

           for the first time in season 1988-1989 (000088)-(000089) I bought a

           season ticket for the Kbp at Anfield.     I usually go to all the home

           games, but not very many of the away games.

           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) Liverpool were to play Nottingham

           Forest in the semi-final of the F A Cup competition, and this game was

           to be played at the Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield.     I knew that

           this game was to be an all ticket match and I obtained my ticket frcm

           Liverpool Football Club, as I am a season ticket holder.     One of my

           friends collected the ticket for me, as I work away frcm home a lot.

           I had visited Hillsborough Stadium once before, that was the

           corresponding game the previous season.     I had a ticket for the

           Leppings Lane terrace in 1988 (000088) and on entering the ground at

           about 2.30 pm (1430) that day I found that the Police were blocking

           the entrance to the tunnel leading to the terrace.     The Police told

           the fans making for the tunnel that this part of the terracing was

           already filled to capacity and they directed people around to the




                                                                                     1787
sides of the West Stand, and into the side part of the terracing.        I

went into the side area in 1988 (000088) and it was not too packed.

For the game on 15th April 1989 (150489) I again had a ticket for the

leppings Lane part of the terracing.       This was the side of the ground

allocated to Liverpool supporters.

I travelled to Sheffield on match day with "Village Group" coaches of

Garston, Liverpool.     I met the coach at the car park of "The Rocket"

public house, which is at the end of the M62 motorway.        The coach left

at 11 am (1100) that day.

I travelled with my friends,                      of

           , Wirral, and his brother                   of

          Liverpool,        [and I             who live in



            and               who also live in

t/no.                  and a lad called         he is about 22 years old, I

don't know anything else about him.        We all had Leppings Lane terrace

tickets, except for _________        and               fs dad, they were both

in the West Stand I believe.

The coach stopped only once on the M62 Services area, so people could

visit the toilets.     We only stopped for 10 minutes.      We experienced no

travel delays on the journey.

As the coach arrived in Sheffield area the driver went the wrong way.

A Police motorcyclist met us and escorted our bus through the traffic.

He led us to an industrial estate, the street of which was full of

Liverpool fans coaches.      We arrived in this area at about 1.15 pm

(1315).   It was a dry, fine day, and quite warm.

Our group which now included two other girls from the Garston area of

Liverpool, that I do not know, went to a nearby pub called the "Fox"

or the "Foxhill".      I had visited this pub last year and had



                                                                                1788
experienced no trouble.      We could not get into this pub, the doors had

been closed, and it was very busy inside.      We then crossed the road to

an off-licence and I bought a couple of cans of beer, and with the

group we sat on the grass outside this shop.      There were quite a few

fans having a quiet drink in this area.      There was no trouble being

caused by anyone.

After a while we set off to walk to the football ground.      The walk

took us about 15 or 20 minutes.      It was about 2.30 pm (1430) when I

arrived outside the turnstiles of the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

It was getting quite busy as you got nearer to the ground.      The crowd

was in a good mood, the atmosphere in the crowd was enjoyable.

Just as I got to the gates leading to the turnstile a Policeman closed

them.    This Policeman was on his own, he appeared harassed in the

crowd.    He told us that the queue was too big at the turnstiles at

that time.    I noticed once these gates had been closed that the crowd

built up quickly behind us.      People were shouting at the Police to get

the gates open.       I remember the Policeman who had closed these gates

wore a Police helmet.       I was being jostled about as the crowd density

increased.

I told          and        to stay close together as we were being jostled

in the crowd.     All of our group were still together at this time.       The

Policeman opened the gates to allow a man and a lad aged about 3 or 4

years old to enter, and get towards the turnstiles.       After they were

inside he shut the gates straight away.

About 2.40 pm (1440)            bulled at my arm and told me that a big

gate had been opened.       I had not seen this gate being opened.   The

crowd moved just like a mass towards these gates, at my right hand

side.    I was just part of the movement of the crowd.     I entered the

ground through what I remember as concertina type gates.       I never saw
any Policemen or Stewards as I went in through these gates.      I wasn't

really taking a lot of notice.    I just wanted to get inside.      I was

holding my ticket as I went in through these gates.

Once inside the mass of people began to separate.     I went to the

toilet.   I met up w ith______________ and       in this courtyard.     We

were split up from the other lads by now.    It was by now about 2.50 pm

(1450).

                 I then joined the busy crowd and headed towards the

tunnel, leading to the terrace.    I got hold of the lads and told them

that when we got to the terracing we should move to the left hand side.

I was aware that this area of terracing was fenced off into sections.

I knew that I would go around to the sides and get into that part of

the terracing.   I like to stand behind the goal, and I never saw any

Police or Stewards as you entered the tunnel.    I thought to myself

that it can't be that bad behind the goal or they would have the

Police stopping you go down the tunnel.

I walked along the tunnel with Derek and Andy.    It was not too busy in

the tunnel' until you got to the end leading onto the terracing.        The

terracing was really busy but I never realised this, until I had

exited from the tunnel.

I was now being pushed about from one side to another.     It was

becoming quite frightening.   We had moved to the left side of the

terracing.                and I were grabbing onto each others clothing,

so we would not get separated.    I was concerned in case I would fall

over in the crowd.   I imagined fans were still coming into the terrace

behind us due to the tremendous pressure that kept building up from

behind.   As I was being pushed about my left laced up casual shoe came

off.   I could not bend down to put it back on my foot due to the

tightly packed crowd, so I just managed to keep my toes inside of it.



                                                                              1790
I never lost ray shoe.

             and I started off near the back of pen 4, but gradually

with the crowd surging we were pushed towards our left and down to a

position about the centre of this pen 4.     The surging continued and we

were next pushed to our right and again forward.     The gate on the

perimeter fence in this section was to ray right about 20 feet at the

most.    I was still with       and        I was just over half way down

the terracing.

I never heard the teams being announced over the loudspeaker.         The

crowd surging was continuing.    I thought I would not get out of the

terracing alive.    I remember looking at the Police who were on the

perimeter track and checking to see if they were using their radios to

get us some help on the terracing.     The Police did not use their

radios and I assumed that they must not have realised how much

distress people on the terracing were facing.

I remember seeing the game start, I saw the Forrest players on the

pitch.    I couldn't really believe that this was going on at a time

when people were being pushed about on the terracing.      I did not see

the game I remember someone shouting that BEARDSLEY had hit the

crossbar this caused a tremendous push from behind.       I thought to

myself thank goodness he did not score.     Although the push from behind

was tremendous it was so tightly packed on the terracing that I was

unable to move any further forward.

People were shouting for the gates to be opened.      I had ray right

hand clutching     onto one of ray friends, I'm not sure which one my left

hand was on the back of     whoever was in front of me.   I knew I was

being crushed,     although I could always manage to breathe.   It was very

warm and I was     sweating by now.   I was anxious as Isuffer from

Asthma. I don't remember the game stopping or players leaving the
field, time seemed to fly past.     I saw people climbing over the fence

onto the pitch.   The crush was intense and continuous, I really felt I

would not get out alive.

After the pressure eased I looked behind where I was standing.       There

was a crush barrier very close behind me.          had his leg caught on

the side of this barrier.          and I managed to pull him free, in

front of the barrier.

At this moment I saw a man lying on the terracing, behind the barrier.

He was on his back.     His eyes were wide open and staring, his mouth

was wide open and his tongue was protruding from his mouth.     I saw

that his face had changed to a blue or purple colour.     This man

appeared to be on his own.     I would describe him as a white man, aged

late 50's, he looked tall, heavy build with a large stanach.     He had

hair turning grey, possibly going bald.     His face was full, with a fat

appearance.   From what I have learned from my mates I believe that

this man was Mr John Anderson (JOHN ANDERSON).

The man was dressed in a brown suit type jacket, a red 'V' neck

jumper, I can't remember his shirt.     I think he may have worn jeans.

I can't recall his shoes, they may have been trainers.

I went to this man, he did not appear to be conscious to me.     I have

never seen a dead person, and I couldn't believe it when people were

shouting towards me that the man was dead.

I gave this man mouth to mouth and compressed his chest.     I got no

reaction from the man.           was helping me at this time, and we were

joined by a couple of fans milling round, one of than tried to help

the man.   I do not know who these two men were.

After several minutes, I stopped and it was dawning on me that the man

was in fact dead.

I assisted          and the other men to pick this man off the floor.     I
realised then how heavy the man was.        The man was passed overhead

towards the perimeter fence.      The gate on the fence was by now open. I

saw people stretched out on the pitch with coats over their faces.           I

never saw the man I had tried to help again.        I did not look at

newspapers or television coverage of the disaster for some time.

I next was aware of a lad, with black curly hair, wearing a white

jacket, aged about 20 years lying to my left.        I can't even remanber

if I went over to him or not             may have went to him.

A lad was crying, seated on the terracing.        He had lost a shoe but

someone found it for him.       This lad had a bloodied nose.

A man was holding a handful of watches, they looked cheap ones, he

asked if we had lost our watches, but we hadn't.

I never lost any property that day.

               and i got on the pitch.     I can't even remember how I got

there, I met         and then               on the pitch.

A press man was jostled for taking pictures of the dead.

               came up to us on the pitch and we decided to leave.

       joined us on the pitch.

We all left the ground, near the co m e r of the West Stand and the

North Stand.

             We walked towards our coach,
                                     phoned on the way walking back to

our coach and telephoned my wife for me, leaving a message with my

father-in-law.     Once back at our coach, the coach television was on

and the days football results were being broadcast.         All our party

were safe.

My injuries were bruising to my chest.        I never went to my doctor.     I

never stayed off work.




                                                                                 1793
        I got home that night at about 9.30 (2130) or 10.30 (2230) pm.




                                                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:           DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                   PC
                                                                                        STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:                      ~


AGE / DATE OF BIR3H: 20

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 281189                                                                       (SIGNED)



           I am a married man and I live at the above address with ray wife and

           two step children.         I support Liverpool football club and held a

           season ticket for the Kop at Anfield for 4 seasons.               My season ticket

           expired, at the end of season 1988-1989 and I have not renewed it.                     My

           reason for not renewing the ticket is that I now have to work shifts,

           as well as Saturdays.           I still attend football matches but will not

           stand on the Kop anymore, since the events of 15th April 1989

           (150489), at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield.               I now use the stands at

           Anfield.

           On 15th April 1989 (150489) Liverpool were to play Nottingham Forest

           in the FA Cup semi final and this game was to take place at the

           Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield.               I managed to obtain a #6 lappings

           Lane terracing ticket from Anfield. I had never visited Hillsborough

           Stadium before that day.

           On the day of this match I met up with my friends at the Railway

           public house, at the Waterloo district of Liverpool.               This would be

           about 9.30 am (0930) when we all joined up.                My friends were

                o     f   L   i   v    e    r   p   o   o     l   ,                 I don't
know his address only that he lives in the Waterloo district of

Liverpool and                  also from the Waterloo district of

Liverpool.     I don't know           address but I can find her house

alright.     I can easily recognise          house,



The three of us                           set off about 10 am (1000) in

                I think it was a Fiat Uno.                       left before

us on his own in his car.              was dropping this car off at

Manchester             as his girlfriend was arriving there from



        followed          s car along the motorway to

We drove without stopping to the               and once there             got

into our car.           then drove to Sheffield, again without stopping,

        did not use the motorway to get to Sheffield.

At about 12 noon (1200) that day[                     and I got out of

            car, outside the Sportxnans pub in Sheffield,            had a

ticket for the same terrace as I had, at the Leppings Lane end, this

being the end allocated to the Liverpool supporters,                and

set off in the car to try to find tickets, they had arranged to get

their tickets from a Director of the Sheffield Wednesday football

club.            knows some of the football players.       He is just the kind

of man who knows everyone.

It was a very sunny dry day.             and I went into the 'Sportmans' pub

in Sheffield, where I knew I would meet some of the locals from the

             pub in Waterloo, Liverpool.     I met some of my friends inside

this pub.     All of my friends that I met inside the pub were in a happy

mood.   There were many Nottingham Forest fans inside the pub and each

set of supporters was attempting to out sing the others.          It was a

good atmosphere and the fans were full of high expectation and
anticipation of the forthcoming match.

      and I had something to eat and drink and we left the pub

together at 1.45 pm (1345).    Another lad frcm Liverpool, I don't know

his name and address, walked down the hill towards the football

ground.   We did not walk particularly fast and it must have taken us

at least half an hour before we got outside the turnstiles at the

Leppings Lane terracing.    The lad who had walked down towards the

ground left        and I outside the turnstiles and set off to try to

find a ticket.    I did see this man later on the football pitch,

following the disaster and he was uninjured.

It was about 2.20 pm (1420) t h a t a n d     I found ourselves outside

the football ground.     The crowd was singing about Liverpool getting to

Wembley and the final.     It was chaos outside the ground, easily the

worst organisation that I have witnessed.     There was a lot of pushing

and shoving outside the ground.    You just had to go with the crowd,

you couldn't move as you wished to.     The crowd was so tightly packed

my ribs were very sore and I was experiencing problems in my

breathing.    Sometimes both my feet were completely off the ground.      I

had got separated frcm          but had managed to shout across the crowd

to her, telling her that we would meet up, once we had got through

the turnstiles.    I only saw one policeman, this man was in the middle

of the crowd, he wore a flat cap.     There was no queue to join, the

crowd was just one large mass of humanity.     I only saw one young lad

being passed overhead by the Police I never saw anyone climb inside

the ground.    I never saw any gates open, other than the turnstile

gates.

I entered the ground about 2.40 pm (1440) through a turnstile. I

gave my ticket to the turnstile operator and I had the ticket stub

returned to me.    I had to wait once inside for          She got in
through the turnstile a few minutes after I got in.       We joined up and

looked around for a programme seller but I couldn't see one.        I told

______ [ would go to the shop at Anfield once we got home and buy one

from there.

I never knew which way to go, nor did I see any signs to direct me to

the terracing.           and I walked ahead down a tunnel, I could see

the goal crossbar through this tunnel.     There were no police or

stewards as we entered the tunnel, to ask directions frcm the tunnel

was not busy.

      and I entered the terracing and moved to our left, into an area

known as Pen 4.     We moved forward into the central area of this pen.

It was very busy.     I could see the pitch but         couldn't,

kept asking me to go down to the front with her.       She told me she had

stood there the previous year and it had been alright we only stood in

this position for a minute and then I went towards the front with

         I have marked our original position on a grid sheet, as number

one, and have signed this sheet.     We were in position 1 at about 2.45

pm (1445).

      and I had to push our way through the packed crowd towards the

front of pen 4.     We had to duck under barriers, being careful to avoid

the feet of people sitting on the barriers.              stood in front of

me right at the front.     There was some young kids around.    There was

more room in this area when we first went down to the front.        No one

was between          and the perimeter fence.     I have indicated this

position on the grid sheet as position number 2.       While in his

position I remember hearing the teams being announced.        I can clearly

recall this, as I was surprised to hear that Alan HANSEN was playing

for Liverpool that afternoon, and this was to be his first game for a

while.
As the teams were being announced, there was an almightly surge from

behind us.     The area around where I was standing filled up

imnediately.     I threw my arms up onto the fence, in an effort to avoid

      being forced against the fence.       The pressure did not ease up.

I felt as though my arms would give way, but somehow I managed to keep

pushing back.     The crowd around me were screaming, as I was, at the

Police, on the perimeter track to open the gate on the perimeter

fencing.     I remember the Police just staring back at us.     They did not

open the gates.     I was directly behind the left hand goal post as you

looked from the terracing towards the pitch.

The teams were not even on the pitch yet.       I saw a few people start to

climb the perimeter fence.     The pressure was constant.     I was starting

to panic by now.     I was using my hands to help push people over the

fence.

I told          she would have to climb out of the terracing.     I can't

remember the teams coming out.     I did not see this.    I heard a huge

roar from the stands above us, and I thought that the game had

started.     I never saw any of the game.

After a long struggle I managed to get            3n top of the brick wall,

I kept telling          to get over the fence, but she is only a small

person and was having difficulty.     I continued to push hard at

to get her to start climbing and eventually she climbed the perimeter

fence.     I continued to push at her to help her over.     I don't know how

she got down onto the track.

The pressure was still on me.     The crowd was screaming I could feel

people banging into my back all of the time.       I never saw anyone on

the ground.     I never looked to my left or right.    I don't even know

who I was standing near.

I knew that if I didn't soon start climbing over the fence, my arms
would give way and I would have to release my grip on the fence.       I

climbed the fence and got my right leg over the top, my left leg got

caught up with my tracksuit bottoms caught in the fence.       I couldn't

move.    People were screaming at me to get over.   Someone finally

pulled my leg free and I fell onto the track. I got up and saw that

my tracksuit left leg was t o m all the way up to the crutch, and even

my boxershorts, beneath my trousers were tom, I had not got any cuts

on my leg.

I joined           The game was still going on.         was crying

hysterically I remember someone I think a pressman taking photographs

on the pitch.     I shouted at this photographer to go away.    I don't

know if he heard me or not.

I stood with         and sat, just behind the left hand goal post, the

game was still being played.

I remember the match being stopped and the players leaving the pitch.

         and I walked across the pitch to an area of the pitch in front

of the North Stand, between the 18 yard box and the half way line.

I remember a lad near me, he told me he couldn't feel his legs, a

policeman was standing close by but he didn't appear to know what to

do.     I left       another fan sat with her, and I ran across to the

rear of the Liverpool goal, to find someone to help this lad.

Behind this goal were people lying all over the area in a dazed shock

state.    Advertising hoardings were being pulled down to be used as

makeshift stretchers.     I looked into the area of terracing that I had

been in, I could see people being crushed against the perimeter

fence.     People were climbing the fence out of the terracing I could

see people being dragged out of this terracing.     I then knew that

people were dead.

I located a St John's Ambulance crew, two ladies, I returned to the
                     ___________________                                        7


injured lad with these two ladies and about 4 lads carrying a board.

The St Johns ladies told me to lift this lad onto the board, which I

did and I helped carry him towards the Spion Kop.     There was by now a

line of Police across the pitch and they told me to take him to the

back of the North Stand.     Once at the back of the North Stand other

policemen told me to put the lad down and leave him.

I would describe this lad as a 15 16 years old white bey, I think he

had black short hair.     He wore Liverpool boxer shorts, blue jeans, I

can't remember any more about him.     He had a Liverpool accent.     He

kept saying he couldn't feel his legs or ant®.      I left the lad lying

on the board.

I next ran back down the pitch towards the Liverpool goal area, at the

Lappings Lane end of the ground.     I saw about 30 dead bodies lying in

this goal area.   People were being resuscitated.    Seme people had

their faces covered up.     I had never seen a dead body before that day.

With other fans I picked up someone that I believe was dead, he was

lying on his back, near the 6 yard box, close to the right hand goal

post, looking from the back of the goal.     No-one was beside this

body. We placed this body on a hoarding.

I would describe this body as that of a white male, 26 or 27 years

old, heavy build, his face was white, it was also blue coloured.           He

had blood trickling out of the c o m e r of his mouth.   His eyes were

looking as if they might pop out.     They were wide open and staring.          I

think he had a moustache, with blonde coloured hair.      He had a

Liverpool scarf knotted around his neck.     I can't describe his other

clothing.   I didn't notice if someone covered his face with a

Liverpool tracksuit suit.     I felt as though I would be sick.      I was

forcing myself to breath deeply in an effort to avoid being sick.

With the other lads I ran to the rear of the North Stand with this
                                                                               8

man.   The Police met us, we were told to lay the man down which we

did.   I could see about 4 other dead bodies in this area.     We lifted

the man off the board and left him.      I did not see the first lad, the

injured one in this area and I presume he must have been taken off to

hospital.     I can't recall the details of the four bodies that I saw I

was trying not to look.     I knew what to expect, should I look at them.

I ran back towards the Lappings Lane end of the ground.       There

appeared to me more people than ever in this goal area, who had their

faces covered.    The scene was chaos.

I continued to work during that afternoon and in total I must have

assisted to carry 6 dead bodies across the pitch.     All of these people

were taken to the rear of the north stand, and left with the Police

there.I can remember as the afternoon wore on, about 20 ambulances

in the area behind the North Stand.

I did not use the same advertising hoarding to carry all of the

victims.    Sometimes I joined other lads carrying a board.

Of the others that I helped to carry they were all male, wearing jeans

or tracksuits.     They all had their faces covered I can't remember much

about them.     I have the impression one of the six that I carried was a

young lad of 15 or 16 years of age.      I only think this as the figure I

carried was smaller than the others that I carried across the pitch.

This body was lighter than the others.      I never saw his face.     He had

a coat over his face.

After these journeys across the pitch, I went to the edge of the

pitch, between the North stand and the Spion Kop, where I was

physically sick.     Someone then gave me a drink of water.

Each time I deposited a dead body behind the North stand, I could see

that this area was becoming busier and busier with more and more dead

bodies, all arranged in a row.



                                                                                   1802
I walked back towards where          had stood waiting for me.    Once

there I heard Kenny DALGLISH make a loudspeaker announcement.

       lias wanting to go to look at the dead as she knew her brother

was at the game.     I talked her out of this.   We later found someone

who knew           brother and he told her that he was alright.

       and I stayed on the pitch, looking for people in the crowd that

we knew.     I saw a few old school friends so did

       and I left the ground about 5 pm (1700).      We left via the

Leppings Lane terraces, we didn't use the tunnel.       There was still a

few people on the terracing.           ras still crying.     I wasn't

looking about a lot.     I never saw any broken barrier on the terracing,

       and I got back to the car,                        were waiting for

us.   They had been in the West stand and were both okay.      We set off

for home, stopping several times to try to phone, but we couldn't get

through to Liverpool.     Eventually we found a pub on the outskirts of

Manchester and I telephoned my wife from there.        This was about 7.15

pm (1915).     I arrived home about 8 pm (2000).

I later learned two of my friends had died in the disaster Paul

HEWITSON and ROBBO.     I think its Steven ROBINSON.

                                       Colin WAFER also died at

Hillsborough.

I never lost any property that day.

I'm a white man, 20 years old, 5'11, 11 st 4lbs, with black short hair

                                                   I had on a red and grey

Liverpool track suit, the bottoms had 'Adidas' down the back of both

legs, a Liverpool CRCWN PAINT 'T' shirt green, grey and red, 'ADIDAS'

trainers, a Liverpool scarf knotted around my wrist while, I was

carrying people on the pitch, I took my scarf and put it in my pocket.

 I also had on a                                   jacket.   This jacket is



                                                                              1803
                                                                                  10

                                               I wore it all the time that day.

       I injured my left knee.     I couldn't bend for days afterwards, my back

       had been so knocked about.    Both my arms were all bruised.    My back

       was also bruised.   My tracksuit bottoms and boxer shorts had to be

       thrown away, they were so badly ripped, as I climbed out the

       terracing.




        I have engaged___________              firm of solicitors in

        Liverpool to represent me.



                                                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:                     PC




                                                                                       1 804
                                                                          STATION



•
NAME:

                        1
ADDRESS:       __________
                                    MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 26

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 004 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070589                                                             (SIGNED)



        I reside at the above address with my wife and family.

        I have been a supporter of Liverpool Football Club all my life and am

        a season ticket holder for the Kop.        I obtained a #6 West Stand

        Terrace ticket for the Liverpool v Notts Forest game at Hillsborough

        on Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) frcm Liverpool club.

        On the morning of the match we met at                     house

                            is we were all going in his car.          drove the car

        and the passengers were myself Henry BURKE,

        We left about 11 an (1100) and did not stop apart from a traffic jam

        near Stockport.     We arrived in Sheffield at about 2 pm (1400) and

        parked in a nearby street.     We all set off towards the ground together,

           it was busy but there was no trouble.     There was a lot of Police on

        the route to the ground.     We arrived at the Leppings Lane end of the

           ground and there was a mass of people outside the turnstiles and only

           saw two police horses no foot police.

        We waited for a while outside a shop and Henry BURKE and

           left us.   After a while I went through the turnstile, this was after

           being pushed and shoved about for some time.     When I got to the




                                                                                      1805
turnstile and handed in ray ticket the turnstiles was jammed, it took

three attempts before I could get through.    I got through and I waited

for                              bo come through, after three or four

minutes, they came through the turnstile, and we made our way to the

centre tunnel.   There was no Police or stewards at this tunnel.     When

we got to the entrance of the tunnel I turned around and saw a

Policeman and Policewoman opening a large gate on the far side near

the river I told ray friends this.

We then headed into the tunnel it was very congested, we were pushed

through into the terrace. There was no way I could have changed ray

mind and turned back there was too many people.    We decided to go to

the left and back but we couldn't and got pushed down the terrace.

There was shouting and screaming and people being hurt by the crush.

I was crushed against the end of a barrier for a short time but

managed to get in front of it.   I then saw a number of people trapped

behind the barrier these people were screaming and crying for help.         I

pushed the people back as much as I could and people started coming

under the barrier and coming up under ray feet and arms.

I couldnt see any of the match but by the noise I knew it was going

on.   I was getting concerned at this point by the crush and decided

to try and get out.   I struggled and made ray way to the side fence

which runs down the terrace. I tried to get over the fence but

because of the congestion it took me three attempts to get over and

in the end               pushed me over.   Once the other side of the

fence I put ray hands through the fence and gave        a help up.    Once

we were over we dragged a few other people over and it got crowded

there so we made our way to the pitch.     While we were helping people

over people were trying to get over the fence further down but Police

Officers were pushing them back over.
We made our way onto the pitch and saw a line of Policeman across it,

and they told us to stay off the pitch and                iaid, "Let me

through" and a Police Officer said no.           said, "I just want to lie

down."        went through and me and          stayed on this side of the

Police, I lost         :hen.I looked around and people were being lifted

over the fence behind the goal from the West stand these people were

being laid down on the pitch.     There was people supporters and Police

trying to resuscitate them.                   helped some supporters carry

another person on a stretcher off the pitch.      I was trying to find

              but couldn't.   I met up withagain and we could see lots of

people being carried on stretchers and boards off the pitch, and the

first sign I saw of a person dead was a young male lying on the

pitch.    I asked two young policewomen to do something and they just

grabbed hold of me by each arm.     I told them I was alright just do

something with him.    After some time          and me went back up the

West end terrace and through the tunnel at this time.       I did not see

any bodies or injured people about.      We left the ground and went out

into Leppings Lane where there was a lot of fire engines parked

blocking some or part of the exits.

We headed for the c o m e r shop where we had arranged to meet, and

         was there.   We waited there for about an hour but no one else

came so we went back to the car.       We waited for the others at the car

for about another hour and people came out with cups of tea and asked

if we wanted to use the phone.     Later        turned up and we waited

again for about an hour for Henry BURKE but he did not appear.

The residents gave us directions to the hospital but we went back to

the ground where                 and              went into the ground to

try and find out something but they couldn't.       We went back to the

car, and then to the hospital, and met up with a social worker who



                                                                             1807
       guided us and told us what to do, later went back to the ground where

       they directed us to the Police Station to register a missing person

        from there we went to a boys' club where we waited several hours.

       An announcement was made that some relatives would be taken to the

       ground to identify people,                 and ,
                                                      |           together

       with the social worker, went to the ground and we were taken to

       another hall where later we heard the bad news.

        I did not see Henry BURKE again after we parted in Leppings Lane

       before the game, and do not know which part of the ground he went

        into.

        In try opinion, the problem was caused by lack of policing outside the

        ground, there was no queues just chaos.   There was also a lack of

        stewards in the ground, if some had been placed at the entrance to

        the tunnel to direct people to either end of the terrace where there

       was room.




                                                                       SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

®         TIME:            DATE:    070589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:               PC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                           STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                                          , MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 16

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything Which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 280789                                                             (SIGNED)



           I am a single person residing at the above address.

           On the afternoon of Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489) I attended the FA

           Cup Semi Final Football match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest

           at the Hillsborough Football ground in Sheffield.

           I attended the match as a Liverpool supporter.    I have supported

           Liverpool all of my life and I am a season ticket holder at Anfield

           and attend all home matches.   My match ticket was for the Leppings

           Lane standing area and cost me six pounds.     I obtained my match ticket

           from Anfield using my season ticket voucher.

           I travelled to the game with the following people.




           We all travelled to the game by coach.    The coach was laid on by

           Eavesway Coaches, Newton - Le Willows.                     pooked us all

           in on the coach.   We got the coach in Haydock, opposite




                                                                                       1809
                                                                           2
Haydock High School, at about eleven o'clock (1100) on the morning.

The coach made two further pick ups at Newton Le Willows and Ashton,

where more supporters got on the coach.    The coach made only one other

stop on the way to Sheffield, that being at services on the motorway.

I can't remember the number.     I do not remember there being any

traffic hold ups on the way.

We arrived in Sheffield at about one thirty (1330).     The coach driver

initially parked near to a traffic island in Leppings Lane, but was

told to move on by the Police.     The driver eventually stopped on a

main road, it was a dual carriageway, near to where the railway line

goes over the road.     The coach then went about half a mile further up

the dual carriageway to park up.     We then made our way to the ground.

On the way to the ground, we did not receive any Police directions,

nor did we get any Police escort.     I saw no signs of disorder or any

person fighting.   There were supporters in the street drinking frcm

beer cans, but none of them were drunk.     Everybody was in good

spirits, singing etc.

We arrived at the Leppings Lane turnstile area at about quarter to two

(1345). We did not have any problems finding the turnstiles.

          knew where to go.     I had not been to the Hillsborough ground

before.   It was very crowded outside the turnstiles in Leppings Lane.

There were no queues as such and the crowd stretched back to the outer

perimeter gates. We joined onto the back of the crowd and within

about ten minutes we got to a turnstile.     The crowd outside the

turnstiles was like any normal football crowd, it was fairly packed

but not a crush.   We did not receive any Police directions outside

the turnstiles.    However there were two Policemen at each turnstile,

one standing either side, who were searching people before they went

through the turnstile.     We were all searched.   I went through the
turnstile and handed my ticket to the turnstile operator.      I retained

the stub portion of the ticket.    While I was outside the turnstiles.

I did not see any sort of unauthorised entry into the ground.       I did

not see any gates open apart frcm the turnstiles neither did I see

any gates being opened.   Once we got through the turnstiles, there was

another Policeman on the other side, and a Policewoman.     I was

searched by the Policewoman.     I remember that                had a

Union Jack flag with Liverpool written across it.          brought the

flag through the turnstiles but the flag was confiscated by a

Policewoman who said it was too big.    The Policewoman gave         a slip

of paper, saying he could get the flag back after the match.        It was

just a flag no flag pole, it wasn't really offensive.           lid claim

the flag back after the match.     It seemed silly that the Police took

       flag, because              was allowed into the ground with a

large white sheet with



This sheet was larger than          flag.   With the exception of

                             we all regrouped behind the turnstiles.

                  iflent straight into the ground.   We got into the

ground at about two o'clock (1400).Once inside the ground all I could

see was a tunnel running underneath the stand, in the centre.        There

were no other signs indicating that you get to the terraces any other

way.   It appeared that the tunnel was the only way to get to the

terraces, and everybody was heading for the tunnel.      Frcm the time

that I entered the ground, I did not see any fighting or disorder.           I

did not see any drunkeness and I did not see any people drinking

inside the ground.We all made for the tunnel and walked along it.        We

were able to walk along the tunnel quite freely, it was fairly empty.

I did not see any Police or stewards either at the entrance to the
tunnel or inside it.    We walked along the tunnel together and we went

to the right hand side at the bottom of the tunnel, into what I now

know to be pen thcee. There was no particular reason for going into

pen three.   We entered pen three at between ten past (1410) and

quarter past two (1415).    It was very crowded in pen three, more so

than a normal football crowd.    We started to push our way through the

crowd, making for the bottom right hand co me r of the pen.     It was our

intention to get to the front of the pen so that we could hang the

large white sheet that I mentioned earlier in front of the pen.         We

wanted to hang the sheet on the front of the pen, so we could be seen

by the 'match of the day' TV cameras.     It was a struggle to get

through the crowd, but we managed to push our way through and all keep

together, at the same time.     As we got towards the front of the pen we

realised we could go no further due to the amount of people packed in

at the front.   Due to this we took up a position towards the front

right hand side of pen three as you look frcm the stand.       I was

standing with a crush barrier behind me.     The time by now would be

between quarter past (1415) and twenty past two (1420).       I was still

with the other lads at this time, with     the exception of

         I don't know where they were.    I have marked this position on

the separate grid plan of pens three and four using the figure one.             I

now know that the barrier that I was leaning against in pen three was

the barrier that later collapsed.     Frcm the time that we took up this

position I could feel things becoming more and more squashed.          We had

only been in that position for a couple of minutes, when I think

either                 said something about the pen on our right hand

side being fairly empty,    this was pen number two.   They had noticed

that the front of pen two was empty and they would be able to hang

their sheet frcm there.     Because of this, we all decided to try and
                                                                              5


get out of pen three and over the dividing fence into pen two.       It

wasn't a crush in pen three at that time, but it was very tight.          I

remember that I wanted to buy a programme but there was no way that I

could have got to the front of pen three to buy a programme.     We all

managed to get towards the front of pen three by the dividing fence

with pen two.   We all helped each other over the dividing fence and

into pen two.   The time at that point would have been between twenty

(1420) and twenty five past two (1425). Having got into pen two, I was

very surprised at how empty it was compared to pen three.    There were

just odd scatterings of supporters across the pen.     I would say it was

about quarter full.     A couple of the lads hung the white sheet up at

the front of pen two.     I bought a programme frcm a seller on the pitch

and I sat on the terraces for a while reading it.    Throughout the next

thirty minutes, up until the players came onto the pitch, pen two

filled up slowly.     These were obviously supporters who had walked

around the side of the stand.     Seme supporters climbed over the fence

from pen three as we had done.     I did not think much of this at the

time, thinking they were just looking for a better spot.     I did not

realise it was a serious crush.     As it got nearer to three o'clock

(1500) I remember seeing supporters being pulled up frcm the terraces

into the seats above by otter supporters.     I thought these were just

some 'scallies' who were after a free seat.     Pen two was full but

comfortable at three o'clock (1500) when the game kicked off.     My

attention was focused on events on the pitch.     At some stage, a

Liverpool striker hit the Forest crossbar at the other end of the

ground.   The crowd seemed to think that Liverpool had scored.       It was

at this point that I noticed people climbing out of pen three, both

over the top of the front fence onto the track next to the pitch and

over the dividing fence into pen two.     Some fans were still being
                                                                                6
pulled up into the seats above as well.     I then realised that

something was very wrong inside pen three.     There were quite a few

supporters on the pitch by now, and I remember seeing a Policeman run

onto the pitch and approach the referee.     The game was then stopped by

the referee.    We remained in our spots in pen two as more and more

people got onto the pitch frcm pen three and also frcm pen four.

There was obviously something drastically wrong.     We then saw people

being laid out on the pitch obviously injured.     Seme fans were ripping

down advertising hoarding boards frcm the front of the stand behind us

and these were being passed down onto the pitch and subsequently used

as stretchers. At some stage I became aware of a man lying on the

goal line, to the right of the goals as you look frcm the pen.       The

man was virtually on the eighteen yard line.     There were three or four

supporters apparently trying to revive this man, giving him mouth to

mouth.     I could not say if this man was already dead or if he was

still alive.    He may have been alive, because the supporters were

trying to revive him for some time, maybe fifteen minutes altogether.

When I first became aware of this man the time would have been about

twenty five past three (1525).     Eventually some fifteen to twenty

minutes later, the supporters covered the mans face and walked away.

He was obviously dead then.     I would describe this man as a white male,

early to middle forties.     He was about five feet ten tall (5'10).       He

was quite big in build, with a 'beer belly'. He had light brown hair

which was cut short.     He was unshaven, and had two - three days

stubble.     His hair was slightly wavy.   He was wearing light brown

trousers and a plain white round neck 'T' shirt.     He was wearing a

round neck woollen jumper, multi coloured, brown and green, I think.

This jumper was eventually used to cover the mans face.     Whilst I was

in pen two I did not see this man moved at all.     We remained in the
ground until round about five o'clock (1700), before collecting

flag and leaving the ground.    We eventually returned to our coach and

found that everybody on our coach was accounted for.

Throughout the course of the afternoon I only witnessed one incident

which may have been a criminal offence.    At about quarter to five

(1645), as I was about to leave the ground I went into pen three.

Whilst in there I saw a half caste youth picking up tickets, ticket

stubs, money, scarves and hats from the terraces.    He had scarves and

hats stuffed under his jumper.    As he was doing this, a group of about

ten supporters jumped on the youth and gave him a good beating.      We

carried on walking through.    Hie half caste youth was about eighteen,

with short black afro hair.    He was average build, about five feet

nine.    He had blue denim jeans, and a round necked jumper.   It was a

polo neck, dark blue in colour with a motif on the front.      I can't

remember what the motif was.     He also wore white adidas trainers.

At no stage was I aware of a barrier breaking in pen three.

I did not sustain any injuries at Hillsborough.

I produce the separate grid plan (Ex No.        ) (Ex Ref      1).

I did not agree with the FA allocation of the tickets, Liverpool

should have had more tickets based on the average home gates of both

clubs.    I feel Liverpool should have also been allocated the Kop end

of Hillsborough.

The Police seemed very slow to react to the initial problem, when they

were standing in front of the pens.

There was also a waste of manpower, in so much that the Police used

all those officers across the centre of the pitch when they could have

been better used at the Leppings Lane end, helping the injured and

dying.    There was a lack of stewards overall at Hillsborough that day.
                                              SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:        280789

WITNESS TO SIGNATURES

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC




                                                       1816
                                                                            STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 23

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 005 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 070989                                                              (SIGNED)



           I am the above named person and live at the above address with my

           mother and elder brother                   I have lived here all my

           life.   I work as a labourer at a local factory.

           On the 15th April 1989 (150489) I went to the FA Cup Semi-Final

           between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest at Hillsborough.       I am a keen

           Liverpool supporter and last season was a season ticket holder at

           Anfield.   I applied to the club for a ticket for the semi-final and

           was given a    #6 standing ticket for the Leppings Lane end.

           I left Liverpool at about 9 am (0900).     I travelled in my own car, a

           white Ford                                   Also with me was my brother



                              have already been seen by the police.   We travelled

           along the motorway and then took the signs for Sheffield.       I don't

           recall any delays on the motorway.

           I had travelled to the semi-final the year before and knew where the

           ground was.    We arrived in Sheffield at about 12 mid-day (1200) and

           stopped at a pub, I think its called the Foxhill, near to the railway

           station.     We had been in this same pub the year before.   I had about 3




                                                                                        1817
                                                                           2

pints of beer that was all and all those in my company had the same.

We were certainly not drunk or disorderly in any way.    There was

probably 100 Liverpool fans in there and a number outside as well.

Although everyone was having a drink everyone was jolly and in good

spirits, there was no trouble and no aggro.

We all left the pub at about 2.15 pm (1415).     I left the car parked

where it was and we all set off for the ground.    I knew where it was

because I'd been there the year before.    I saw plenty of policemen on

the way but I didn't ask for directions.

We arrived at the Leppings Lane end of the ground at about 2.30 pm

(1430).   There was a great crowd of people there and I could just

about see the turnstiles.   I could see the mounted policemen there and

also some policemen trying to organise things.    We managed to 'weave'

our way to the front and to the turnstiles.    We went in the turnstile

to the far right of the Leppings Lane End.     The pressure at the front

was such that when you got to the front you had to put your arms up

and just allow one person through the turnstile at once.     If you

didn't do that then the turnstile jammed up.     I don't recall seeing

any stewards outside the ground.   I didn't see any gates open.

Before I got into the ground I did see fans climbing over the

turnstile building and dropping to the ground.     I saw probably 10 to

15 people do this.

I handed the ticket to the turnstile operator and he gave me back the

ticket stub.   I have since sent this to the Hillsborough Disaster

Appeal.

Once I got through the turnstile I made for the tunnel although I knew

I could have gone to the right and got on the terraces.     There was

just a steady stream of people going through the tunnel.     I don't

remember seeing any policemen or stewards at this point.
I didn't see any signs of trouble but people were getting agitated

outside the ground because of the crowd and the fact that they

probably wouldn't get in on time.     I saw nobody drinking alcohol in

the ground.

When I got into the tunnel I went to the right into Pen 3.       All 4 of

us were still standing together.     We stayed at the back right in line

with the goal.     I have marked the grid in the questionaire where I

was.     People were still coming in and I was being pushed slowly

further and further down the terracing.        I've been in similar crowds

before but because it was so hot and crowded it was getting very

uncomfortable.    At one stage, I think the match had just kicked off,

there was a tremendous surge which finally pushed me right to the

front of the terracing.     I ended up near the gate.    There were about 2

people immediately in front of me.     The gate was shut and everyone was

shouting at the policeman who stood by it to open it.       The gate did

open and 1 or 2 fans spilled out onto the track and then it closed

again.     I was finding it increasingly difficult to breathe as the

pressure built up.     About a minute later the gate opened again and I

managed to get out.     I was just getting my breath back and then a

steward escorted me into the pens to the left (1 and 2).        There were

less people in there, in fact it was quite empty.        The game was still

going on at this point, although I hadn't seen any of the game.

           rjas still with me at this point.

I then got worried about my brother            and went up to the fence that

separates pen 2 from pen 3.     I climbed up on the fence but couldn't

see him.

The crowd in pen 3 was very packed and I didn't see any bodies.        I

could see people crushed up against the fence that I stood on and they

looked very uncomfortable but not dead.        I could only see the side
       fencing not the front of the pens.       People in pen 3 were putting their

       hands up and I was grasping them and helping them climb over into the

       pen I was in.     I probably helped      about 10people over this way.

       I could see that the police wereat the front of the pens trying to

       get people out along with the fans.

       The crowd in pen 3 was thinning out a bit now and I was still

       concerned about            I climbed over the    fence back into pen 3.     I

       saw that one of the barriers had broken and I saw a pile of bodies at

       the front.     I started looking at the faces looking for            they all

       looked dead to me.      I couldn't see          ind then got out onto the

       pitch.      I could see people laying all over the place and was

        frantically searching for my brother.      After about 15 minutes I found

       him.     We sat on the pitch and then after Kenny DALGLISH made the

       announcement we left the ground and came back to Liverpool.

        I didn't carry or assist with any of the deceased.

        (On day)

       Description of taker - White male 6'2 (6'2), slim build, short dark

        hair, 2 weeks growth of whiskers on face.        Wearing blue jeans, blue

        trainers, aqua-green long sleeved shirt.

                                                                             SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:               DATE:   070989

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:         G MCCQMBIE DS8792




                                                                                       1820
                                                                           STATION

NAME:          ROBERT ARTHER
               KNOWLES

ADDRESS:
                                         MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 33

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 000 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 240589                                               R A KNOWLES (SIGNED)



           I live at the above address with my wife and family.    I am personally

           a Liverpool supporter and have been a season ticket holder for the

           past 12 years.    On Saturday 15th April{150489) I attended the football

           match between Liverpool and Notts Forest at Hillsborough Football

           Ground, Sheffield.

           Concerning the events at Hillsborough on Saturday 15th April{150489) I

           felt it necessary to relate my version of events as I and my family

           were involved in many aspects of the crush in the football ground and

           surrounding area and I have sent a letter related to them and made

           this statement.

           At 1015am{1015) on Saturday 15th April 1989(150489) I with my wife

                                                                    m d a family

           friend                     aged 14 yrs set off to Sheffield to watch a

           football match.    The three males had ticket valued at #6 for Leppings

           Lane standing area which I had purchased from Anfield Liverpool, the

           two females had intended to spend the day shopping in Sheffield city

           centre.

           We set off from my home              and drove our car to the
KNOWLES               ROBERT ARTHER                                          2


Clatterbridge roundabout to join the M53 mid-Wirral motorway.       From

here we joined the M56 and headed for Manchester.     Along the

motorways traffic was free moving with many cars sporting red scarves

or blue heading for the M6 and the other semi-final.

Vte left the motorway at Stockport and encountered long queues of

traffic at approximately 11.00 am. (1100)   All along the A560 to its

roundabout junction with the A628 traffic was slow moving.     At the

roundabout the scene was even worse with more football match traffic

joining the queues having driven from Liverpool through Manchester and

along the M67.   After approximately 6 miles the queue suddenly became

more free moving along the A628 for no apparent reason and we

were able to continue our journey at a more realistic rate.       The time

now was approx 1225pn( 1225), the last 10 or 12 miles had taken 1 and

a half hours to negotiate.   Our plan to arrive at Sheffield by around

midday(1200) was now obviously hopelessly         behind schedule.I mustsay

at this point we felt we were probably quite lucky because anybody

who was purely going to see the match may not have begun their

journey until much later than the time when we set off.

As we neared Sheffield the Hillsborough ground route was quite well

sign posted but traffic was very light.     Having travelled to many big

matches over the last 20 years I remarked to my wife that maybe she

should drop us near to the ground in order that we did not encounter

trouble entering the ground.   I felt thatthe two boys may     not get a

good view if we left it too late.     Vte had 3 tickets for entrance B and

having been to the ground before, I remembered to be able to sit on a

barrier you should be in the ground at least 45 minutes before kick

off.   Vte however decided that in order to meet up after the match we

needed to be aware where the car was parked, we therefore drove into

Sheffield city centre.   Vte parked the car in a N.C.P. building at
KNOWLES                ROBERT    ARTHER                                      3


precisely 1.35pn(1335) as stated on the ticket we were given at the

entrance. After parking the car we walked into the city centre.      Vte

had not bought food with us.      We therefore looked for a chip shop and

after buying food my wife and I had a drink in a pub called the

Frog & Parrott while the children ate their food on the wall outside.

Inside and outside the pub there were some football supporters from

both clubs drinking together along with many local people, the

atmosphere was friendly and the banter and talk was mainly about

football.     I did not think excessive drinking was taking place, people

were just enjoying themselves and relaxing after the journey to

Sheffield.     I myself had two pints in the pub.

At approximately 2 .05pn( 1405) people began to leave the pub to go to

the ground approximately 2 miles away.      I myself took the two boys and

we got into a taxi to take us to Hillsborough.

As we neared the ground the traffic began to build up.      I said to the

taxi driver when we were near enough to the ground to walk he could

drop us to enable him to go back to work.      He thanked me and said it

was unusual for traffic to build up so much at this time about 2.

20pm. (1420) He dropped us about half mile from the ground and we

walked the rest of the way.      Vte arrived at the Leppings Lane end of

the stadium at 2.30pm(1430). My heart dropped at the sight that

greeted us.    There were no queues just a mass of people trying to push

their way into the ground, we joined the throng and soon arrived at

the blue outer gates, a policeman on horseback was in front of these

gates attempting to stop people going through the gates towards the

turnstiles.     Two policemen appeared on the other side of the gates and

began to force them shut.       The crowd became more agitated as somebody

shouted theyre trying to shut the gates and lock us out.      The push

became more fierce.     I found myself pushed up against the rear of the
KNOWLES               ROBERT    ARTHER                                     4


horse, my son in front of me,            had hold of my sleeves from

behind. Somebody in the crowd asked the policeman behind the gates

which were now shut if he could let the two young boys through to the

safety of the area behind the gates which although packed had spaces

at the sides of the turnstile area in which you could stand out of the

crush. The policeman agreed to this and allowed myself and the two

boys to pass through the gate into the inner area.

Once inside I moved towards the turnstile.       I could see people were

trying to get out of the gates behind me because they had found

themselves in the wrong place to enter the ground.      The lettering

above the turnstiles was for B ticket holders but many people clearly

had tickets for different entrances and were unable to get out of

this area to go to the correct turnstiles.       I attempted to get us

towards the turnstiles but the packed crowd was about 20 people across

and 40 deep and I soon realised it would be futile to try and attempt

pushing through with the two boys in tow.       Out at the side of the

crowd a number of people had extracted themselves and were standing

watching the scenes unfold.     Here I noticed a policewoman standing

watching.   I asked one which was there was no orderly queues for the

turnstiles and he replied that if I had not spent the last two hours

in the pub and had arrived earlier I would have got in easily.         I

pointed out that I had the two boys with me and was worried about

their safety.   He replied that policemen had been standing in front

of the turnstiles but had got out when they feared they may be hurt

and I quote 'let the fans to fight it out amongst themselves.'

At this point a man came up to us and said to the policeman 'Why don't

you open the exit gate and try and ease the pressure on the

turnstiles.'    It was only now I noticed a blue concertina gate similar

to those on a lift a little behind the area of the turnstiles.         I
KNOWLES                ROBERT   ARTHER


moved the boys towards this gate, the crowd was now becoming more

aggressive as people began to become frustrated at being unable to

enter the ground.    In front of the blue gate was a row of about six

policemen confronted with a small crowd of perhaps about 20 people

asking and shouting to be allowed into the ground through this gate to

get out of the crush going on around them.

The gate was opened to allow a policeman to go through and a couple of

minutes later to allow him to cone back out this was at about 2.

45pm(1445). I held on to the two boys and we stood in front of the

blue gates.    I had a feeling that we would be allowed to enter the

ground this way. I offered our tickets to a policeman standing in

front of the gate but he just shook his head.    Then the policeman who

had entered the gates and returned and had been standing next to me

answered a call on his radio and then replied into his radio and I

quote, 'WHAT OPEN THE GATE OH OK'. He turned to face the gate, looked

through the small window at somebody inside and gestured through the

window to open the gate, after a few moments delay the gate was opened

to its fullest extent. As the police turned to I suppose try and form

an orderly entrance into the ground they were swept away by a tide of

people racing into the stadium.    I and the two boys were at the

foremost of this human tide being swept into the ground by the

pressure, fron behind a great cheer went up as the gate was opened

letting people out in the crush. I know that a gate had been breached

in seme way.From this moment I believe the police    had now lost

complete control of the crowd and could do nothing to stem the flow of

supporters into the ground whether they had tickets or not or indeed

tickets for that particular section of the ground.

Once through   the gate the first thing visible as an entrance to the

playing area    is a tunnel,through which can be seen the pitch above
KNOWLES                 ROBERT   ARTHER                                     6

the heads of the crowd already on the terracing.     Above the tunnel

were two signs, on the left the letter 'B' and the right the letter

'A'.      Having tickets indicating Section 'B' this is where we

immediately headed for the tunnel, at the pitch end of the tunnel we

came upon a wall of people and realising it was pointless standing

here because the boys could see nothing I told both of them to try and

push through the crowd along and down the central dividing fence

heading for the fence at the front and then make their way along this

fence at the front towards the left at the bottom of the terraces.

After the initial push to get onto the terraces this proved to be

quite easy to achieve.     At the front there was a gap between the first

step and people standing right up against the fence, we moved along

the front fence to the left until we came upon a railing running from

front to back of the terracing.      The boys moved to stand at the fence

and took up a position on the first step.      This is at point 8P in pen

4 on the diagram.     We did not move from this point throughout the

whole incident.     The players now took the field and I congratulated

myself on getting the boys a good 'spec' to see the game and at just

the right time.

Beyond the fence to my left as I glanced around I realised that that

part of the ground was very empty considering the close proximity of

kick off time and I thought that maybe it would be better to climb

over the dividing rails and take up position in section 6 as many

people climbing over had already decided to do but I thought that once

all the people already climbing over were out of our section then we

would be alright.

As the match kicked off the crowd surged forward towards the pitch.         I

was forced up against the fence with two boys in front of me.      This

was not unusual in a packed crowd and usually eases off after a few
KNOWLES                ROBERT   ARTHER                                       7


seconds but after the first crush came a second surge pushing

everybody even harder against the fence.    Screams and shouts for help

and for the front gate to be opened were being made by the crowd.        I

in fact saw two policemen at the entrance to the gate to Pen 5.      I

shouted 'help open the gates' to them.     They just stared back and did

nothing, not even opening the gate at that particular time.     Such was

the shouts from the crowd it indicated the pain and obvious discomfort

people were feeling.    I pulled at the two boys and shouted for them to

climb over the front fence.     I had to wrench them out of the crowd and

with help from other people around they eventually got onto the front

fence to climb over onto the pitch, but the design of the fence with

very tight mesh with no rocm to gain a foothold and then the

overhanging spikes proved very difficult for even two very agile young

boys.     I was very relieved when they dropped off the fence onto the

track surrounding the ground.

The match was still in progress but people on the terrace could see

nothing as more and more people clambered over the fence to the safety

of the pitch.     Now the boys were safe I began to assess my own

situation in the crush.     I had moved several feet away from the

railings dividing 4 and 5 pens, many people were now scrambling over

this rail over the heads of people on the terracing and mass panic was

evident as people fought to escape the crush.     I myself was pushed up

against the front fence unable to move but not feeling any great

discomfort.

I then saw the gate between the railings of the two sections (Pen 5)

being opened but could not believe my eyes when a policewoman grabbed

my small thirteen year old son and pushed him through the gate back

onto the terraces, she began to scream and shout at people to clear

the pitch and became almost hysterical when no notice of her was
KNOWLES                 ROBERT    ARTHER


taken.    Her voice was raised to the pitch of a scream whilst shouting

at people to clear the pitch.       I watched as an older policeman took

her arm and led her away onto the pitch.

As people climbed out many turned and began to help friend or anybody

to climb out as well.    At this point the police seemed unable to

comprehend the anguish and suffering that people in the crowd were

experiencing.

Being close to both fences as people got out my own position became

easier and I turned to see that the match had been stopped and the

police were starting to help the injured instead of urging them to

clear the pitch.    As I moved I saw a man who had been pressed

alongside me slide (town the fence onto the floor.       He was ashen and

did not display any signs of life.         I screamed at a policeman who had

been at the open gate to help, he jumped into the crowd and began to

administer mouth to mouth in order to help the man.

I would describe the man who collapsed as being about 30 years clean

shaven sandy to light medium cut hair.        He had a heavy build and was

wearing what seemed to me a brown parka but it had lightish coloured

fur on the collar.    He had a Liverpool scarf round his neck.       I think

he had brown trousers on.        I didn't know him.

A bit of room then seemed to appear about me and I decided to climb

the railings into Pen 5 and went out through the gate onto the pitch.

I pointed out to another policeman what was happening he said an

ambulance was on its way.        Several people then began to try and rip

down the fence with their bare hands bending and working the metal

back and forth to try and provide an escape route for the many still

trapped and unable to climb to safety.

My thoughts now turned to finding my son and friend.         The last I had

seen of my son was him running back out of the terrace area in which
KNOWLES                 ROBERT   ARTHER                                    9


the policewoman had tried to put him.     I walked across the pitch, all

around people were now lying on the pitch being comforted by friends,

St Johns Ambulance men or policemen.      I walked back and forth unable

to see the face of my son but seeing the faces of other men's sons and

daughters eyes filled with tears, faces wracked with pain and fear.

People were directing anger at police who seemed content to stand and

watch or awaited some sort of leadership, seme order that would enable

them to help to forget their usual football duties and concentrate

their efforts into the help that people so obviously needed.       That

order I'm afraid was a long time coming.

I found my son in front of the main stand along with our friend, both

thank God unhurt, as I was except for a few bruises.     As we embraced

on the pitch the police began to form a human wall across the centre

of the pitch.   At this another policewoman approached us, seeing our

obvious distress.     She asked that once we had 'gathered' ourselves

could we please go back onto the terracing to enable the match to

continue.   I told her that people in Leppings Lane terrace may be dead

or seriously injured.     She or many of her colleagues did not seem to

comprehend the enormity of the events that were unfolding around us.

We walked off the side of the pitch and sat down on the small track in

front of the stand.     People in the stand were asking what had

happened.   I noticed on the clock in the c o m e r of the ground it was

3.20pm( 1520) and many thousands of people in the ground did not know

what was happening, many believing that fighting or hooligans were

responsible for what they could see on the pitch.

Liverpool supporters in the North stand now began to shout to the

police 'guarding' them to go and help more supporters, many of which

were teenagers began and tear down hoardings at the side of the pitch

to use the wood as make shift stretchers.      An ambulance drove onto the
KNOWLES                ROBERT ARTHER                                      10

pitch and went around to the Leppings Lane end and the fire brigade

arrived and ran across the pitch.

We sat for about an hour watching the scenes before us as crushed and

broken bodies were rushed across the pitch to awaiting ambulances, it

wasn't until about 4 .20pn( 1620) when a policeman walked round the

pitch with a megaphone informing people that the match had been

abandoned because of a 'Serious incident' that many of the huge crowd

realised the extent of what they had just witnessed.

At no time did I see any criminal offence or drunkeness or fighting

amongst the fans.

I did not have any police directions before the match or escort and

there was no police or steward evident at the entrance or exit to the

tunnel.   I also did not see any stewards outside this.

I would also like to add that Saturday 15th April (150489) was a semi­

final day, a day all football supporters hoped their teams would be

involved in one of the matches.     A football match thats what people

went to Hillsborough to see, instead they saw deaths of 95 people, men,

women and children because those we trust to organise major sporting

events got it wrong.    Control of the crowds outside was lost, control

of the crowd inside meant steel cages from which there was no escape,

mistakes were made by those in charge.     To allow a crush to occur on

the scale that it occured at Hillsborough is not down to the people

who only wanted to see a football match who had paid good money for

tickets before the match took place, to ensure they got into the match

and had a place in comfort it is down to the people responsible for

getting those people into the stadium safely and quickly and on this

day proved wholely inadequate for the job required of them.

For the sake of those who died never let it happen again please.

R A KNOWLES
        KNOWLES              ROBERT    ARTHER                                   11

        I would describe myself as medium built white man 6'2" tall(6'02),

        clean shaven with dark receeding hair.   On the day I was wearing black

        sweatshirt, blue jeans, no jacket or scarf.



                                                           R A KNOWLES SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE:      240589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




*




                                                                                     1831
                                                                            STATION




«
NAME:


ADDRESS:
                             LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 31

OCCUPATION:     UNEMPLOYED


Who states:- This statement consisting of Oil pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 071289                                                               SIGNED)


+          On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I went to the FA Cup Semi Final

           football game held at the Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground,

           Hillsborough, Sheffield.

           I attended the game as a supporter of Liverpool Football Club, I was

           born in Anfield and have been attending football games regularly

           since I was about five years of age.       I have visited numerous football

           grounds whilst supporting Liverpool in both this country and in

           Europe.

           I obtained my ticket for the semi final at Hillsborough from as best as

           I can recall my cousin                 it was a six pound ticket for the

           Leppings Lane terrace I paid face value for the ticket.

           I travelled to the game with the following people

           1.   My cousin

           2.   Neil FITZMAURICE, of

           3.                                                               I don't

           know the number of his house.

           4.

           5.
Road, Anfield.

There were I think another four people in the van we travel lied in.

I have seen these others at Anfield on match days but I don't know

their names.     I think they are friends of           he may be able to

help with their details.

The ten of us all travelled in a van              had borrowed from his

works, as far as I can recall we left Liverpool sometime between 10 am

(1000) and 11 am (1100) on the morning of Saturday 15th April 1989

(150489).

We travelled direct to Sheffield on the motorway through Manchester, I

was in the back of the van, I cannot say which route we took, I know

when we were coming off the motorway into Sheffield there was a

traffic queue so we carried onto the next junction to try and avoid

the hold ups, when leaving the motorway at the next junction our van

was stopped by the Police and we were directed back down the motorway

by the Police and ordered to leave the motorway at the junction we had

tried to avoid.

We stopped at a pub outside Sheffield City Centre and had a drink, I

can't remember what the pub was called or what time we stopped.    I had

about three or four pints at the pub, there were a few other Liverpool

supporters at the pub also having a drink.

We left the pub and drove towards Hillsborough, we parked the van in a

side street about ten minutes walk away from the football ground, we

parked the van at about 2.20 pm (1420).

When we left the van we split up into smaller groups I walked to the

ground with my cousin

I had been to the corresponding semi final in 1988 (000088) and I knew

my way to the ground.     We had no sort of directions or escort by the

Police to the ground although I was stopped about half a mile away
from the ground by the Police, they said they were searching

supporters for alcohol.    The Policeman gave me a quick sort of frisk

and we continued on our way.

During our walk to the ground I did not see any kind of disorder,

fighting or drunkeness, but there was quite a heavy Police presence on

the streets around the ground, and the likelyhood of their being any

trouble was remote.

We arrived outside the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground at about

twenty minutes to three (1440).

Myself,                   and Neil all had tickets for the Leppings Lane

terraces and we approached the terrace turnstile block, it was very

busy in front of the turnstiles, but people were forming lines up to

the turnstile entrances.    We joined onto the queues just inside the

outer perimeter gates.     It was very busy just like you would expect at

a semi final and as soon as we had joined onto the queues I noticed

large numbers of people were joining on behind us.

Within a couple of minutes of joining onto what were orderly queues

the pressure of people joining onto the queues behind us quickly

changed the queues by increasing pressure into a solid mass of people

and a crush developed.

I can remember seeing two policemen on horses in the area leading up

to the terrace turnstiles.     I recognised one of the Policemen he has a

moustache I've seen him at Anfield.

The mounted Policemen who had been in amongst the lines leading up to

the turnstiles was now subjected to the same pressure as we were and

although he still appeared to be trying to organise the mass as it had

beeerne back into lines, he was having no success.

It was at about this time that I realised the situation wasquickly

becoming a situation which was getting out of control.
At a time that I can only estimate to have been about 2.45 pm (1445)

or a few minutes later we moved across to a clear area we could see to

the right hand side of the terrace turnstile block as you look from

Leppings Lane.

Myself                 and Neil then approached a solitary Policeman

who was standing by a large folding gate, this gate I now know to be

gate C.   We told this policeman who was wearing a helmet how bad the

situation was in amongst the crowd leading up to the turnstiles.    This

policeman himself was quite agitated it was obvious a few other people

had been remonstrating with him.   I would even say the Policeman

himself was in a state of panic, I can rananber him turning away from

us and speaking into his radio although I did not hear what he said.

After this policemen had spoken into his radio the large gate, gate C,

was opened from inside.   I did not see who opened it.   When the gate

was opened we walked through it.   I did not see who was on the other

side of the gate, I am not sure how many people followed us through

this open gate.

There was no one to take our tickets as we entered   the ground, on

entering the area behind the terrace turnstiles I saw the entrance to

the tunnel which runs beneath the West Stand and onto the terraces.

I did not see any signs directing people to the terraces.    I had used

the tunnel to get onto the terraces at the 1988 (000088) semi final

and I was not aware that there were any other entrance points onto the

terraces.

Neil FITZMAURICE had also ccme through gate C with us and the four of

us entered the tunnel.    I did not see any Policemen or stewards by the

entrance to the tunnel or anywhere inside it.   We all had free passage

along the length of the tunnel.

The four of us came out of the tunnel onto the back of the terraces to
the left hand side into what I now know to be pen number four.    Once

we got onto the terraces it was clear that the terraces were full to

capacity.    Once we tried to make our way into the crowd of the back

of pen number four.    I quickly realised how very full the terraces

were, we had to force our way into the crowd to try and get onto the

terraces.

I cannot say what time it was when we came out of the tunnel, I never

caught sight of the pitch I cannot say if there were any players on

the pitch at that time.

As soon as I got onto the back of the terracing in pen number four I

immediately lost sight of                    I could see Neil was just

behind me on my right hand side.

As soon as I got onto the terraces it became obvious to me that a

large number of people were coming down the tunnel onto the terraces.

I wasn't aware at the time of actually moving but I now know that the

force of the pressure caused by the people coming out of the tunnel

and onto the terraces was moving me across pen number four towards the

dividing fence between pens four and five.

I did not have any first match viewing position from entering the

terraces I was subjected to the crush and a pressure the likes of

which I have never experienced before at any football match.

Having been subjected to the mayhem outside the turnstiles and now to

a far worse situation on the terraces I was in a state of shock and I

have no recollection of any movement or of anything occurring on the

pitch in relation to the game.

The first time I can ranember looking towards the pitch I was I

believe in a position I have marked with a figure one on the separate

grid plan.    I cannot say if the game was in play at this time or give

any indication as to what time I got to this position all I can say is
                                                                         6
that I saw people trying to climb over the front perimeter fence at

the front of pen number four somewhere in the vicinity of the gate in

the fence.   I saw a policeman pushing these people off the fence back

into the pen and I think from the movements of his hands that he was

shouting at people in the pen to stay where they were.

The next clear recollection I have of being in the pen is finding

myself being pushed towards a crush barrier I have marked this

position which I can only estimate with a figure two on the separate

grid plan.   Again I had not seen anything of the game but I am sure

the game had been stopped by the time I got to this position.

In this position I caught a glimpse of the crush barrier which was

just in front of me.   I knew I had to try and get under it so I tried

to bend down, for some reason a little space occurred around me and

I bent further down hoping I could get under the barrier, just as I

did this a blonde girl fell on top of me and this forced me even

further downwards.

Fortunately seme one picked her up again and I managed to get back up

to my feet still behind the barrier.   It was then that I saw that this

blonde girl was okay people were just trying to push her forwards down

the pen to get her out of the crush.

My next recollection is being in a position further back up pen number

four and I think closer to the dividing fence of pens numbers four and

BBfive.   I was looking down the pen to an area roughly about my

previous position number two.   I can ranember at this time that space

was starting to be created around me and also Neil had managed to join

me, I remember seeing a man standing in the crowd in about position

number two, I ranember seeing him upright and then suddenly as space

appeared around the man I remember seeing him drop to the floor, I can

remember thinking at the time from the way that this man had suddenly
__________________________________                                       7


dropped to the floor as space appeared around him that he was

obviously unconcious when he dropped.

All I can say about this man because I only saw him from the back is

that he was a white male, I would guess he was aged in his fifties, I

cannot ranember anything more about him other than I think he was

wearing a light coloured open necked shirt.

Not long after seeing this man drop both me and Neil managed to climb

over the dividing fence into pen number five and as best as I can

recall we went out through the gate at the end of pen number five and

went onto the pitch.

I cannot say what time it was when I got onto the pitch all I can say

is that there were a lot of people on the pitch at that time around

the Leppings Lane end goal.   At first I was trying to find my cousin



Eventually we met up with                 on the pitch.

Both      and myself then helped with carrying people on hoardings from

the area of the Leppings Lane goal up to the area in between the North

Stand and the Kop end of the ground, where there were ambulances

parked.   Myself and     carried either two or three hoardings I can't

remember exactly how many.

I can only rememeber one of the people we carried and that is only

because he was such a young lad.

The only thing I can ranember about helping this young lad is I think

he was lying on a hoarding in the area of the Leppings Lane end goal

on the North Stand side of the ground.   As far as I can ranember when

I first saw this young lad there was a man with him and for some

reason I think this man was related to the boy, I think the man was

kneeling over the boy he was in a terrible state.   Myself      and

this man picked up the hoarding the boy was lying on and ran with it
                                                                          8

up the pitch towards the Spion Kop end of the ground.   It was clear to

me that the boy was dead, he was lying on his back on the hoarding,

his face was a blue colour, his eyes were closed,



We took the young boy to the area just behind the North Stand and

placed him down on the hoarding at the back of one of the Ambulances.

An ambulance man was by the ambulance he looked at the boy and said

there was nothing he could do for him, we left the boy in that

position with the Ambulanceman, I do not know what happened to the man

who I think was related to the boy, he had gone when we got by the

ambulance.

I can only describe this boy as being white aged about ten years old,

he was slight in build and had short dark hair, I cannot say what

style his hair was cut in his hair was all matted with vcrnit.

I cannot remember what the boy was wearing.

As previously stated myself and

hoardings I cannot remember much about them it is just the boy who

stuck in my mind because he was so young.

I cannot remember what time we left the ground, but myself       and

Neil left of our own accord.

As a result of my experiences at Hillsborough




I did not see anything on that afternoon that I considered to be a

criminal offence.

A few weeks after Hillsborough I made a statement about my experiences

at Hillsborough to a Solicitor
I am a white male 6 feet tall of average build, I have blonde straight

hair which on that afternoon my hair was cut short above the ears and

brushed back from the front.   I cannot be sure but on that day I may

have had a full beard and moustache if not I would have been clean

shaven.

I was wearing a Liverpool football club short sleeved football shirt

with a V neck and Candy across the front, blue denim jeans and I think

a pair of brown trainers.

The only other thing I would like to add to this statement about that

afternoon is in regards to the Policing, I thought that there were a

large amount of Policemen on that afternoon who were standing about

looking bemused, not appearing to know what to do as the disaster

unfolded.   I took particular exception to the large amount of

Policemen who were lined up across the middle of the pitch they should

have been used to help in the disaster instead of this they just

hindered the progress of the fans who were carrying the dead and

injured across the pitch on hoardings.

I thought in general that the people who were there at the ground to

deal with the emergency failed to deal with it as you would expect

them to.

I produce the separate grid plan (Exh No       ) (Exh Ref        'I)
                                     SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC
                                                                         STATION

NAME:          PAUL
               MCCAFFREY

ADDRESS
                                MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 30

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 300489                                              P McCAFFREY (SIGNED)


#         I am a married man living at the above address with my wife.

          On Saturday 15th April (150489) this year I went to    Hillsborough to

          watch Liverpool play Nottingham Forest in the FA Cup Semi Final,

          infact I went to the same game last year( 000088).    I went on the

          Saturday with three friends of mine, they are

                            we travelled up in          car, we went over the

          Pennines, the same route as last year missing the M62, we left my

          house at eleven o'clock (1100) in the morning in           cavalier and

          we didn't stop until we got to Sheffield, the only hold up we

          encountered on the way was one in Stockport where we were held up in

          traffic for five or ten minutes.

          We stopped on the outskirts of Sheffield at a pub for a drink, infact

          again it was the same pub we stopped at last year.     I can't remember

          the name of the pub, but I know there was a cricket pitch next to it,

          it could have been called the Porterhouse, or one of those Porterhouse

          steak houses, we got there at about half past one to quarter to two

          (1330 - 1345).   I had three pints at the pub and we left at about

          twenty to twenty five past two (1420 - 1425), we knew where we were as
MCCAFFREY              PAUL                                                  2


we did exactly the same last year.

We drove down toward the ground and parked the car in the same area as

we parked last year, but I can't remember the name of the road we

parked in, but it had sandstone wall on one side and houses on the

other, I forgot to mention that as we were leaving the pub four or

five football fans were just going in.

We walked from the car down the hill towards the ground, two of us had

got tickets for the west stand and me and         had tickets for the

terraces, up and till now it was just like last years game.    When I

got to the gates of the Leppings Lane end it was about quarter to

three (1445) and I was shocked to see the amount ofpeople trying to

get in, unlike last year there was no order,no queuing or anything, it

was just a mass of people, there weresome policemen on horseback

trying their best to do what they could to get some order, I think

there were three of them, but they didn't have a chance to be honest.

At this time I was with                                         had left

us to go to the West Stand.    I was just standing in the mass of

people, the turnstiles were some twenty five to thirty yards away at

least, and by this time there were quite a few more people    behind us

and others arriving all the time.    I saw a policeman infront of me in

the crowd, he was wearing a flat cap and had a walkie-talkie.       He

looked as though he was trying to make his way towards the policemen

on horseback but he didn't have much chance, he was getting pushed

and shoved like the rest of us.     I could also see some policemens

helmets there could have been about half a dozen, these were over by

the turnstiles that I wanted to go in.    Last year it was totally

different, I arrived about the same time but there was a couple of

queues stretching back onto the footpath by the road and I managed to

get in quite easily.      As I was standing there I said to         "We're
MCCAFFREY             PAUL                                                 3


not going to get in here before the kick off".     I didn't look at my

watch but you knew we would miss the beginning.

        said to me lets follow those, there were some people just

infront of        and to the side, climbing over the railings that

take you to the side of the river, we followed them and climbed over

and there were also others following us, we managed to walk along side

the river quite easily, and it was our intention to climb back over

the railings by the turnstiles to hopefully get in quicker, so as not

to miss the beginning of the game.

When I got near the turnstiles which I could see through the fence, I

saw there was a gate open and I could see people walking through into

the ground, they weren't pouring through they were walking through as

though there was some-body official on the other side, I got through a

hole in the fence and walked through the gate with           I was

expecting somebody there to collect my ticket, but there was no one

about, at this time my immediate thought was that the gate had been

opened by some fans, anyway I just carried on and walked with

towards the tunnel which takes you through to the terraces behind the

goal.

The walk from the open gate to the tunnel was no problem, there

was no pushing or anything.      I walked into the tunnel there were no

signs of any police or stewards about, and about half way down the

tunnel we both stopped for a pee, infact where we stopped was a gap

inbetween others who were urinating.     There were peope urinating both

sides of the tunnel and from what I could see the whole length of the

tunnel as well.    I have been to this ground several times and I still

don't know where the toilet is.     After I finished my pee, I walked

towards the ground, it was my intention to stand where I did last year,

right behind the goals.      When I got to the end of the tunnel there was
MCCAFFREY              PAUL                                                   4


no signs of any police or stewards and I saw Alan HANSEN on the pitch

which surprised roe, the game hadn't yet kicked off.    I pushed my way

through a few people to get to where I wanted to stand, and            said

to roe "It's choca in here, why do we want to come in here".    I told

him it would quieten down.          was behind roe and I was leading the

way.   Then a surge came and I was pushed forward.     I thought at first

it was just like a normal surge which I have been in numerous times at

hone games, and I was expecting the crowd to go back, but they didn't.

It just increased and the pressure got worse.    I was just moving

forward, I couldn't help it, and I was pushed up against a crash

barrier.    Because of the pressure on me against the barrier I had to

move and both of us,          first, managed to get down underneath the

barrier and in front of it.    A couple of others got under with us.      I

was standing up in front of the barrier and was still being crushed,

usually when you get in front it eases off, but it didn't.      It must

have been about a minute or so and I heard a cracking noise and felt

something hit roe on the legs, but I don't know if it was the barrier

or a person.    People behind roe must have fell face down because I

could feel then grabbing at my legs.     I was still being pushed and

crushed.    By this time I could feel myself walking on people, and it

got to the stage where you just couldn't go any further. There was

somebody in arms distance of my right arm and I tried to pull them up

but by this time I was weak and out of breath and I couldn't move him.

I grabbed hold of his collar, he was a young boy aged about 10 to 14

years with blond air and wearing a white top.     He never spoke to me,

he just disappeared under other people.     I was a bit light headed

myself and I remember          saying he was weak and I told him to just

keep breathing. After that I was stuck and there was no movement

either way.    It seemed like a long time, but it might have been just
MCCAFFREY               PAUL


minutes.     Fortunately I was standing up.    People were screaming, and I

could feel people pulling my hair.       I saw the gate at the front open

and I saw a few get out onto the pitch, then it was closed by           the

police.     The police who closed it stayed with it, they didn't        walk

away.     At this time I didn'tknow if the game had finished or not,         I

was about six (6'0)    to seven (7'0) feet away from the perimeter fence,

and I remember shouting for help to get me out.      Eventually I don't

know how long, a tall bloke with fair hair, wearing a black and white

jumper and black trousers managed to pull me out, he was behind me. By

this time there were gaps behind him, and it was clearing.      There

were bodies all around me either dead or unconscious.       I wouldn't like

to say how many but at least over twenty.      I started to help the

others then,     I carried out the body of a girl that was lying just to

the left of where I had been.      I carried her out with a policeman to

behind us where there was more space.      On seeing a photograph the

next day or Monday, I recognised the girl I carried with the policeman

as being a girl called Sarah HICKS.

After I had carried the girl with the policeman, I went back to help

other people and I was helping pick them up and get them over the

fence into the section on our right (pen 2).      I assisted with at least

six or seven people over the fence.      I then sat down because I was

feeling light headed again.      A policonan came up to me and asked me if

I was alright, and I told him I'd be o.k.      I sat there for a bit

longer, talking to a lad by the side of me who had hurt his leg.         I

helped carry him onto the pitch with a policeman.      Then I started

looking for vay mate           :or about twenty minutes, I couldn't find

him so I went back into pen 3 through the open gate and walked back

through the tunnel and made irry way back up to the car.    When I got

back to the car the other three were there, it would have been about
       MCCAFFREY            PAUL                                                 6
       twenty to quarter to five (1640) - (1645).   A woman from over the road

       came over with a cup of tea for us and let us use the phone.   The

       following Monday I saw a picture                and I saw       in the

       picture, and I also saw myself.    It shows you exactly where I was in

       the terraces.

       Last year I was stopped by the police on the bridge in Leppings Lane

       and asked if I had a ticket, there were also stewards on the entrance

       to the tunnel last year,    Last year the police were getting everybody

       into orderly queues, which helped.   Unfortunately this year there

       weren't enough police outside the Leppings Lane entrances, and I would

       also say that if the segregation fences were removed allowing people

       to move sideways I don't think you would have got a crush at all, you

       would have got the people in.




                                                           P MCCAFFREY SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE

         TIME:            DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE

OFFICERS SIGNATURE
                                                                         STATION

NAME:          TERRANCE     STEVEN
               PITT

ADDRESS


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 32

OCCUPATION: UNEMPLOYED


Who states:- This statement consisting of 013 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 120689                                                  T S PITT (SIGNED)



          I live at the above address with two friends.    I am a Liverpool

          supporter and on Saturday, 15th April 1989, (150489) I attended

          Hillsborough football ground, Sheffield, for the Football Association

          Cup semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.    I went to the

          match with two friends                                    Liverpool (no

          phone) and Graham SEDEN                                 I travelled to

          Sheffield in my car and we left Wallasey at about 9.30 am (0930).

          I am a season ticket holder at Anfield and I obtained my

          ticket for the match through my season ticket I paid    6.00 for the

          ticket which was for the terraces at the Leppings Lane end of the

          ground.   On the journey to Sheffield we were only held up by slow

          moving traffic going through Snake Pass and we stopped on Snake pass

          for the toilet.     After moving off again when we had been to the toilet

          I saw a mini-bus which contained Liverpool fans.     I noticed a couple

          of them were drinking alcohol from cans but they were not drunk.       We

          arrived in Sheffield at about 12.30 pn (1230) and parked at the

          Leppings Lane End of the ground in Willis Road which I would say is

          only a couple of minutes walk to the ground.




                                                                                      1848
PITT                  TERRANCE    STEVEN                                   2
After parking the car we walked to the Beeley Wood public house,

we were in there for just before 1.00 pm (1300).      The pub was quite

empty really there were only a few Liverpool fans in the pub.      None

of them were drunk.     I had two pints because of driving and we left

the pub at about 2.20pm (1420).    On the walk to the ground we knew

where we were going we did not receive any Police directions or a

Police Escort, but Police were evident on foot, around the area of the

ground directing traffic, on the walk to the ground I saw no

drunkeness, disorder or other bad behaviour.

We got to the Leppings Lane entrance at about 2.35 pm (1435).      As we

walked over the bridge to the River Don I looked over to my right

where I saw that the two large blue gates giving access to the terrace

turnstiles had been shut.     I saw two mounted Police Officers outside

the gates and two between the area of the gates and the turnstiles,

because the gates were closed people were forming up outside the gates

and because of the large number of people present, people were

starting to spill over onto the main road.       When I got nearer I'm sure
                                             \

I saw that the outer gates to the West Stand turnstiles were also

closed.

The Police horses were completely ineffective but they couldn't do

anything because of the crowds of people.     I saw Police Officers on

foot on the pavement on Leppings Lane then a few by the terrace

turnstiles again there was nothing the Officers could do because of

the mass of the crowd.     I did not see any stewards by the outer gates

or turnstiles at all.

We joined the mass of people there was no orderly queues, there was

just no control and no one was trying to form people into orderly

queues in the end it got so bad it was too late to do anything about

the situation outside the ground, people were being crusted up against
PITT                  TERRANCE    STEVEN                                  3


the outer gates and also against the Police horses.    Eventually the

outer gates were opened.   I don't know if they were opened physically

or whether it was the force of the crowd against than that caused them

to open.   People then just surged towards the turnstiles, after a

while it again got bad in this area.

I knew which turnstile I needed to enter through I was positioned

more or less to the centre of the turnstiles about five yards away

from them, again people were being crushed and there seemed no

movement forward of people actually going through the turnstiles.

I saw people climbing over the turnstile walls, I entered the ground

not via the turnstiles but through a concertina gate which was to my

left this gate is situated in between the West Stand turnstiles and

the terrace turnstiles.    I saw a Policeman open this gate from inside

the ground it was opened fully.     I don't know for what purpose the

gate was opened, but people saw it open and made a surge towards it,

you were just carried through with the others, there was no way you

could have tried to stand in a fixed position you would have been

hurt.   I did not use my ticket but sent it to the Liverpool Supporters

Club who were forwarding all the complete tickets to the Police.     My

ticket was for entrance B Leppings Lane terraces, serial no LL1 44 43.

Inside the ground I saw no signs directing me to my match viewing

point apart from the letter B by the tunnel entrance.

Once you had got into the ground the crowds eased off considerably.

We walked down the tunnel at normal walking pace and you had full

movement of your upper body, there were even fans urinating against

the walls within the tunnel.

At the entrance to the tunnel I saw no Police or steward control,

between my entry point and match viewing point I saw no disorder or

other incidents and saw no supporters consuming alcohol in the ground.
PITT                   TERRANCE    STEVEN                                     4


At the end of the tunnel it again began to become crowded, just before

we started to push our way into the terraces a man with a small

boy was walking out of the terraces the boy was crying, and was in a

distressed state.    On getting beyond the tunnel we turned right and

went into Pen 3, as we were walking across the terraces I saw that the

match had already kicked off but a man I spoke to said that the match

had only just started so we were in the terraces just seconds after 3

pm (1500).

At the time of taking up my first match viewing point number one as

indicated on the grid (Marked TSP/1) (Exhibit No.             ) there was

no excessive crowd crush evident.           aven had roan to get out a

paper and I saw other people around me reading too, although upon

looking down at the front of the pen Isaw that people had started to

climb up the front fencing.       I did not see the barrier break in pen 3,

although I don't know if I was near it or not when it broke.

Shortly after taking up my first position in the pen, you could

gradually feel the weight of people from behind pushing down on you,

the excessive crowd crush came shortly afterwards, there was a large

surge forwards.     I was moved about 5 - 1 0 yds forwards      andI ended

up in position two as indicated on the grid.      It was after this large

surge that people started to panic, after this surge I got seperated

from         and Graham.   I saw people climbing over the front fencing

and people being pulled up into the stand above,       I was not injured at

all.   I managed to move back up towards the back wall of the terraces

people were just panicking I saw a man dragging a girl backwards, he

was panicking and I told him to calm down, the girl was unconscious.

Together with a man, I don't know, I managed to help lift this girl up

into the stand above, I would say the girl was about 14 - 15 yrs and

she was wearing a red jumper and blue jeans, I then managed to help
PITT                 TERRANCE   STEVEN                                      5


another two or three people up into the stand above.     I then saw three

lads carrying a youth of about 17 - 18 he seemed in a bad way.     He had

a shirt on which was ripped open and jeans on.

I didn't see where he had been picked up from within the terraces.      I

helped carry this youth about half way back through the tunnel.

I then began to make my way back onto the terraces, but I saw three

men carrying another youth who was again in his late teens early

twenties, they were carrying him with his stomach and head facing

the ground, I told them to turn him around, so they laid him down in

the tunnel.

We then carried him out through the tunnel and laid him down about 5 -

10 yds away from the tunnel entrance.

The lads who had helped me carry him disappeared, I began to give this

youth mouth to mouth then a WPC came over to me she started to do

chest compressions while I continued to give mouth to mouth, but after

3 or 4 minutes I realised he was dead.

I would describe this youth as I say, late teens early twenties,

height about 5' 9 (5' 09), white button shirt which was open, denim

jeans, he had no footwear on, although I can't remember if he was

wearing socks he had mousey collar length hair, which was wavy,

brushed back with a centre parting.      I can't remember if he had a

beard or moustache but he had brown eyes.     There was nothing else on

his body which made him stand out, I think I would recognise this

youth again.

I then moved away from this youth and I saw another person lying on

the ground about 2 - 3 yds to the right of the first youth I had tried

to revive.

I began to do mouth to mouth then I was joined by a girl who said she

was a nurse.   Then others came over, in the end there were two female
PITT                  TERRANCE   STEVEN                                  6

nurses and a male nurse by this second youth.   We were getting in each

others way.   One of the nurses was doing heart compressions on this

youth, while I did mouth to mouth, then an ambulanceman came over

with a resuscitator, but that failed to revive the youth and he died.

I knew this youth was again in his late teens or early twenties but I

cannot describe what clothing he had on or his facial features and I

would not recognise him again.

I then went over and spoke to a youth who I now know I stand with in

the Kop.   He had an injured arm, I then went over to another youth who

was lying on the ground, he was positioned in between the entrance to

the tunnel and the stairs leading to the West Stand to the right of

the tunnel.   I would say he was positioned near the stairs.   I began

to give him mouth to mouth but I can't remember if anyone was giving

this youth heart compressions, someone then came over to me and asked

if he was dead, this person then introduced himself as a doctor.    He

told me to leave him so it was obvious he had died.

Again he was in his late teens early twenties, but I cannot describe

him facially or describe what he wearing.   I would not recognise him

again.

I then attended to another youth who was positioned about 2 - 3 yds

away from the stairs to the stand, to the right of the tunnel

entrance, he had been sick, a Policewoman was also with him, I wiped

his mouth with my scarf and began to give him mouth to mouth but again

he died.   Again he was in his late teens, early twenties, but I cannot

describe him facially although if I saw a picture of him I may be able

to recognise him again, he had a light coloured shirt or T shirt on

which had been pulled up to his neck and dark coloured trousers on

which could have been denims.

I covered this youth's face with a brown leather jacket and a very
PITT                    TERRANCE   STEVEN                                7


thin coat.

All the four dead bodies I witnessed were removed from their

respective positions on the ground by the Police and ambulancemen.

In relation to factors which caused deaths and injuries I would say

that it was the amount of people that was allowed to enter the

middle two pens.   I left the ground at about 4.00 pm (1600) of my own

accord.

I witnessed nothing I consider to be a criminal offence, although the

thin coat and leather jacket I had used to cover the fourth youth's

face, I did go through the pockets of both garments to see if I could

see who they belonged to before I handed them to a Policeman.

I cannot really ccmment on events within the terracing after the match

was stopped, but behind the stand it took about fifteen minutes for

ambulances to arrive.     There were a lack of medical facilities (no

signs for first aid posts or equipment), a lack of stewards and co­

ordination between the emergency services and stewards in relation to

directing people to a point where assistance was needed for people who

could not find friends or relatives.

Overall I feel there was a lack of Police control over the crowds

outside the ground and inside in relation to letting people down the

tunnel when the middle two pens were over full, and tickets should

have been checked better outside the ground.     I did not attend the

same match last year.
        PITT             TERRANCE    STEVEN                     8

                                              T S PITT SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   120689

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:           PC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                                    1 85 5
                                                                          STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                           LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 26

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 141189                                                             (SIGNED)



           On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I attended the Football

           Association Challenge Cup Semi-Final game held at the Sheffield

           Wednesday Football Ground in Hillsborough, Sheffield.

           I attended the game as a supporter of Liverpool Football Club, I have

           supported Liverpool regularly for the last eighteen years.     I am a

           season ticket holder.

           I travelled to Sheffield with my

                                                                               and

           two other lads who I only know as                 I don't know any

           other details about them, all five of us travelled in my brothers car.

           I got my ticket for the Semi-Final from Liverpool F.C. using my season

           ticket voucher it was a Six Pounds ticket for the Leppings Lane

           terraces.

           The five of us left Liverpool at about quarter to eleven (1045) on the

           morning of Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), we travelled direct to

           Sheffield.   I cannot remember what route we travelled, I cannot

           remember any severe travel delays on the way.

           We arrived in Sheffield at about twenty minutes to two o'clock
(1340) and the police directed us to a parking place, we parked the

car on a main road about ten minutes walk away from the football

ground.

After parking the car we went to a pub about five minutes walk away

from where we perked the car, we had about two pints each and

          who had gone to the game without a ticket managed to buy a

ticket for the Leppings Lane terraces,           paid face value for the

ticket which was six pounds, he bought it off another Liverpool

supporter who was also having a drink in the pub.

                                             left the pub at about twenty

past two (1420) to get seme sandwiches from the car.    Myself and

left the pub at about twenty five minutes past two (1425) and walked

down towards the ground, we never had any sort of directions or escort

from the Police towards the ground, we just followed the large crowds

walking down towards the ground.

I never saw any sort of disorder, fighting or drunkeness as I walked

down towards the ground.     I had seen other supporters drinking in the

pub we had been in.     I also saw supporters drinking from cans in the

streets.

Just before arriving at the ground myself and

                              the four of us arrived outside the

Leppings Lane entrance to the ground at about twenty five minutes to

three o'clock. (1435)

On arrival at the entrance to the ground there were no queues, all I

could see was a mass of people stretching back from the terrace

turnstiles and beyond the outer gates towards the road.

Myself,[                                              joined onto this

mass of people.

     had gone to the other end of the ground because he had a standing
ticket for the Spion Kop end of the ground.        also had a ticket for

the Kop end of the ground and was intending to go and find         but

once we got into the crowd outside the Leppings Lane turnstiles it was

so packed and crushed        couldn't get out.

I could only see one policeman on a horse in amongst the crowd leading

up to the terrace turnstiles, he was trying to split the crowd up into

queues, but there were too many people and he wasn't doing any good.

I cant remember seeing any stewards outside the turnstiles.

We were stuck in the crowd outside the entrance to the turnstiles for

a long time.   I cannot say exactly how long, we didn't seem to be

getting any closer to the entrance to the turnstiles all that seemed

to be happening was that the pressure around us was increasing and the

crush was getting worse.

I cannot be sure of what time it happened but whilst still in the

crush outside the turnstiles and in a position I would say was outside

the outer perimeter gates I became aware that the crowd in front of me

was moving forwards.    All four of us at this time were still

together and we were carried along with the forward movement of the

crowd.

As we were carried along with the crowd I was aware that we had

entered into the ground through a large open gate, which I now know to

be gate C situated to the right hand side of the terrace turnstiles as

you look from Leppings Lane.

I cannot be sure how many people had entered through this gate before

us, I had not seen the gate being opened.     As we got into the ground

through gate C no one was checking tickets.

Once we got through the gate I saw the tunnel, the tunnel running

under the centre of the West Stand, I didn't see any signs to direct

supporters onto the terraces, all I could see was the entrance to the
________________________________                                            4


tunnel and everyone seemed to be going down the tunnel, it was just a

case of being carried along into the tunnel.

I cannot remember seeing any Policemen or Stewards by the entrance to

the tunnel but I was stuck in the crowd and probably wouldn't have

noticed them anyway.

As far as I can remember I had free passage along the tunnel, at the

end of the tunnel I was carried out onto the terraces by the crowd

into what I now know to be pen number four, I lost sight of the other

three as we entered the tunnel.

As I came out of the tunnel onto the terraces I can remember catching

a quick glimpse of the pitch.      I knew that the players were on the

pitch at that time and I don't think the game had kicked off.

Having been carried forwards into pen number four I was just carried

along with the movement of the fans.      I never got a match viewing

position on entering the pen.      I was irrmediately in a situation

where I was being crushed, I had no control over my movements I was

just being carried along, my arms were pinned down against my sides, I

was being moved around in all directions facing all directions.         I was

not aware of anything occurring on the pitch.

I was not aware of the kick off occurring or anything happening on the

pitch.

As I was being moved around in the crowd I became aware that I was

being moved slowly forwards down the terracing towards the perimeter

fence.

The crushing sensation was very bad I was having problems trying to

breath and I could hear people around me screaming for the gate in the

fence to be opened.

I cannot say how long I was in pen number four, I cannot relate any

event to a time.
Eventually I stopped moving and I found that I was about twelve feet

away frcm the front perimeter fence, the gate in the fence was about

twenty feet away to my left.    I cannot say what time I got to this

position, I have marked this position with a figure two on the

seperate grid plan which I produce (Ex. No.        ) (Ex. Ref

When I got to position two I could not see anything of the pitch, all

I could see was people climbing over the front perimeter fence onto

the pitch and I saw a policeman pulling people out through the gate in

the perimeter fence.

I knew that the best thing to do was to get out of the pen.     I could

hear people shouting out things like, "I can't breath"     I concentrated

my efforts on getting out.     I knew people were in trouble around me

but I never actually saw anyone on the terraces who I would say, was

having difficulty, but it was very difficult to see anything, there

was a lot of panic on the terraces.

Eventually I got out through the gate in the perimeter fence, there

were policemen by the gate pulling people out of the pen.

Once I got out of the pen I turned around and I s a w i n s i d e pen

number four by the gate I helped pull him out through the gate.

I cannot say what time I got out of pen number four, I cannot say what

was occurring on the pitch when I got out of the pen, at that time all

I was worried about was finding                         I walked along

the track by the perimeter fence looking for            and eventually I

saw him, he was still inside the terraces.     I climbed up onto the

perimeter fence and leant over and p u l l e d i p      out of the crowd

on the terraces and got him over the top of the perimeter fence.       I

cannot be sure but I think I pulled            out of the terraces

somewhere behind the Liverpool goal I cannot be any more precise about

his position.
Once I got          out, I noticed that there were a large number of

people on the pitch in the area of the Liverpool goal, there were a

lot of Police on the perimeter fence trying to get people out of the

terraces and onto the pitch.

We walked about for some time in the area by the Liverpool goal

looking f o r _____________ I saw a lot of bodies lying on the pitch it

was then that I realised the seriousness of the situation.     I did not

assist any of the dead or injured, I did not as far as I am aware

personally witness any deaths.   I did see a lot of bodies laid on the

pitch but none that I could really describe there were so many, also

we were still trying to find

Eventually we found______ on the pitch and we went off the pitch into

the North Stand.

I cannot be more precise but we left the ground at some time after

four o'clock (1600), eventually when we got back to our car we found

everyone in our group was accounted for.

I did not see anything during that day which I would say was a

criminal offence.

'The only thing I can say about the afternoon is that once the Police

realised what was going on they did what they could also I think they

did the correct thing by opening the gate to let people into the

ground because it was very bad outside the turnstiles and they had to

do something to help the situation outside.

I am a white male, 5 ft 10 ins tall I am slim in build, I have dark

brown hair with a left parting cut above my ears.   I have a

moustache.

On that afternoon I was wearing white training shoes, light blue denim

jeans and a blue and green rugby shirt, it has a white collar a green

right sleeve and a blue left sleeve a plain blue back and the front is
                                                                                  7


        in four quarters in blue and green colours.

        On the afternoon of the semi-final whilst on the Leppings Lane

        terraces I lost my wrist watch, it was a round faced gents wrist

        watch, a cream coloured body with a gold ring surrounding the face, it

        had a black leather look strap with holes in.   The face was white

        with black Roman type numerals, it has a quartz movement, named




                                                                         IIGNED

^fcffEMENT TAKEN
           PLACE:

          TIME:            DATE

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE                PC

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:
                                                                         STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                         LONDON,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 24

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 050589                                                            SIGNED)



           I am a single girl and I live at the above address with my boyfriend



           We have lived together for approximately four and a half months and

           are keen Supporters of Liverpool Football Club.

           As a result of          obtaining two Football Tickets for the

           Liverpool v Nottingham Forest Football Match on Saturday 15th April

           1989 (150489), we attended the Hillsborough Football Ground in

           Sheffield.

                     and myself caught the train from St Pancreas Train Station at

           around 9 am (0900) and met up with two of our friends at Kettering

           train Station.    From Kettering we all travelled together by train to

           Sheffield main train station arriving at around 11.30 am (1130).

           On arrival at the Sheffield Station after getting outside I saw approx

           50-50 Police Officers two of which were Mounted Police they were

           separating the Liverpool supporters from the Nottingham Forest

           supporters, we were directed to an area nearby to await a bus to the

           ground.    We were in a crowd of around 100 to 150 people awaiting buses

           we had to wait half an hour for a bus and the journey to the ground
took approximately 20 minutes.

As the bus neared the Football Ground via Leppings Lane I could see

outside the ground about 4 to 6 Policemen on horses and about 10

Officers on foot.    There was not many supporters about as this was

about 12.30pm (1230).

As the bus stopped at the ground on the opposite side of the road to

the ground, three Police Officers came over and were instructing us as

we got off to cross over the road onto the same side as the ground and

we «ere told after we had crossed over we could go where we liked.

Together with

we walked along Leppings Lane in the direction of the Park to nearby

Shops and purchased soft drinks and food.    There was not a large

number of people about, it appeared normal from what I have seen when

attending other football matches.

Whilst we were at the shops                         |.eft us and they went

on their own walking away from the ground, we could not go too far as

we had made arrangements to meet up with five of              friends

when I know as

and        it Leppings Lane entrance.

Whilst we were waiting we walked up and down Leppings Lane a number of

times and eventually met than at around 2.00pm (1400) in Leppings Lane

near to the shops.

Whilst we were waiting for them to arrive between 1.30pm (1330) and

2.00pm (1400) an awful lot of people had appeared and were moving

into the ground.     I noticed in this area that the police presence had

dropped and all that I saw at this time were three policemen on horse

back and could not see any officers on foot that had been evident

earlier.   As we neared the Leppings Lane entrance which would be about

2.15pm (1415) I could see a mass of people on the pavement near to the
entrance, there were so many that they were spilling into the road

on the same side as the ground and I could see one of the officers

on horseback trying to keep them off the road onto the pavement.     We

then joined the crowd to go to the turnstiles and as we turned the

corner to face the turnstile I could see that there were a lot of

pecpie there, we joined on the back of it other people then joined on

the back of us and we started to become crushed, I became very

frightened as the pressure became unbearable I could hardly breath the

pressure was from all round and was so intense that my feet were not

touching the floor and I was being moved with the crowd involuntary

alcng to add to that           elbow was digging in my neck causing me

great pain but because of the crush he was unable to move it.    Then to

my horror and disbelief the Policeman on horseback forced his horse

through the crowd to our right, the crowd were unable to move

anywhere, which caused others to be crushed up against the wall by the

turnstiles in an effort to get out of the horses way the horse

disappeared in the crowd some where I think to my right.   It was then

that there was a relief in the pressure and we were able to move

around freely again.          and I decided we had had enough and

turned round to leave and it was then that we saw that the gates to

the ground behind us had been closed.   We managed to move round to the

wall next to the exit gate at the side of the turnstiles, as we could

move freely there, I could see a policeman standing by the exit gate,

there was a lot of people around him pleading and shouting at him to

open the gate or do something out here as there were people dying.        I

believe this was said as an expression rather than a fact.   I was

standing against the wall at this stage and once again the number of

people was building up, this carried on for about five minutes, during

whioh the policeman was constantly being pleaded with to open the
gate, the officer was saying he didn't have the authority to open the

gat a and he hadn't the means to contact anyone with such authority.

The crowd moved around the gate by the policeman and again the

crushing began to build up.    Again I became very   frightened as againI

was in fear of my life.    Suddenly the gate was opened slightly   anda

police officer who I pressume was more senior as     he had a flat haton

and had a lot of pips on his shoulder came out he was with a man who I

believe was a steward as he had an orange bib on, this officer looked

around and he listened to what people were saying to him, he then

disappeared back into the ground with the gate shut behind him.    Then

a vary short time later I saw that same officer open the gate fully

and allow everyone in, I was again frightened by this because before

he opened the gate everyone outside was screaming and shouting at him

to open it and I knew that if he did there would be terrific rush and

my fears came true because everyone did rush forward and I became

trapped by the rush past me against the edge of this gate and the wall

and I could not move,           swept past me and into the ground I

could hear him shouting me but could not see him, after a minute or so

I don't know whether the crowd had eased off or whether I was pulled

off but I ended up with         inside the ground, we stood inside the

ground to one side out of the rush to regain ourselves, I could see

that there was about 150 to 200 other people doing same, sane with

kids who were crying.     The rush through the open gates eased off and

we began to walk around within the ground, we walked near to the steps

to the seating in the West Stand where we saw a Steward and a

policeman, then another policeman came up to us and asked us if we

wers O.K.   We couldn't see where else to go so we walked into the

tunnel towards the terraces, we could see straight through the tunnel,

the only people in it were a few men who were urinating in the tunnel,
at this stage we could move about easily and I was not aware of any

large crowds behind us.   When we got to the end of the tunnel we

stepped because we could see the number of people on the terraces. I

told        that I didn't want to go in there as I could see that it

was full straight the way back to about about a couple of feet from

the tunnel entrance.         thought that there was a lot of room in

what is Pen 7 near the North Stand and we intended to go there.     Then

there appeared to be a lot of people coming in behind us down the

tunnel, there was no pushing with hands but you had to follow the

motion of the crowd which was forward and down towards the front and

we anded up right at the front of the stand in front of the fence

behind the goals.   At this stage I could stand freely and move about

slightly not any crushing, then the pressure from behind began to

build up no actual pushing just gradual pressure which again you had

to xove with the crowd which in our case was to the right of Pen 4 and

end ad up to the right of a gate in the fence at the front.   I was

subjected to far more pressure here in fact it was unbearable and

again I was in fear of my life, I could see policemen on the track

around the pitch and we were all shouting at them to open this gate to

let us out, I saw a policewoman there and she was shouting at her male

colleague to open the gates then the policeman went off to fetch

soiraone.   I believe to open the gate.   The pressure was so intense

that as you breathed out you were unable to breathe back in again and

I concentrated on breathing and shouting at the policeman to let us

out.   Eventually the policeman returned and opened the gate in front

of us, and a lad to my left pushed past me and fell over and was then

pulled out by the policewoman, I was next out and I believe between 20

and 40 were pulled out and the gate was again shut.     We walked along

the track towards the North Stand when we were physically man handled
into a very slim Pen in the stands which I think is Pen 5.

Whilst in this Pen more and more were being put in the front by police

and I could see a large number of supporters climbing the separating

fence from Pen 4 into ours.

In fear of being crushed again and the number of people in Pen 5 was

increasing,         m d myself climbed the separating fence into Pen 6 to

get away.     The match was still being played at this time, after a

couple of minutes the game was stopped and I was aware that there was

sorrething seriously wrong in the stands.    I could see grown men

cli.Tibing into our pen and sitting down and crying,      and myself

then climbed over the fence onto the pitch and walked along towards

the Kop, I sat with friends in the North Stand as I was very upset and

     went back to the terraces to see if he could help.    We waited in

the ground until we were instructed by the tannoy to leave the ground.

I would like to say that upon my first arriving at the ground where

the police were by the buses, the policeman's attitude was wrong it

was aggresive he was saying the fans is an aggressive manner.

"We have pavements to walk on in Sheffield" because one or two were

walking in the road, also when I was in the crush outside the

turnstile and the young Policeman was on that gate he was as terrified

as all of us and I felt for him he was unable to do anything.

I also would like to say whilst in the crush outside the turnstile I

saw the wall by the gate begin to move due to the pressure on it, if

scurathing had not have been done I'm sure the wall would have gone

over and god knows how many more would have been injured or killed.       I

was injured in the crush due to being crushed against a post in Pen 4

which caused bruising to my left leg, but I did not attend Hospital.
                                              SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          PLACE:

          TIME:              DATE:   050589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:     PC
                                                                          STATION
NAME:


ADDRESS:
                --------    LIVERPOOL

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 42

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of Oil pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecutior. if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 250689                                                             SIGNED)



           I a m a married man residing at the above address.

           On the afternoon of Saturday 15 April 1989(150489), I attended the

           F.A. Cup semi final football match between Liverpool and Nottingham

           Forest at the Hillsborough ground in Sheffield.

           I attended the match as a Liverpool supporter.     I have supported

           Liverpool all ray life and I am a season ticket holder at Anfield.

           I obtained ray match ticket from Anfield by using a voucher from ray

           season ticket.     My ticket was for the Leppings Lane standing and cost

           me six pounds.

           I travelled to the match by private car with the following people -

                                                         He's been seen by the

           Police. 2.      A lad called          . Thats not his surname, that what

           I know him by.      He lives in         somewhere and I could find out

           his full name if necessary.

           3.   Another lad whose name and address I do not know.    I believe he

           was a friend of

           We made one stop on the way to Sheffield, that being at services on

           the motorway to use the toilet and have something to eat.     I don't
knew which services or which motorway.     There were traffic delays on

the motorway, there being a long tailback at some stage.         There was

also a hold up on the outskirts of Sheffield due to the amount of

traffic.

We eventually got to The Gate public house and parked on the car park.

This was at quarter to two (1345).     The Gate pub is about a ten minute

walk to the ground.     The pub appeared closed but after a couple

of minutes a couple of lads came out of a side door and we were able

to go in.     We had about three pints in there and left at about half

past two (1430).     We then made our way to the ground.   On the way to

the ground I saw people drinking cans of beer in the street, but

there was no drunkeness.     I did not see any people fighting or any

form of disorder.     There were a number of Policemen on the way to the

ground and the numbers of Police got less and less as you got nearer

the ground.     We did not receive any directions or any escort from the

Police, but I knew which way to go to the ground as I had attended the

corresponding match at Hillsborough the previous year.

We arrived at the Leppings Lane turnstile area at about twenty to

three (1440).     Upon arrival at the turnstile area, there was just a

large mass of people trying to get to the turnstile.       The

turnstiles area between the iron perimeter gates and the turnstiles

was full with people.     This crowd was stretching back to the pavement

on Leppings Lane itself.     It was chaotic.   There was one mounted

Policeman outside the gates trying to organise the crowd, but to no

avail.     I have seen the Policeman before, he is a regular at matches

at Anfield.     The right hand iron perimeter gate was closed at that

tine. Seme people were getting through the left hand side which was

open.    We joined the rear of the crowd in front of the outer gates.

When I say we, that is              and myself.   The other two lads had
sir.ce left us becuase they had stand tickets. Myself and          were a

gocd few feet away from the gates, between twelve and fifteen feet

away.    We were standing virtually in the middle of the road.    At some

stage during the next few minutes, both of the outer perimeter gates

became closed.    We were still well away from them.    I do not recall

seeing any Stewards outside the turnstiles.    We had been standing

outside the gates for between ten and fifteen minutes, when the gates

were opened again.    It was about five to three (1455) now.     I don't

knew who opened the gates or how they became open.     As soon as they

were opened again, the crowd started to move forward towards the open

gates.   As soon as the movement started, you just had to go with the

crcwd.We went through the perimeter gates at what I would describe as

a hurried walk.    During the next few minutes I was carried along by

the crowd and the next thing that I was aware of was being at the

entrance to the central tunnel that runs underneath the West Stand.

During the time that I went through the iron gates and before being at

the start of the tunnel.    I was totally oblivious to everything.     I

die not know where the crowd were carrying me to.      All I know is that

I r.ever went near a turnstile.   I am now aware that I entered the

grcund through gate 'C'.    I did not hand my ticket in to anybody, but

then I did not know that I had entered the ground. I have since

disposed of the ticket.    I remember seeing a few lads climbing up the

wall in between the turnstiles and walking along it.      They then

dropped into the ground.    This was while we were still outside the

perimeter gates.     I do not recall there being any disorder or fighting,

but at the time I was oblivious to most things. The movement of the

crcwd carried us along the central tunnel.     It was one continous

movement from the time that we first moved towards the iron gates and

getting to the end of the tunnel.     I don't remember seeing any Police
or Stewards at the start of the tunnel or inside it. It was not until

we got to the end of the tunnel that the movement stopped.              and

I wanted to go to the left hand side at the end of the tunnel, but

the movement of the crowd had carried us into the right hand pen,

which I now knov: as pen number three.    We worked our way through the

crcwd forwards into the pen and to the right hand side.        The game had

only just kicked off.     We took up a position about halfway down the

per, and pretty well central in the pen.      I have marked this position

on the seperate grid plan using the figure one. We took up this

position not long after the kick off and we were subjected to a crush

as soon as we got to position one.     It was very tight and I had very

restricted movement.     We had only been in that position for a minute

or two when we started being jostled forward by the amount of pressure

frcm the rear.    The jostling was pushing us forwards down the

terracing and towards the right hand side.      It was while we were being

gradually moved down the pen by the pressure from behind, that a

Liverpool player hit the crossbar at the other end of the ground.

It was Peter BEARDSLEY that hit the crossbar.         Following BEARDSLEY

hitting the crossbar, there was a forwards surge, inside pen three.

It wasn't a severe surge, but an obvious one.         This was at four or

five minutes past three (1504/1505).      Very shortly after

this, there was a very strong surge from behind.        We were still being

jostled forwards as the surge came and the next I knew, I was up

against a crush barrier.     I had been pinned right up against it.         I

have marked this position on the seperate grid plan using the figure

twc.   I think         pas behind me at this point.     I took hold of the

crush barrier with outstretched arms to try and keep myself away from

the barrier.     I then became aware of       who was shouting to me

       «jas slightly in front of me, to my right.           was shouting
towards me            grab me, grab me".He was in a leaning position,

tilted well forwards.     I then worked my way along the barrier, to my

richt hand side.     I managed to get clear of the barrier.     I went

towards       to try and pull him back up straight.       As I did so there

was a second surge, another strong one.       This resulted in me being

pushed forwards, against          whom I was actually holding at the time.

When the surge ended, I managed to get back to my feet and as I did so

I realised that I was standing on somebodies arm.         I looked down and I

save      tugging at a person who was tangled up with numerous other

bodies on the terraces.     I could see lots of bodies all tangled up,

anrs, legs, heads, all interlocked. The bodies were three to four deep

anc were spread from in front of me to the front perimeter fence of

the pen, a distance of ten to twelve feet.       I went to help          but

he lost his grip on the person and couldn't move him.              and I then

grabbed another person who was lying by the pile and pulled him away.

       started working on the mans chest and I was slapping him lightly

on the face saying "Come on wake up, wake up".

I then opened his mouth and tried to blow air into him.

                                            We tried to revive the lad for

three or four minutes without success.       A Policeman then came over to

us and looked at the lad.     He said to us "Its no use" and then covered

the lads face.     This lad was white and aged between twenty five to

thirty.   He hadjet black hair which       was ear length, perhaps slightly

over his ears.      He was clean shaven.    He was of average build.    He was

wearing a black leather jacket, the bomber type, with a zip.           This

jacket was used     to cover his face by the Policeman.    As best I

rerrember he wore a    white 'T' shirt under the leather jacket, but I

car't be sure.     The lad had black sideburns, ear length.       His face was

ashen and his lips were blue.


                                                                                 1874
        The time by now was somewhere between ten past (1510) and

quarter past three (1515 hrs).    I now think that the crush barrier

that I was pinned up against following the first strong surge was the

one on the left hand side of the pen as you look from the tunnel, the

one nearest the perimeter fence and on a line with the crush barrier

that collapsed.    I was pinned up against the right hand section as

you stand behind it.   The pile of bodies that I previously mentioned

must have been as a result of the right hand crush barrier breaking.

I did not see it break, neither did I hear anything that may have

been the barrier breaking.    I did not have any further dealing with

the lad in the leather jacket.    I was crying by now and I was leaning

against the barrier, probably the same one that I was pinned up

against previously.    The next thing I was aware of was a Policeman

outside the perimeter fence shouting to people inside the pen.       He was

shouting "Tear the fence, pull the fence".    The Policeman, I think it

was a sergeant, was kicking at the fence from the outside.     There were

other lads pulling the mesh in the front perimeter fence, from the

inside and the outside.    The mesh eventually broke away.    It broke

away at the bottom left hand c o m e r of the pen, by the dividing fence

between pen three and pen four.    There were still quite a few in pen

three and people started going through the gap in the fence and

getting out onto the track outside.    After a few minutes, I climbed

through as well.          jot through at the same time.   The time now was

between quarter past and twenty past three (1515/1520).      After

getting out onto the pitch, I assisted in the carrying of two persons

to the far left hand c o m e r of the ground, in between the Kop and the

North Stand.   The first one was between five and ten minutes after

getting out onto the pitch, that would be between twenty past and half

past three(15.20/15.30 hrs).          and I assisted three other lads to
carry a person on an advertising hoarding.     I can't remember which

part of the pitch that we carried him from.

I co not know if the lad was dead or alive.    When we got to the Kop

enc, we took the lad off the hoarding and laid him out on the pitch,

in the goal area in front of the Kop stand.    We then ran back down to

the other end.    The first lad that we carried was white, that is all I

car. remember.   I was in a very distressed state and just can't

renember anything.    However, I am pictured in two daily paper helping

to carrying a hoarding with the first lad on.    The same picture

appears in both papers.    The picture appeared in

dated Monday 17 April 1989(170489), on

                 In the picture, I am shown carrying the

side of the hoarding.     I am wearing a nylon track suit top.   Which is




the top.   I also wore blue denim jeans and black shoes.    I am a white

male, about five feet four in height.     I have dark hair, ear length



       Both pictures are in black and white, but the above clothing is

whet I wore at Hillsborough. The second picture, identical to the

first one, appeared in                          dated 22 April

1969 (220489), on page          I helped carry a second lad to the far

corner of the pitch, but I cannot remember anything about him or if he

was alive or dead.     I was in a bad state on the afternoon.

I eventually left the ground at about twenty past four(1620).       I left

the ground with____


                                                                             1876
Throughout the course of the afternoon, I did not witness anything

thet I would consider to be a criminal offence.

I produce the seperate grid plan (Ex No          )(Ex Ref       . In my

opinion there was a lack of Police doing their duty on the day,

they lacked leadership.        It wasn't all the Police, some were very

gocd, unfortunately the bosses just didn't seem to do their job.          I

would critise the F.A. for not delaying the kick off.        It seems to me

thet they are happy once they get all the fans money and then don't

seem bothered about the fans who have paid the money.        I feel

Sheffield Wednesday F.C. should be criticised for not providing enough

turnstiles to cater for the amount of Supporters, and for lack of

first aid equipment.    The safety people at the club should also be

criticised for the design of the pens, i.e. the small gate at the

frcnt which only allows one person at a time to get out.

Going back to the Photograph that I previously mentioned,                     Ls

also pictured.    He is pictured second from the right carrying the

             the hoarding, behind the lad with the dark hair and

moustache.

                                                                 To the best

of my knowledge             was wearing a nylon Kaghoul, which is two two

                 I think.     I think he was wearing blue denim jeans.
                                              SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          fLACEs

          TIME:         DATE:        250889

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC




                                                       1878
                                                                          STATION

NAME;


ADDRESS;
                            LIVERPOOL,

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH; 19

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 000 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecutior if I have wilfully stated in it anything vdiich I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 250589                                                             SIGNED)



           I em a                          and I live at the given address.

           On Saturday the 15th of April, 1989 (150489) I went to Hillsborough,

           Sheffield to see the Liverpool football club and Nottingham Football

           club, semi final match.   I am a Liverpool supporter I didn't go in an

           organised party, I travelled by coach with friends [

           frcm Liverpool                                    of

           Liverpool all of us travelled by coach, Barnes travel, of County Road,

           Liverpool.

           I purchased my ticket from Anfield, Liverpool Football club and paid

           #6.00 for a Leppings Lane standing terrace.

           We set out from Stanley Park, Liverpool at about 11.00 am (1100 hrs)

           the same day and we didn't stop en route to Sheffield.

           There were two delays on route to Sheffield, both on the M62 one was

           neer to the Manchester route due Ithink to roadworks and the other

           neer to the Ml due to volume of traffic.

           On route to the game I did see other fans drinking alcohol in

           Sheffield I saw about twenty fans, club I don't    know, sitting on a

           gress bank near to the White Horse Public         Houseabout a ten minute




                                                                                       1879
                                                                            2


walk from the ground.     I think they were drinking lager or beer. Apart

frcm that I saw no others.

Vfe arrived in Sheffield at about 2 pm (1400 hrs) and parked on a dual

carriageway possibly the A61 about ten minute walk from the ground.

Having arrived at Sheffield and making our way to the ground itself I

saw many Police Officers in pairs mainly on the route but did not

receive any specific direction or escort and on route I did not

witness any disorder, fighting or drunkeness.    Vfe arrived at the

lappings Lane turnstile area of the ground at about 2.50 pm (1450 hrs)

and upon our arrival saw no queues just a mass of fans.

I only saw about four mounted officers outside the turnstile area and

did not receive any directions from them, although I did hear them

shouting at the crowd to push back.    I did not see any stewards at all.

Apert from the crowd crush outside the turnstiles to Leppings Lane

standing terrace, I did not experience any difficulty in finding the

turnstiles, but because of the crowd and the pushing and shoving that

was the only difficulty to me.

I did not enter through a turnstileI saw a gate     already open and I

followed the main crowd through the     gateI had no choice I had to go

with the flow.   I can't say what kind of gate it was.    I did not

witness the opening of any gates, only the one I passed through,

which was already open.

I cid see fans about 30 or 40 in number climbing over a wall somewhere

to ay left.   I don't know whether it was unauthorised entry or whether

it was to avoid the crowd outside the turnstiles.

At no stage did I hand a ticket in.    Having entered the ground which

would be about 2.55 pm (1455 hrs) I did not see any signs directing me

to ay match viewing point.     I just followed a large group of fans

through a tunnel under the West stand seating which led me to pens 3
and 4.   I didn't have free passage down the tunnel because of

the numbers of fans.    I did not see any Police or steward control at

the tunnel nor did I see having entered the ground any disorder or

other incident.    I didn't see anyone consuming alcohol in the ground.

Having got to the ground, the other end of the tunnel I took a right

turn and entered Pen no 3 and because of the numbers behind me I got

pushed right to the front.    I was about 3 to 5 yards away from the

grounds perimeter fence.

I did not see any barrier break in pen 3 or hear a barrier.      I wasn't

aware a barrier had broke until later.     It would be about 3pm (1500

hrs) when I got to this position and I was already experiencing

excessive crowd crush at this time from all directions but mainly

forwards.   In no way could I change direction or avoid the crush.

I lost                          in the tunnel and                 was

with me in Pen 3 but I lost him later on.           did go unconscious at

one point in the crush which is when I lost him.     It would be about

this time that Beardsley a Liverpool player took a shot at goal which

hit the crossbar and at that moment there was a surge forward by the

fars in pen 3.    In that surge I fell forward losing my footing and

found myself in amongst other fans legs.     I struggled to get back onto

my feet again and remember being pulled by my feet by another fan and

pulled me up onto my feet.   He grabbed my upper body chest/shoulders

anc dragged me backwards through the crowd back towards the tunnel.

At no time prior to this did I witness any fights or disturbance the

only unusual thing was the excessive crowd crush which I have never

experienced before.    Once I had got to the tunnel entrance ground side

I vas on my feet again and could walk properly.     This fan took me

through the tunnel to the other side.    This fan then left me in the

yard on the other side of the tunnel.    I was quite dazed and in
                                                                         4


shcck at this time, he told me to sit and wait till he got someone

else to me and then he went back down the tunnel again.   It would be

abcut 3.20 pn (1520 hrs) by now and having recovered a little I then

walked round looking for my mates.   At about 4.30 pn (1630 hrs) having

walked round the ground I went back to the coach.   I didn't receive

any direction to do so by either the Police, steward or loud speaker

anr.ouncement I left of my own accord I didn't assist to any of the

dead or injured although I was aware that there were dead in the

ground.   I did not witness at any time anything that I consider to be

a criminal offence.




I co have views about the way the incident was handled after the match

was stopped.   The Police did not seem to know what they were doing.

They were standing about and not giving proper assistance.   Instead

they formed a cordon across the pitch.   They appeared to be concerned

with crowd trouble.   I would also say that I didn't see stewards

giving assistance either.



Whet I feel is vital to this enquiry is the allocation of tickets to

the Liverpool supporters which was wrong.   Not enough were given and

the Liverpool fans were given the wrong end of the ground.   We should

have had the Spion Kop end considering the number of supporters
        expected to attend such an important match.



                                                      SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE;

          TIME;            DATE;   250589

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE;

OFFICERS SIGNATURE;                     PC
                                                                           STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                          LIVERPOOL, MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 26

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 007 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecutior. if I have wilfully stated in it anything vdiich I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 211189                                                             (SIGNED)



           I em a single man and reside at the above address with my parents.

           I em a Liverpool Football supporter and season ticket holder.     I

           attended the semi final match at Hillsborough, Sheffield on Saturday

           15th April 1989 (150489) between Liverpool and Notts Forest.     I

           obtained a #6 terrace ticket for the match from Anfield.

           On the morning of the match my mother took me to Garston to meet a

           coech which I had a ticket for.   I met my friends

                                    and a lot of other people who normally go on

           the same coach to each match.

           We left Garston at about 10 am (1000) and went straight to Sheffield

           without any traffic delays, arriving around 12 mid day (1200).

           The coach was parked on a dual carriage way with a large number of

           other coaches, this was about a twenty minute walk to the ground.

           We went for a drink in a pub, I think it was 'The Ctol'.   We left the

           put at about quarter to half past two (1415 - 1430), and walked

           towards the ground.   It took about five to ten minutes to walk to the

           ground.   I had been to the ground before and knew where to go, I went

           into the Leppings lane terrace last year at the same match.




                                                                                     1884
                                                                             2


On arriving at the Leppings Lane turnstiles there was a large crowd

all milling around outside.     There were no queues just a mass of

pecple.     I saw a few mounted police about and other police standing

neer the turnstiles.     I saw that a few of the turnstiles were not

open, this seemed strange to me because it was a big match.      I thought

they would have them all open.

At this point I was still with

      and we joined the mass of people and started to mate our way

towards the turnstiles.     Vfe were getting pushed about in the crowd,

this lasted for ten to fifteen minutes and we were still some distance

frcm the turnstiles.     Vfe were being pushed to the right as you

approach the ground.     I did not feel worried, it was just like being

in a large crowd on the kop but it was not the normal way of going

into a football match.

I then saw a blue concertina gate open at the side of the turnstile

anc people start to rush through.     I did not see who opened the gate.

At this point I lost contact with my friends because of the crowd

surging through the open gate, I did not see any of my friends again

until I arrived back at the coach after the match.

I think I would be in the first fifty or sixty to go through the

open gate. When I went through the gate I saw some police there but no

stewards.     I was half pushed and walked towards the tunnel which leads

to the terrace.     I could hear the crowd noise and I think the game had

kicked off.     I was pushed along the tunnel by the crowd surge, it was

very crowded and there was no way you could turn back once into the

turnel. As I got near to the terrace end of the tunnel, I saw the

players on the field and the game was in motion.

At the end of the tunnel my feet were off the ground and I was pushed

alcng by the crowd surge.     As I entered the terrace I was pushed to my
left into pen four.

I have marked three positions on a separate grid plan which I produce

(Ex No.          ) Ref Nos.____ (1), these positions are narked as

nuirbers (1), (2), (3).

The first position marked 1 was where I entered the terrace.     I did

not stop at this point.     I was pushed along by the crowd surge down

the terrace about half way down.    At this point marked 2, I fell over

anc people were trampling over the top of me.     I was getting worried

at this time.    When I fell over there were two other people who had

also fell over, I could not describe these people.     We all got pulled

up by other fans.     I don't know who they were and could not describe

them.     On getting to my feet I paused for a few seconds but was then

age in pushed forward by the crowd surge and further to my left.       I

was pushed along.     I was pushed into barriers but managed to get

arcund them.     I then came to a stop again in position 3, this was

abcut in the middle of the pen about ten to twelve feet (10'to 12')

frcm the perimeter fence.     I do not know if the match was still going

on, I was too concerned about my safety.

In position 3 I again fell over on the top of other fans, and a very

fat man fell over on top of me.     I lay in this position for some time

being unable to move because of the weight on top of me.      I saw a

young lad in front of me in his early teens, he was asking for help

but I could not help him because I was trapped.     This lad was lying on

his left side trapped by other people and eventually I saw his face

turn blue and he appeared unconscious.     This youth had a Liverpool

shirt on with Candy written on, his hair was light brown.

After about five minutes I managed to wriggle myself free and during

this time people had been trying to pull me up.     I pulled myself up by

grebbing a barrier and saw a lot of people on the pitch, and others
________________________________________                                       4


climbing over the perimeter fence.         At the rear I saw a lot of people

being pulled up into the West Stand.        After I had got up I saw that

the large fat man was still lying on the        terrace.   He     was wearing a

rec shirt and a      brown coat or anorak.     I think he was     aged mid

thirties, brown curly hair cut shortish.         There were a lot of other

pec pie lying on the terrace but the fat man and the young lad were the

only ones that stuck out.

I saw that a hole had been ripped in the perimeter fence around the

grcund and I made my way towards this picking people up off the

grcund as I went.      Some of these people were injured and others

appeared dead.       I was pulled through the hole in the fence ontothe

pitch and I saw      a large number of people on the pitch        injured.At

this time I saw an ambulance ccming along the pitch frcm the Kop end.

I pulled two people through the gap in the fence but they were dead.

One of these fans was a young girl aged about 15 years, long brown

hair, wearing red Liverpool shirt, blue jeans.         The other was a youth

aged about 18 years, straight dark brown hair, collar length and

thick.    He was wearing a striped blue and white t shirt, blue jeans,

white trainers.      I p>assed these over to other people who were on the

pitch and do not know what happened to them after this, this was just

before I got out onto the pitch.

Once on the pitch I gave mouth to mouth to several people who I

thcught were still alive or who the police asked me to help.         One or

twc I assisted definitely revived and said they were ok and then I

would move to someone else.        I could not describe any of the people

I helped, it was all a maze of people.         I worked on some poeple on my

owr. and some with police and other fans.        I did not help to carry

anyone across the pitch on stretchers or rip down any hoardings.

I stayed on the pitch helping until most of the injured and dead were
                                                                          5


raroved.   I then thought 'where the hell are my mates' and looked all

arcund the pitch for them but could not find any of them.     The pitch

hac now been cleared of dead and injured, and I climbed back through

the hole in the fence into pen four and walked up the terrace towards

the tunnel. The terrace was pretty quiet just a few people standing

arcund and the rest of the ground was starting to empty.

I vent back up the tunnel and out of the ground into Leppings Lane.       I

die not see any injured or dead people at the rear of the West Stand.

I irade my way back to the coach.   It took some time because I could

not find it.   When I did find the coach my friends were all there, I

was the last to get to the coach.

As soon as I got on the coach it movedoff and later at a

smell village where I phoned home to let my parents know I was ok.

I vas dropped off in Speke, Liverpool and walked home taking me about

15 to 20 minutes arriving home at about 9.30 pm (2130) to 10 pm (2200).

On arriving home I realised I was aching all over.    I suffered

bruising all over and had footprints on my back.     My knees, elbows   and

hards had lost skin frcm falling down.I did not      go to adoctor and

die not loose any time at work.

I em 6ft 1 and a half inches (6'2), 12 stone, dark brown short hair,

moustache, I was wearing a Crown point, red Liverpool shirt, blue

jeens, white trainers.

I think the kick off should have been delayed and more turnstiles

should have been open.   There should have been police or stewards

inside the turnstiles directing the fans to the sides of the stand but

because there was no one, everyone just followed the leader down the

turnel.    I attended the same fixture last year and it was very crowded

then in the terrace and this year we were given the same end of the

grcund even though we had more supporters.
                                         SIGNED

STATEMENT TAKEN
          FLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:   211189

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:




                                                  1839
                                                                            STATION

NAME:


ADDRESS:
                            MERSEYSIDE

AGE / DATE OF BIR3H: 23

OCCUPATION:


Who states:- This statement consisting of 010 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of ray knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecutior if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 220889                                                              (SIGNED)



           I em a single man and reside at the above address.

           On the afternoon of Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I attended the FA

           Cup Semi Final football match between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest

           at the Hillsborough football ground in Sheffield.      I attended the

           match as a Liverpool supporter I have supported Liverpool all ray life

           nok and I have been a season ticket holder at Anfield for four years.

           I obtained ray match ticket frcm Anfield using a voucher frcm my season

           ticket.   My match ticket was for the Leppings Lane terracing and cost

           me six pounds.

           I travelled to the game with the following people:-

           1.                     - He's been seen by the Police.

                                                       I don't know if he has been

           seen by the Police.    I don't know his address but _______ would know

           it.

                 A lad called               I'm not quite sure.     He works with



           We travelled to Sheffield in                    car.     We travelled to

           Sheffield along the M62 and the Snake Pass.    We did not encounter any




                                                                                      1890
                                                                              2


reel traffic delays on the way and I don't recall making any stops on

the way.    We left Wallasey at sometime between ten (1000) and eleven

o'clock    (1100) on the morning.

We arrived in Sheffield at between two (1400) and quarter past two

(1415).    We came into Sheffield at the Forest end of the ground and

parked in a side street at that end of the ground.       It was near to a

large DIY Warehouse, about fifteen minute walking distance to the

grcund.    We left the car and walked straight to the ground.

We weren't quite sure how to get to the Liverpool end of the ground,

so we stopped and asked a Policeman which way to go.      He pointed us in

the direction of the Leppings Lane end.     I had not been to the

Hillsborough ground before.    I saw one pub open while we were walking

to the ground and there were a lot of Forest supporters in that pub.

I elso saw people in the street with cans of beer, both Liverpool and

Forest supporters.    I did not see any fighting or any form of

disorder, neither did I see any drunkeness.

We arrived at the turnstile area in Leppings Lane at about half past

twc (1430).    It was crowded when we got there, but it wasn't

disorderly. The turnstile area itself was full with people waiting to

get through the turnstiles.    The crowd stretched back beyond the iron

perimeter gates into Leppings Lane itself.       There was one policeman on

horseback to the right of the turnstiles and there were other

Policemen standing in the turnstile area.     They all seemed to be

involved in crowd control.    I did not see any stewards.    Whilst in the

crtwd outside the    turnstiles it was packed, but not a crush.     It was

no busier than a typical derby match where you have a capacity       crowd.

It took me about ten minutes to get to a turnstile.       Just before I

went through the turnstile I was given a brief body search by a

Policeman.    He also asked if I had a ticket.     I showed him the ticket
anc then went through the turnstile I handed ray ticket in to the

turnstile operator and was given the stub portion back.       At this tine,

                    was still   with me.                          and his

friend had     tickets for the West Stand seating and      they   hadleft us to

enter through the seating turnstiles.

Whilst outside the turnstiles I did not see any gates open, neither

die I see any gates being opened.      I did see about four or five people

whc had climbed onto the top of the turnstiles and then walked across

the top, presumably away from Policemen on the other side of the

turnstiles.     They then dropped over into the ground.    Once through the

turnstiles, I did not see any signs indicating which way to go to the

terraces.     All I could see was a central tunnel which ran

underneath the West Stand.      I could see that the tunnel looked very

busy.   By this time it was     about quarter to three    (1445).Because the

turnel wasbusy, we decided to walk around the back of the stand to

see if we could get round there. We walked to the right hand side of

the stand as you look from the turnstiles. As we got to the area by

the steps that lead to the seats in the West Stand, we looked across

to the end of the stand and decided it must have been a dead end.           It

locked as though you couldn't get through there.         We then looked at

the steps that Inow know lead to the seats in the West Stand, however

at the time I thought it may have been two-tier standing and that the

step® may lead to a standing area.

For some reason we decided against going up the steps and we made for

the central tunnel.     Whilst I was in the area behind the stand,     I did

 net see any fighting or any form of disorder.      I did not see anybody

drinking either.     We walked along the tunnel quite freely.     We had

been walking along the right hand side of the tunnel so when we got to

the bottom of the tunnel we went to the right hand side into what
I row know to be pen number three.     I do not remember seeing any

Policemen or any stewards either at this entrance to the tunnel or

inside it.     Once inside pen three, we started pushing our way through

the crowd to find somewhere to watch the match from.     We went slightly

forwards and to the right hand side.     I like to watch matches from

behind the goal if possible.    Myself and          book up a position

not far from the tunnel, towards the rear of the pen.      I have marked

this position on the separate grid plan using the figure one.     We took

up this position sometime between quarter to three (1445) and ten

to three (1450).     It was packed inside the pen, but not a crush.   A

lot of people were still entering the pen behind us, from the tunnel.

As the minutes went by we were being continually pushed and generally

knocked about by the people still entering the pen.      Because of this,

we decided to move further inside the pen to get away from the tunnel.

W e moved further across to our right and further down the pen.       It

was about this time that the players came onto the pitch and started

their kick about.    Although it was packed inside the pen, we were

still able to move across the pen.     I remember the match kicking off

at three o'clock (1500).    At that time I was towards the right hand

sice of the pen, towards pen number two, behind the middle crush

barrier.     I wasn't actually up against the barrier but somewhere near

to it.     This wasn't the crush barrier that broke, but the next one up

the turnstile.     It was shortly after the game kicked off that I became

awe re that people in the pen were beginning to panic.

People were saying that fans were dead in the pen and this started

people panicking.    At that time, I could not believe that people were

deed in there, but there was obvious panic amongst the crowd.      People

started screaming and I could see people at the rear of the terraces

being pulled up into the seats above.     Within a short space of time
there was real panic amongst the crowd.     I have marked this second

position on the separate grid plan using the figure two.        I had been

in position two for perhaps a couple of minutes when I felt myself

being pushed up against the crush barrier.     I put my arms out at full

stretch and took hold of the barrier trying to keep myself away from

it.   With the amount of pressure from behind, it became a real strain

on my arms.     Because of this, I brought my knees up against the

barrier, still trying to push myself away from it.     I remember that

whilst I was against the barrier Peter BEARDSLEY hit the cross bar at

the other end of the ground.     I tried to push myself underneath the

barrier, but couldn't.     I somehow got one of my legs on top of the

crush barrier and then             who had already got over the barrier,

pulled me up onto the barrier and I managed     to get over and in front

of the barrier.     By this time the game had been stopped.     After

getting over the barrier, I could see a slight clearing in the pen,

richt by the dividing fence between pen three and pen two.       There were

scare lads on the other side of the fence who were helping people out

of pen three.     We then got to this clearing, and climbed over the

dividing fence and into pen two.      After getting into pen two, I saw a

large number of bodies piled up at the front of pen three, in the

corner at the side of the dividing fence.     A lot of people were now

climbing over into pen two.     We remained in pen two for about fifteen

mirutes until the Police asked us to leave, in order to make more rocm

for other people.     We left pen two via the gate in the front perimeter

ferce.   The time now would be about half past three (1530).       I went

through the gate ahead of            and we became separated.     I wandered

onto the pitch.     There were a lot of people on the pitch by now and a

lot of people laid out on the pitch.     As I was on the pitch somewhere

on the edge of the penalty area, to the right as you look from the
terraces, I saw a number of lads carrying one of the advertising

hoardings that was being used as a make shift stretcher.

There were about eight lads carrying the hoarding which had a person

laid out on it.     I went straight over to them to help.     I took hold of

the back end of the hoarding and we ran it up to the far left hand

corner of the ground.     When we got to the far corner of the ground, in

between the North Stand and the Spion Kop, just off the pitch itself,

we put the hoarding down and two St Johns ambulance men and two

stewards took the person off the stretcher.       As soon as they had done

so, we all picked the hoarding up again and ran straight back to the

Leppings Lane end.    All I can remember about the person was that it

was a male who was possibly wearing denim jeans or canvas type

trcusers. I cannot remember anything else.        I remember that the person

was totally motionless and I assumed that he was dead.       We ran back

dofcn to the Lappings Lane end in front of the North Stand.      When we

got to the Leppings Lane end, we placed the hoarding down on the goal

lire, near to the goal posts, to the right of them as you look from

the kop end.    We became aware of an ambulance man who was trying to

carry a person on his own.     I think it may have been an ambulanceman

possibly a policeman.     He was wearing a blue shirt with a black tie.

We helped him to place the person that he was trying to carry, onto

the hoarding. As soon as the person was on the hoarding we picked it

up and again ran towards the far left hand c o m e r of the ground.    As

we reached the half way line, I left the lads as there were too

mary of us carrying the hoarding.     The second person that I helped to

carry was a white male.    All I remember of him was that he was wearing

blue denim jeans and was bare from the waist up.       He was quite

stcckily built.     He had a heavily freckled face and I think he had

fair hair.     This person was also motionless.    After leaving the lads
at the half way line, I walked across the pitch and sat on the touch

lire in front of the South Stand, near to the dug outs.      I don't

rarember how long I sat there for.   After getting up from the

touchline, I went to look for              whom I eventually found

scrrewhere near to the front of pen two.    We left the ground at about

quarter to five (1645).Throughout the course of the afternoon, I did

not witness anything that I would consider to be a criminal of fence. On

the afternoon of Saturday 15 April 1989 (150489), I was wearing the

following clothing:-

A blue denim jacket which was new on the day.     A

shirt with short sleeves.    I can't remember if it had any writing on

or not.   I have             'T' shirts one of which is plain.   The

other has large red lettering on.    The lettering on the front is



On the rear it reads

I vas wearing one of these 'T' shirts.

I vas also wearing blue denim jeans and a pair of black 'adidas'

training shoes with white stripes.

I em a white male, six feet three inches tall (6'3), and of slim

build.    I have short cropped light brown hair and clean shaven.      I

wear a small earring in each ear, in fact they are called 'sleepers.'

I produce the separate grid plan indicating my two positions

(Ex No        ) (Ex Ref GFM 1).

The only real comment I would like to make now is why, if the

authorities stated that the ground was safe, did a crush barrier

collapse and how did so many people come to be crushed together in

such a confined area ie the two central pens.



              PC
                                     SIGNED

STATEMENT 1AKEN
          fLACE:

          TIME:         DATE:

WITNESS TO SIGNATURE:

OFFICERS SIGNATURE:             PC




                                              1897
