                                          Sheffield Archives Ref: f & - |              M IR .15



OTHER DOCUMENT FORM                                Date and time raised                           Number   3> \ { ^           .


Title               \ jk3Sju*
(Include source and any document number i f relevant)


Receiver's instructions^'urgent action -^> 6 s/N @ l

        = \< ¥ \S 6 -
                                                                                                                   Receiver




                                                                                                                   Indexer
Document registered/indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised                                                                                       W«y
                                                                                                           Statement Reader
Statement reader's instructions



                                                                                                                   Indexer
Indexed as indicated

No(s) o f actions raised                                                                                    4^o'              •




Examined     further action to be taken                                                                     0 /M         SIO




Further action No(s)                                                                                               Indexer


When satisfied all actions raised Office Manager to endorse other Document Master Number Form
                                                              Wavertree,
                                                              Liverpool




                                                              16th April, 1989




Dern Sir,

 I am writing to you regarding the disaster at Sheffield's Hillsborough stadium
^which 1 witnessed yesterday.

After arriving at the: ground at approximately 2.20 p.m. we walked down towards
the North Stand entrance.   As we approached this entrance it soon became apparent
that there was a large amount of people all trying to gain entrance to different
pacts of the ground through one main gate. There was no organised queue for any
one of the turnstiles.   The only way to gain entrance was to join the back of the
group of fans and to wait until people in front of you managed to get through into
ground.   Inevitably, there was considerable crushing at this point with the
organisation and policing of the turnstiles nowhere near as good as last year when
we were all able to get in comfortably and safely. As we finally reached the
turnsr.ile, I was pushed into the police officer manning this particular turnstile.
A t this point, he turned to his colleague at the next gate and asked if he knew
where the Sergeant was.   It was as if the police on the gates already'knew that
ail was not as it should have been.   Another problem seemed to be that actually
getting through the turnstiles seemed to take longer than usual which had the
effect of increasing the number of people waiting to get in.

On taking our seats in the North Stand,   I glanced over towards the Leppings Lane
end where the Liverpool supporters were   gathering.  It was immediately apparent
that the centre section behind the goal   wao extremely full whereas the two ends
of the enclosure, at either side of the   goal, seemed to be comparatively empty.
In fact, 1 can remember pointing out to   the people I was with how empty the side;;
seerced.         1

At 3.00 p.m. the game started.  Some five minutes into the game, the play .vas in
the Liverpool half cf the pitch and we could see supporters beginning to sp:.ll out
of the terracing. At first we thought it was the type of spillage which of"en
happens at big football matches. Soon though, supporters started running onto the
pitch to tell the players what was happening and that was when a police officer
ran onto the pitch to ask the referee to take the players off. Even then, we ail
thought that it would be a temporary stoppage.  Indeed, certain sections of the
Nottingham Forest supporters began singing and chanting, not realising what was
happening.  It seemed to take a long time before supporters were able to escape
from the affected areas.  This, in retrospect, would seein to be due to the slow
opening of the gates in front of the enclosure and the apparent lack of understanding
of the situation by the authorities.
After five to ten minutes, about thirty to forty police reinforcements arrived
unci inexplicably took up positions in front of the North Stand.  Even after a
day ha;: paused since this tragedy I, and many other supporters who were in the
North Stand, am unable to understand the reason behind this positioning. Behind
them, Liverpool supporter’s were ripping up the advertising hoardings to use as
stretchers to carry out the dead and injured Liverpool supporters.   Still the
police litood there not helping.  People around me in the stand were screaming at
the police to help and yet they would not.

Another   apparent problem during this time was the lack of public announcements
to tell   the crowd what"Was happening.    This could so easily have caused more
trouble   un fans became more and more impatient.    In fact, it is to the credit
of boUh   iieti: of supporters that there wao no trouble at all.

It will probably be a while before the cause of this tragedy is known, but one
t-'j-iggts.-ition that must be thought of is a re—think of the way the fans were "penned
in” and the way that the so-called "security" fence could not be removed therefore
trapping people and inevitably killing them.

In closing this letter I would just like to thank the people, shops and businesses
of Sheffield for allowing supporters such as myself to use their telephones to let
our loved ones back home know we were safe.

I cannot comment on the opening of the exit gate which apparently contributed to
th.it', disaster as I did not personally see xfce incident. All the events I have
recounted in thus letter are incidents J. personally witnessed.

No -hin.:’ j.ikt; this musr ever be allowed to happen again. In this country it always
        t.-mt we only ever learn from disasterts. The enquiry .must be      to establish
what went wrong and why, and any recommendations must be implemented immediately.

I hope that this letter may in some way be used to help piece together the events
of that terrible day.

Yours sincerely,
                                N/   1
